

Menu

# Yale Climate Connections

### Listen. Watch. Read. Act.

  * About
    * About YCC
    * Staff
    * Regular Contributors
    * Partners
    * Story Locations, Stations Map
    * Letters to the Editor
    * Use Policy
  * Topics
    * Browse All Stories
    * Arts & Culture
    * Climate Science
    * Communicating Climate
    * Education
    * Energy
    * Food & Agriculture
    * Health
    * Jobs & Economy
    * National Security
    * Oceans
    * Policy & Politics
    * Religion & Morality
    * Snow & Ice
    * Species & Ecosystems
    * Transportation
    * Weather Extremes
    * Youth
  * Radio Program
    * Browse All Stories
    * About Our Radio Program
    * Story Locations, Stations Map
    * What's Your Climate Story?
    * Info for Radio Stations
  * More
    * Analysis
    * Climate Advice
    * Commentary
    * Interviews
    * On Journalism
    * Reviews
    * Videos
  * Contact Us

Twitter Facebook Youtube Pinterest

Subscribe

Search

##### Menu

Close

    
    
    Overview
    Topics
    Departments
    

  * Home
  * Feature Articles
  * Audio
  * Video
  * Story Locations, Stations Map
  * Letters to the Editor
  * About YCC
  * Contact Us

  * Arts & Culture

  * Climate Science
  * Education
  * Energy
  * Communicating Climate
  * Food & Agriculture
  * Health
  * Jobs & Economy
  * National Security
  * Oceans
  * Policy & Politics
  * Religion & Morality
  * Snow & Ice
  * Species & Ecosystems
  * Transportation
  * Weather Extremes
  * Youth

  * Analysis

  * Climate Advice
  * Commentary
  * Interview
  * On Journalism
  * Review

Twitter Facebook Youtube Pinterest

Subscribe

###### Article

## Common Climate Misconceptions: Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide

##### By Zeke Hausfather on Dec 12, 2010

![Email to someone](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/email.png)

email

![Share on Facebook](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/facebook.png)

Facebook

![Tweet about this on Twitter](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/twitter.png)

Twitter

![Share on LinkedIn](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/linkedin.png)

Linkedin

![Pin on Pinterest](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/pinterest.png)

Pinterest

![Share on Reddit](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/reddit.png)

Reddit

##### By Zeke Hausfather

##### Thursday, December 16, 2010

##### Topics

Climate Science

#### Recent Posts

  * Climate change deniers of the recent past live in 'The Gulf'
  * 'Which vacation spots could be permanently damaged by global warming?'
  * Where to find big ideas for addressing climate change
  * Rising demand for air conditioning could make climate change even worse
  * 12 books on how climate change is transforming businesses and the global economy
  * 12 free reports on climate change and the economy
  * The right seafood choices help fight climate change
  * State of the climate: Heat across Earth's surface and oceans mark early 2019
  * Floods and droughts: What it's like to live in communities hit hard by climate change
  * Canada's Changing Climate Report: A call to action to reduce climate change risks

Understanding the carbon cycle is a key part of understanding the broader
climate change issue. But a number of misconceptions floating around the
blogosphere confuse basic concepts to argue that climate change is irrelevant
because of the short residence time of carbon molecules in the atmosphere and
the large overall carbon stock in the environment.

It turns out that while much of the "pulse" of extra CO2 accumulating in the
atmosphere would be absorbed over the next century if emissions miraculously
were to end today, about 20 percent of that CO2 would remain for at least tens
of thousands of years.

The complex global carbon cycle process involves carbon absorption and release
by the atmosphere, oceans, soils, and organic matter, and also emissions from
anthropogenic fossil fuel combustion and land-use changes. The figure below
shows the best estimate of annual carbon fluxes from main sources and sinks.

![](http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/pics/1210_ZHfig1_tmb.jpg)  
View larger image

* * *

Figure from Oak Ridge National Laboratories (Units in gigatons of carbon).

At first glance, it may seem that the narrow black arrows representing
anthropogenic sources are relatively insignificant, making up only a few
percent of the total carbon released to the atmosphere in any given year. To
understand why anthropogenic emissions are of concern, it is important to
think of the carbon cycle as a balance of sorts; every year around 230
gigatons of carbon dioxide are released to the atmosphere, and around 230
gigatons of carbon dioxide are absorbed by the world's oceans and biosphere.
This balance forms an equilibrium of sorts, with the level of atmospheric
carbon dioxide remaining largely unchanged over time. However, anthropogenic
emissions throw this process out of kilter, adding a new source of emissions
unmatched by additional sinks.

The carbon dioxide record over the past 10,000 years demonstrates this
situation: the modern period exhibits a large spike in atmospheric carbon
dioxide coincident to the time humans started burning fossil fuels.

## ![](http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/pics/1210_ZHfig2.jpg)

Atmospheric CO2 concentrations over the past 10,000 years. From the IPCC AR4
WG1 SPM.

Graphing emissions over the modern period against changes in atmospheric
concentrations illustrates a clear relationship between emissions and
increasing CO2 concentrations.

## ![](http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/pics/1210_ZHfig3.jpg)

Via Wikipedia.

It is important to note that not all anthropogenic emissions are accumulating
in the atmosphere. Indeed, about half of annual CO2 emissions are absorbed by
the ocean and vegetation, and this percentage of absorption, called the
airborne fraction, is currently the subject of vigorous debate over whether or
not it is changing over time. Scientists can model the absorption of
anthropogenic carbon by year for different sinks.

## ![](http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/pics/1210_ZHfig4.jpg)

Image from the Global Carbon Project.

Determining the residence time of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is a rather
complex problem. A common misconception arises from simply looking at the
annual carbon flux and the atmospheric stock; after all, with 230 gigatons
absorbed by the oceans and land every year, and a total atmospheric stock of
720 gigatons, one might expect the average molecule of CO2 to remain in the
atmosphere for only three to four years.

Such an approach poorly frames the issue, however. It is not the residence
time of an individual molecule that is relevant. What really matters is just
how long it will take for the stock of anthropogenic carbon emissions that has
accumulated in the atmosphere to be reabsorbed.

The simplest way to approximate the time it will take to reabsorb the
anthropogenic flux is to calculate how long it would take for the atmosphere
to revert to preindustrial levels of 280 parts per million if humans could
cease emissions immediately. If the current net sink of around 4 gigatons of
carbon per year remained constant over time, it would take about 50 years for
the atmosphere to return to 280 ppm. However, there is no reason to think that
these sinks would remain constant as emissions decrease. Indeed, it is more
realistic to anticipate that the net sink would shrink in proportion to the
decrease in emissions.

Scientists can approach this problem in a number of different ways. They can
use models of carbon sink behavior based on their best knowledge of the
physics of ocean carbon absorption and the biosphere. They can also use
records of changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide during glacial periods in the
distant past to estimate the time it takes for perturbations to settle out.

Using a combination of various methods, researchers have estimated that about
50 percent of the net anthropogenic pulse would be absorbed in the first 50
years, and about 70 percent in the first 100 years. Absorption by sinks slows
dramatically after that, with an additional 10 percent or so being removed
after 300 years and the remaining 20 percent lasting tens if not hundreds of
thousands of years before being removed.

As University of Washington scientist David Archer explains, this "long tail"
of absorption means that the mean lifetime of the pulse attributable to
anthropogenic emissions is around 30,000 to 35,000 years.

## ![](http://www.yaleclimatemediaforum.org/pics/1210_ZHfig5.jpg)

Figure via Global Warming Art.

So while a good portion of warming attributable to carbon and other greenhouse
gas emissions would be removed from the atmosphere in a few decades if
emissions were somehow ceased immediately, about 10 percent will continue
warming Earth for eons to come. This 10 percent is significant, because even a
small increase in atmospheric greenhouse gases can have a large impact on
things like ice sheets and sea level if it persists over the millennia.

##### Filed under: atmospheric carbon dioxide, carbon cycle, climate change,

CO2, global warming, Zeke Hausfather

![Email to someone](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/email.png)

email

![Share on Facebook](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/facebook.png)

Facebook

![Tweet about this on Twitter](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/twitter.png)

Twitter

![Share on LinkedIn](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/linkedin.png)

Linkedin

![Pin on Pinterest](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/pinterest.png)

Pinterest

![Share on Reddit](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/reddit.png)

Reddit

##### More Stories

###### Audio

### Some places in a city are dramatically hotter than others. Why?

###### Posted on Jun 6, 2019

###### Article

### State of the climate: Heat across Earth's surface and oceans mark early

2019

###### By Zeke Hausfather on May 28, 2019

###### Audio

### What's the difference between the ozone hole and global warming?

###### Posted on May 28, 2019

###### Climate Advice

### 'Are carbon offsets a scam?'

###### By Sara Peach on May 20, 2019

Load more

An initiative of

##### Yale Center for Environment Education

##### Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies

###### **STAY CONNECTED**

![Email to someone](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/email.png)

email

![Share on Facebook](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/facebook.png)

Facebook

![Tweet about this on Twitter](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/twitter.png)

Twitter

![Share on LinkedIn](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/linkedin.png)

Linkedin

![Pin on Pinterest](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/pinterest.png)

Pinterest

![Share on Reddit](/wp-content/themes/ycc2015/img/reddit.png)

Reddit

(C) 2019 Yale Climate Connections | Site Maintained by WebFirst

Search for:

##### Subscribe to YCC

Close

    
    
    __Audio
    __RSS
    __Newsletters
    

iTunes Audio RSS iHeartRadio Stitcher

Select feed

  * All
  * Analysis
  * Climate Advice
  * Commentary
  * Interview
  * News Note
  * On Journalism
  * Review

Daily Weekly Features

Get Weekly Updates

Please sign up for a weekly e-mail of new climate stories. You can opt out any
time and we'll never share your information with a third party.

