

[Skip to Content]

![KidsHealth from Nemours](/images/mothership/logos/logo-kidshealth.svg)

Open search

  * for Parents

    * ![](/images/mothership/navigation/nav-parents-icon.png)Parents site
    * Sitio para padres
    * General Health
    * Growth & Development
    * Infections
    * Diseases & Conditions
    * Pregnancy & Baby
    * Nutrition & Fitness
    * Emotions & Behavior
    * School & Family Life
    * First Aid & Safety
    * Doctors & Hospitals
    * Videos
    * Recipes
    * Close for parents nav
  * for Kids

    * ![](/images/mothership/navigation/nav-kids-icon.png)Kids site
    * Sitio para ninos
    * How the Body Works
    * Puberty & Growing Up
    * Staying Healthy
    * Staying Safe
    * Recipes & Cooking
    * Health Problems
    * Illnesses & Injuries
    * Relax & Unwind
    * People, Places & Things That Help
    * Feelings
    * Expert Answers Q&A
    * Movies & More
    * Close for kids nav
  * for Teens

    * ![](/images/mothership/navigation/nav-teens-icon.png)Teens site
    * Sitio para adolescentes
    * Body
    * Mind
    * Sexual Health
    * Food & Fitness
    * Diseases & Conditions
    * Infections
    * Drugs & Alcohol
    * School & Jobs
    * Sports
    * Expert Answers (Q&A)
    * Staying Safe
    * Videos
    * Close for teens nav
  * For Educators

Open search

Search KidsHealth libraryOpen search language selector

Search language selectorEnglishEspañol

  * Share to Facebook
  * Share to Twitter
  * Share to Pinterest
  * Share via Email

  * KidsHealth / 

  * for Parents
  * / Your Baby's Growth: 2 Months 

# Your Baby's Growth: 2 Months

Reviewed by: Cristy A. Wong, MD

  *     * Larger text sizeLarge text sizeRegular text size
  * Print

en españolEl crecimiento de su bebé: 2 meses

Babies continue to grow quickly in weight and length this month.

### How Much Will My Baby Grow?

The first 2 months of life were a period of rapid growth. Your baby will
continue to grow at a similar rate, gaining about 1 to 1½ inches (2.5 to 3.8
centimeters) in length and 2 pounds (907 grams) in weight this month. These
are just averages -- your baby may grow somewhat faster or slower, and is
likely to have growth spurts.

Your baby can go through periods of increased hunger and fussiness. This
increase in hunger means your baby is going through a period of fast growth (a
**growth spurt** ). If you breastfeed, you might find your baby wants to eat
more often (sometimes every hour!) during certain times of the day. This is
often called "cluster feeding." Formula-fed babies may want to eat more often
or will drink more formula than usual during feedings.

You'll learn to see the signs that tell you that your baby is hungry or when
your baby is full. You will know your baby is hungry when she seems restless,
cries a lot, sticks out her tongue or sucks on her hands and lips. You will
know your baby is full when she is no longer interested in feeding or just
falls asleep at the end of a feeding session. Remember, babies' tummies are
very small and they need to be burped after feedings to release gas that can
cause discomfort.

Your doctor will measure your baby's weight, length, and head circumference
and track his or her growth on a standardized growth chart (there are
different charts for boys and girls). Your baby might be large, small, or
medium-sized. As long as this growth pattern stays consistent over time,
chances are your baby's progress is just fine.

If your baby is born prematurely, keep in mind that growth and development
should not be compared with that of a full-term child. Preemies will need to
be followed more closely and may need to be weighed more often during the
first months to make sure they are growing properly. They have some catching
up to do!

### Should I Be Concerned?

If your baby is not growing at the expected rate, or the growth rate slows,
your doctor will want to make sure your baby is getting enough to eat.

The doctor may ask you about:

  * **How many feedings a day your baby gets.** At 2 months old, a breastfed baby may feed about 8 times in a 24-hour period; formula-fed babies usually eat less frequently, about every 4 hours. Now that babies are drinking more at a time they will feed less often and sleep longer at night.
  * **How much your baby eats at each feeding.** A baby generally nurses for at least 10 minutes, should be heard to swallow, and should seem satisfied when done. Bottle-fed babies eat about 5 to 6 ounces (148 -177 milliliters) -- some more and some less -- at each feeding. Breastfeeding mothers may benefit from seeing a lactation consultant to increase comfort and improve technique.
  * **How many bowel movements your baby has each day, and their volume and consistency.** Most babies will have 1 or more bowel movements daily, but it may be normal to skip 1 or 2 days if consistency is normal. Breastfed babies' stools tend to be soft and slightly runny. The stools of formula-fed babies tend to be a little firmer, but should not be hard or formed.

Most of the time, a baby's growth will simply be tracked over the next few
months during routine well-baby visits. But if your doctor is concerned about
your baby's growth, he or she will want to see your baby more often.

### What's Next?

On average, babies between 3 and 6 months grow in length and weight at a
steady but slightly slower rate compared with the first 2 months of life.
Sometimes, it may seem like your baby is outgrowing clothes every other day
and you can't keep up. Don't worry. Rapid growth will start to slow down in
the second half of the first year.

**Reviewed by:** Cristy A. Wong, MD

Date reviewed: January 2019

## More on this topic for:

Parents

  * Growth Charts
  * Communication and Your 1- to 3-Month-Old
  * Your Child's Checkup: 2 Months
  * Your Child's Checkup: 1 Month
  * Feeding Your Newborn
  * Feeding Your 1- to 3-Month-Old
  * Medical Care and Your 1- to 3-Month-Old
  * Your Baby's Hearing, Vision, and Other Senses: 2 Months
  * Sleep and Your 1- to 3-Month-Old
  * Your Child's Growth
  * Breastfeeding FAQs: How Much and How Often
  * Pregnancy & Newborn Center
  * Your Child's Development: 2 Months

View more

  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Partners
  * Editorial Policy
  * Permissions Guidelines
  * Privacy Policy & Terms of Use
  * Notice of Nondiscrimination

  * ![Nemours](/images/mothership/logos/logo-nemours.svg)

  * ![KidsHealth from Nemours](/images/mothership/logos/logo-kidshealth.svg)
  * ![Nemours Reading BrightStart!](/images/mothership/logos/logo-brightstart.svg)

Note: All information on KidsHealth® is for educational purposes only. For
specific medical advice, diagnoses, and treatment, consult your doctor.

© 1995- The Nemours Foundation. All rights reserved.

Images provided by The Nemours Foundation, iStock, Getty Images, Veer,
Shutterstock, and Clipart.com.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=474670473054468&v=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

