

Skip to main content

We use cookies to analyse how visitors use our website and to help us provide
the best possible experience for users. View our Cookie Policy for more
information

Agree

search __

![WWF logo - do it for your planet](/themes/custom/wwf/img/wwf-logo.svg)

## Main navigation

  * Wildlife 
    *       * Wildlife
    * African elephant
    * African rhinos
    * Amur leopards
    * Asian elephants
    * Asian rhinos
    * Dolphins
    * Giant pandas
    * Jaguars
    * Lions
    * Marine turtles
    * Mountain gorillas
    * Orang-utans
    * Adélie penguins
    * Emperor penguins
    * Polar bears
    * Snow leopards
    * Tigers
    * Yangtze finless porpoise
  * Where we work 
    *       * Environments
    * Forests
    * Rivers and wetlands
    * Frozen landscapes
    * Grasslands
    * Mountain ranges
    * Oceans
    * Places we work
    * The Amazon
    * Amur-Heilong
    * Antarctic
    * Arctic
    * Coastal Kenya
    * Coastal Tanzania
    * Eastern Himalayas
    * The Ganges
    * Mau-Mara-Serengeti
    * The Mekong
    * The Pantanal
    * Satpuda Maikal
    * UK seas
    * UK rivers
    * Virunga-Bwindi
    * Western Ghats
    * The Yangtze
  * What we do 
  * About WWF 
    *       * About us
    * Mission statement
    * Our annual review
    * Our President
    * Trustees
    * Our environmental performance
    * Our work in Scotland
    * Our work in Wales
    * Our work with communities
    * Our work with businesses
    * Press centre
    * Press releases
    * Visit the Living Planet Centre
  * Success stories 
  * What you can do 

Search

Close

Sign up to get the latest WWF news delivered straight to your inbox

First Name

Last Name

Email

We’ll keep your personal details safe and won’t share with them with any other
organisations for their marketing purposes. For full details see our Privacy
Policy.

Close

__menu

Adopt Donate Join

![King Penguins \(Aptenodytes patagonicus\) walking in line in snow storm,

South

Georgia.](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_s/public/2016-09/Medium_WW22789.jpg?h=d16e3f17&itok=z9-X6noK)

#

10 myths about climate change

With the climate crisis becoming a hot topic in mainstream media - there's a
lot of confusion around what climate change actually is. That's why we've
tried to clear up some of the most frequently heard myths, so that you can
tell fiction from fact!

Demand action on the climate emergency

Climate change Latest news

### 1. "CO2 is not a pollutant. It’s a GREEN gas which plants, crops and trees

need to grow."

This is true, but in the context of climate change, this is misinformed.

Yes, plants need carbon dioxide (CO2) for photosynthesis as humans need oxygen
for respiration. In fact, the world’s forests store and cycle huge amounts of
carbon. However, there’s a limit to the amount that they can be stored in any
given woodland area, and with deforestation increasing this limit is getting
lower. CO2 itself does not cause problems; it is part of the natural global
ecosystem. The problem is caused by the quantity being released by human
activity: there hasn’t been this level of CO2 in the atmosphere for 800,000
years.

Our carbon emissions are contributing to the greenhouse effect – trapping heat
and making the Earth warmer.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2017-02/twisted%20tree.jpg?h=aa81dfca&itok=fA5DFfTX)

### 2. "Climate change has been here AT LEAST 5 million years, you fools!"

In its basic sense, this statement is true (except for the last part, which
they must obviously be mistaken about!) The Earth’s climate does go through
natural cycles of warming and cooling. Our current warming being experienced
is completely out of sync with previous cycles – it is so much higher!

However – and it’s a big, however – when people talk about climate change
today they mean anthropogenic (man-made) climate change, this is how the
Earth’s average temperature is warming because of human activities such as
burning coal, oil and gas for energy and cutting down trees to make way for
agriculture. Climate change is currently happening to an extent that cannot be
explained by natural factors alone. Global temperatures have been rising for
over a century, accelerating in the past 30 years, and are now the highest
since records began.

The global scientific community widely agrees that the warming we are
experiencing is man-made… you fools!

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2017-02/space%20view.jpg?h=d24800e8&itok=pA_3C1S4)

### 3. "A few degrees don’t matter."

During the last ice age, which ended 12,000 years ago, the world's average
temperature was only 4-5°C cooler than it is today. Yet those few degrees have
made a drastic difference: parts of Britain were under a mile of ice, and sea
levels were about 100 metres lower than they currently are.

**Just a few degrees can have very dramatic effects, and what's happening now
is at a far greater rate than we've ever seen.** More importantly, we know
that it's largely caused by human activity.

We’ve seen just over 1°C over the last century and we’re seeing real effects
and impacts of climate change on nature and people all over the world – most
recently, in the UK, in extreme weather, both very cold and very hot. To avoid
the worst impacts, we need to keep the already unavoidable rise to 1.5°C. We
can do that by cutting greenhouse gas emissions from the energy we produce,
the buildings we live in, the way we travel, the products we manufacture and
the food we eat.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2017-02/iceberg.jpg?h=05756fc0&itok=V7xZ4kwM)

### 4. "Polar bears have increased their numbers. They have obviously

benefitted from climate change."

This is not true. Climate change is the most serious threat faced by the
planet’s biggest land-based carnivores. The Arctic is warming roughly twice as
fast as the global average, and the sea ice is melting earlier and forming
later each year. This makes it more difficult for females to get onto land in
late autumn to make their dens, and onto the sea ice in spring to feed. In
parts of the Arctic, bears are struggling without food for longer than
previously. This fasting dramatically reduces their body weight, which in turn
reduces their chance of surviving the summer season.

Loss of sea ice also threatens polar bears' main prey, seals, which depend on
sea ice to raise their young and rest. Polar bears are considered 'vulnerable'
in the IUCN red list of threatened species, with between 22,000 and 31,000
remaining in the wild. And their numbers are predicted to decline by 30% by
the middle of this century. As the top predator in the Arctic food chain, it
is vital to protect these creatures to ensure that the ecosystem remains
balanced.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2016-12/Original_WW22791.jpg?h=43f95bd6&itok=GpoQOfX_)

### 5. "Wind farms and solar are expensive and inefficient. Nuclear, coal and

oil are the only realistic way to provide for our energy needs."

It's a commonly-held belief that renewable energy is expensive, but solar
power has been the cheapest form of energy generation (per unit of energy
generated) for a long time, onshore wind costs about the same as gas, and
offshore wind is now cheaper than nuclear and close to challenging gas too.
The costs of renewables have fallen faster than anyone (including our
optimistic climate team!) could have predicted.

There are many misconceptions surrounding this issue; a recent survey found
that many people think nuclear power is a cheap source of energy, when in fact
it's the most expensive of the currently available forms. Onshore wind is
actually the UK’s cheapest power source.

Pairing renewable energy with improved technology is actually proving to be
very good for your bank account! Technology like double glazing and loft
insulation may not sound glamorous, but it reduces our bills and helps save
the planet at the same time.

WWF's vision is that we will use 100% renewable energy to provide our energy
needs within a generation.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2017-05/Wind%20farm.jpg?h=c9f93661&itok=3vMZKPQy)

### 6. "I thought a warmer climate brought less nasty weather."

Global warming will mean nicer weather in the UK, more Indian summers and less
of our British drizzle... right?

You might be forgiven for believing so, with this still being a very common
myth about climate change. The truth is far more complicated than that – and
it bodes less well for your holiday plans. The rise in global temperatures
that we're experiencing is caused by increasing greenhouse gas emissions and
affects weather patterns and ecosystems in complex ways, making storms,
floods, droughts and other extreme events more likely.

**Global warming means more extreme, erratic, unpredictable weather.**

For the UK, we could see less seasonal weather, with colder winters, more
intense heatwaves that last longer and wetter more intense summers. Met Office
data shows that climate change makes disasters like Storm Desmond seven times
more likely in the UK. We’ve seen evidence in 2018 already in Europe with the
‘beast from the east’ extreme cold-snap earlier this year, and right around
the northern hemisphere this summer, with a heatwave that broke temperature
records all over the place.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2016-09/Large_WW173831.jpg?h=5fcece85&itok=xWviL8Kq)

### 7. "Why is the WWF talking about Climate Change?"

Many people ask us why WWF is so involved in tackling climate change.
Shouldn’t we just stick to saving wildlife, like tigers and pandas?

Here's the stark truth: one in six species is at risk of extinction because of
climate change if we don't get things under control. Those species are the
ones we’re perhaps most familiar with – penguins and polar bears, for example.
But it’s true of species we see here in the UK, too. Puffins are threatened by
climate change, as their prey migrate to colder waters and it becomes harder
for them to source enough food to raise their chicks. It’s a similar story for
lots of UK seabirds, and this is partly why their numbers have plummeted in
recent years.

At WWF our job is to improve the relationship between people and the natural
world. Right now, climate change is putting pressure on both, and it affects
all the work we do. If we solved every other threat to wildlife but ignored
climate change, we’d have wasted our time tackling those other threats!

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2012-16/115440.jpg?itok=05ILMBgt)

### 8. "Everything is affected by climate change, but things adapt!"

This one isn't a myth, Darwin got the adaptation part right. But let’s clarify
the wording: everything is affected by climate change, and _some_ things
adapt.

To survive, plants, animals and birds confronted with climate change have two
options: move or adapt. There are several examples of species that have begun
to adapt to climate change already.

But increasingly it's a different story for many. With the speed of climate
change we are experiencing already, it’s becoming impossible for many species
to adapt quickly enough to keep up with their changing environment. And, as
habitats are destroyed by roads, cities and dams, moving becomes increasingly
difficult. If you can’t adapt quickly enough, and you can’t move – then you
die.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2016-09/Large_WW171150.jpg?h=9a3a310d&itok=fcP_nzSQ)

### 9. "Global warming was made up as a way to make money."

Climate change has been verified by almost every nation-state today in some
form; if it was a conspiracy by one group, then why is everyone standing
behind it? Because the science is easily attainable and verified – and
supported by 97% of climate scientists, with the rest having no single,
coherent and verified an alternative theory. You can check the data and the
science right now if you want to.

Climate change is one of the biggest challenges of our time, and it's our
responsibility to tackle it urgently. The time has gone for us to pass this
problem onto the next generation; we must face up to this now.

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2017-02/bridge%20meme.jpg?h=8995857d&itok=4dR_hav9)

### 10. The only way this planet will survive is us humans getting wiped out.

This, we firmly believe, is wrong. It’s easy to start feeling that we've gone
too far already and that the best thing for our planet would be the extinction
of the human race.

It's WWF's mission to build a world where people and nature thrive together.
The technology and systems we need to move to 100% renewable energy by 2050
and use our planet's resources sustainably are already available.

Humans and wildlife can benefit each other. We can learn to live in harmony
with the natural world.

Let's do it!

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/hero_l/public/2017-02/turtle%20hatchling.jpg?h=1c9b88c9&itok=8Iu5A4VS)

Climate change is complicated. We know that. That’s why we’re making as much
noise about it as possible.

You can help us fight climate change and restore nature by making a donation:

Make a Donation

**What are the battiest things you’ve heard about climate change this year?
We’d love to find out.**  
Let us know on Facebook, Twitter or Instagram.

#### People also visited:

![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/square_xs/public/2016-09/_DSC9148_0.jpg?h=6df8fd2f&itok=4TSoOEL1)
**The effects of climate change**
![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/square_xs/public/2016-12/Large_WW139598_0.jpg?h=d649bd26&itok=G2QOAKMk)
**We must shut down the UK ivory trade**
![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/square_xs/public/2017-05/Medium_WW226367.jpg?h=10d202d3&itok=2OxzeIBN)
**Wild tiger numbers rise for the first time in 100 years**
![](//www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/styles/square_xs/public/2017-01/WWF%20Scotland%20visit%20to%20Newton%20Primary%20Dunblane%20l%20to%20r%20Isla%20Cheyne%2C%20Harvey%20Hall%2C%20Mike%20Olendo%20WWF%20Kenya%2C%20Ella%20Ritch%2C%20Anna%20Eastham%2C%20Alex%20Hesketh%20%2827%20of%2036%29.jpg?h=6d1e208b&itok=o2HdrRMu)
**WWF Scotland surprises special young fundraiser**

##### Updates direct to your inbox

Sign up to be kept informed about our conservation work and how you can help
such as fundraising, campaigning and events. You can unsubscribe at any time.

First Name

Last Name

Email

We’ll keep your personal details safe and won’t share with them with any other
organisations for their marketing purposes. For full details see our Privacy
Policy.

### For a future where people and nature thrive

## Get Involved

  * Join us
  * Adopt an animal
  * Donate
  * Fundraise
  * Earth Hour
  * Footprint calculator
  * Careers
  * Shop
  * Significant gifts

## About WWF

  * Our annual review
  * Living Planet Centre
  * Trustees
  * Press contacts
  * Contact us
  * FAQs

## Legal

  * Terms & Conditions
  * Cookies
  * Privacy and Data Protection
  * Annual Report and Financial Statements
  * Gender Pay Gap report
  * Modern Slavery Statement

## Our UK offices

  * Living Planet Centre
  * Scotland
  * Wales
  * Cymru

Follow us on: __Twitter __Facebook __Instagram __Youtube __Pinterest
__Linkedin

  * Adopt
  * join
  * donate

![Alternate Text](/sites/default/files/wwf_logo_full.svg) WWF-UK is a
registered charity in England and Wales 1081247 and in Scotland SC039593 and a
company limited by guarantee registered in England and Wales 4016725.

