

~~~~~~~~~~~~

  *     * News
  * Tech
  * Health
  * Planet Earth
  * Strange News
  * Animals
  * History
  * Culture
  * Space
  * * * *

Live Science

* * *

  * News
  * Tech
  * Health
  * Planet Earth
  * Strange News
  * Animals
  * History
  * Culture
  * Space

Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History
Culture Space __ ____

__

  *     *       *         *           *   * Live Science

  * Planet Earth

# Carbon Dioxide Is Warming the Planet (Here's How)

By Stephanie Pappas, Live Science Contributor | March 10, 2017 07:11am ET

  *     *       *         *           *             * MORE

![Partner

Series](https://img.purch.com/o/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvcGFydG5lcnMvMjIvb3JpZ2luYWwvaW50ZXJlc3RpbmctcGVyc29uLTEuanBnPzE0NzA2ODAyNDc=)

The head of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) said he does not believe
that carbon dioxide is a main driver of climate change.

"I think that measuring with precision human activity on the climate is
something very challenging to do, and there's tremendous disagreement about
the degree of impact. So no, I would not agree that it's a primary contributor
to the global warming that we see," EPA chief Scott Pruitt told CNBC's morning
news show "Squawk Box" yesterday (March 9).

Pruitt's comments are in opposition to the scientific research on climate
change. But when even the head of the EPA doubts the consensus, it can be hard
to cut through the noise to understand what research scientists are really
using when they express climate-change concern. [The Reality of Climate
Change: 10 Myths Busted]

"I think plenty of people have pretty serious concerns in their life and they
just don't have the time to do all of the homework and the background to
figure this out," said Katherine Moore Powell, a climate ecologist at the
Field Museum in Chicago.

So here's a primer explaining exactly why scientists know the climate is
changing and that human activities are causing it.

## Earth is warming

At this point, even the staunchest climate deniers would be hard-pressed to
argue that the climate is not warming. Simply put, it's getting hotter out
there. Combining land and ocean measurements from 1850 to 2012, researchers
have found that the average surface-air temperature globally has risen by 1.4
degrees Fahrenheit (0.8 degrees Celsius) since the beginning of the industrial
age. That's according to the fifth report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), released in 2014. The top graph in the figure from the
IPCC report summary for policy makers shows the temperature anomaly in
Celsius.

The next graph in this sequence shows sea-level rise, which has gone up
globally by about 7.4 inches (0.19 meters) on average since 1901. According to
the IPCC, the rate of sea-level rise since the middle of the 1800s has been
higher than the rate during the previous two millennia. Scientists use tide
gauges and satellite measurements to track sea-level changes, according to the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Geologists and other
Earth scientists can study rocks, fossils and sediment cores to get a longer-
term look at sea-level changes, according to NASA.

The bottom two graphs show rising greenhouse-gas concentrations and estimated
emissions of carbon dioxide by humans since 1850. The rising trend is evident
on each figure. Scientists monitor carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by pumping
air into an artificial chamberand shining an infrared light through the
sample. Carbon dioxide absorbs infrared light very efficiently -- more on that
in a minute -- so the amount of infrared absorbed can be used to calculate the
amount of CO2 in the sample. [Top 10 Ways to Destroy Earth]

The premier (and longest-standing) site for these measurements is the Mauna
Loa Observatory in Hawaii, which recently reported that the planet's
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration has surpassed 400 parts per million.
In 1958, when observations at Mauna Loa began, the annual carbon dioxide
concentration in the atmosphere was 315 parts per million.

## The physics of greenhouse gases

Carbon dioxide is no dark-horse candidate for the warming of the atmosphere.
In 1896, Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius (who would later win the first-
ever Nobel Prize for Chemistry) published a paper in the Philosophical
Magazine and Journal of Science that laid out the basics of what's now known
as "the greenhouse effect."

The effect is a result of how energy interacts with the atmosphere. Sunlight
enters the atmosphere as ultraviolet and visible light; some of this solar
energy is then radiated back toward space as infrared energy, or heat. The
atmosphere is 78 percent nitrogen and 21 percent oxygen, which are both gases
made up of molecules containing two atoms. These tightly bound pairs don't
absorb much heat.

But the greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, water vapor and methane,
each have at least three atoms in their molecules. These loosely bound
structures are efficient absorbers of the long-wave radiation (also known as
heat) bouncing back from the planet's surface. When the molecules in carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases re-emit this long-wave radiation back
toward Earth's surface, the result is warming.

## Is it really carbon dioxide?

So, temperatures are rising, as are levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide. But
are the two connected?

Yes. The evidence is strong. In 2006, scientists presented a poster at the
18th Conference on Climate Variability and Change that even measured the
effect directly. Using spectrometers (tools that measure spectra to identify
particular wavelengths), the researchers analyzed the wavelengths of infrared
radiation reaching the ground. Based on the varying wavelengths, the
scientists determined that more radiation was occurring due to the
contribution of specific greenhouse gases.

Overall, they found that greenhouse gas radiation had increased by 3.5 watts
per square meter compared with preindustrial times, a rise of just over 2
percent. Other researchers have noted "missing" infrared wavelengths in
radiation into space, a phenomenon that happens because these missing
wavelengths get stuck in the atmosphere.

Scientists also know that the extra carbon in the atmosphere is the very same
carbon that comes from burning fossil fuels. By analyzing molecular variations
called isotopes, researchers can trace the origin of atmospheric carbon, Moore
Powell said.

"We know what the burning of fossil fuels looks like, in a scientific sense,"
she said.

That's not to say that the climate is as simple as an actual greenhouse. Many
factors influence global temperatures, including volcanic eruptions and
variations in the solar cycle and Earth's orbit that alter the amount of
sunlight reaching the planet.

But scientists know that volcanoes and the sun aren't to blame for recent
climate change. According to the IPCC, volcanic carbon dioxide emissions have
been, at most, a hundredth of human CO2 emissions since 1750. In addition,
volcanic eruptions cause changes for short timescales of about two years, not
the longer-term changes being observed currently.

The sun is more complex, but researchers have found that the recent solar-
cycle minimum (between 1986 and 2008) was actually lower than the previous two
solar-cycle minimums (the sun moves between quiet minimums and active maximums
about once every five years). If anything, the IPPC concluded, recent solar
activity should have resulted in cooling, not warming. Likewise, a 2012 study
found that between 2005 and 2010, a period when solar activity was low, the
Earth still absorbed 0.58 watts of excess energy per square meter, continuing
to warm despite the lower level of solar energy going into the system.

## Where's the real uncertainty?

Given the weight of the evidence, scientists have come to a consensus that
climate change is happening, and that human greenhouse gas emissions are the
primary cause.

So where are the real scientific debates?

There are still a lot of questions left about how fast climate change will
happen and what the precise effects will be.

"What I would say is most uncertain is simply how quickly things are chaning,"
Moore Powell said. "I'm very interested in the pace."

One of the major unknowns is the ultimate influence of clouds on climate:
Clouds are white, so they reflect sunlight back toward space, which could have
a cooling effect. But clouds are also water vapor, which traps heat. And
different types of clouds might have warming or cooling effects, so the
precise role of clouds in the feedback loop of global warming remains
difficult to untangle, scientists have said.

Another burning question is how high, and how quickly, the sea level will rise
as warming sea waters expand and Antarctic and Arctic ice melts. The IPCC
forecasted a rise of 20 to 38 inches (52 to 98 cm), assuming no efforts are
made to curb greenhouse gas emissions.

That range is broad, largely because the dynamics of Antarctic ice sheets are
not completely understood. If Antarctica's land-based glaciers slough off to
the sea rapidly with a little bit of warming, that will be bad news for
coastal communities, researchers have said. That's why scientists are watching
closely right now as a rift is splitting the Larsen C ice shelf on the Weddell
Sea. If the giant iceberg-calving event about to occur destabilizes the ice
shelf, it could result in the rapid flow of the land-based glaciers behind it
into the ocean. This type of rapid glacial flow already occurred nearby, when
the Larsen B ice shelf crumbled in 2002.

For an ecologist like Moore Powell, there are also myriad questions to answer
about how ecosystems will respond to a changing climate. If the pace is slow
enough, plants and animals can adapt. But in many places, the change is
happening very quickly, Moore Powell said.

"There's not enough time at this pace for natural adaptation to take over,"
she said.

_Original article onLive Science. _

### You'd Also Like

  * #### The Green New Deal Doesn't Go Far Enough. Here's Why (Op-Ed)

LiveScience __

  * #### Carbon Dioxide Soars to Record-Breaking Levels Not Seen in 800,000 Years

LiveScience __

  * #### Humans Have Caused the Most Dramatic Climate Change in 3 Million Years

LiveScience __

  * #### Climate Change Could Make These Super-Common Clouds Extinct, Which Would Scorch the Planet

LiveScience __

Author Bio

* * *

Stephanie Pappas, Live Science Contributor

Stephanie interned as a science writer at Stanford University Medical School,
and also interned at ScienceNow magazine and the Santa Cruz Sentinel. She has
a bachelor's degree in psychology from the University of South Carolina and a
graduate certificate in science writing from the University of California,
Santa Cruz.

    
    
     **Stephanie Pappas, Live Science Contributor** on
    

Science Newsletter: Subscribe

Submit

Follow Us

Most Popular

  1. Pregnant Women Who Eat More Fiber May Lower Child's Celiac Risk

  2. Please Do Not Feed These Tweezer-Beaked, Hopping Rats Peanut Butter!!!

  3. Can Physicists Really Save Schrödinger’s Cat?

  4. Mysterious 'Bridge' of Radio Waves Between Galaxies Seems to Be Smashing the Laws of Physics (But It’s Not)

  5. These First Americans Vanished Without a Trace — But Hints of Them Linger

HomeAbout Us

Company

  * Company Info
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Advertise with Us
  * Using Our Content
  * Licensing & Reprints
  * Terms of Use
  * Copyright Policy
  * Privacy Policy

Network

  * Top Ten Reviews
  * Tom's Guide
  * Laptop Mag
  * Tom's Hardware
  * Space.com
  * Live Science
  * AnandTech
  * Dignifyed

FOLLOW US

Subscribe SUBMIT

![Purch](https://www.livescience.com/resources/img/purch-logo.png?5dba563)

Copyright (C) All Rights Reserved.

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

