

alert message here

⚠ You have javascript turned off. This site requires it to function properly.
Please turn it on in your browser preferences.

# The Skeptics Society & Skeptic magazine

![SKEPTIC \(logo\)](/images/skeptic-logo-2017.png)

  * Search
  * Menu

## Reading Room

  * Reading Room

    * read articles 
  * browse by topic

aliens alternative medicine anthropogenic global warming atheism behavioral
psychology belief biology brain Carl Sagan Christianity climate change
consciousness conspiracies creationism critical thinking Darwin debate ethics
evolution evolution and/or creationism evolutionary biology evolutionary
psychology faith free will global warming God history human nature Intelligent
Design meaning medicine morality mythology neuroscience
paranormal/supernatural/occult physics politics pseudoscience psychic
phenomena psychology reason religion review science Science Salon skepticism
supernatural tribute UFOs universe **more keywords …**

* * *

### How We Know Global Warming is Real

by Dr. Tapio Schneider

Dr. Tapio Schneider discusses the science behind human-induced climate change.
He is a climate scientist and Professor of Environmental Science and
Engineering at the California Institute of Technology.

BUY this issue >  
DOWNLOAD this article in PDF >

#### The Science Behind Human-induced Climate Change

Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are higher today than at any time in
at least the past 650,000 years. They are about 35% higher than before the
industrial revolution, and this increase is caused by human activities,
primarily the burning of fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, as
are methane, nitrous oxide, water vapor, and a host of other trace gases. They
occur naturally in the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases act like a blanket for
infrared radiation, retaining radiative energy near the surface that would
otherwise escape directly to space. An increase in atmospheric concentrations
of carbon dioxide and of other greenhouse gases augments the natural
greenhouse effect; it increases the radiative energy available to Earth's
surface and to the lower atmosphere. Unless compensated for by other
processes, the increase in radiative energy available to the surface and the
lower atmosphere leads to warming. This we know. How do we know it?

![figure 1](https://www.skeptic.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/v14n01resources/tapio_figure1.jpg)

**Figure 1. Carbon dioxide concentrations in Antarctica over 400,000 years.**
"The graph combines ice core data with recent samples of Antarctic air. The
100,000-year ice age cycle is clearly recognizable." (Data sources: Petit et
al. 1999; Keeling and Whorf 2004; GLOBALVIEW-CO2 2007.)

##### How do we know carbon dioxide concentrations have increased?

The concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in atmospheric
samples have been measured continuously since the late 1950s. Since then,
carbon dioxide concentrations have increased steadily from about 315 parts per
million (ppm, or molecules of carbon dioxide per million molecules of dry air)
in the late 1950s to about 385 ppm now, with small spatial variations away
from major sources of emissions. For the more distant past, we can measure
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases in bubbles of ancient air
preserved in ice (e.g., in Greenland and Antarctica). Ice core records
currently go back 650,000 years; over this period we know that carbon dioxide
concentrations have never been higher than they are now. Before the industrial
revolution, they were about 280 ppm, and they have varied naturally between
about 180 ppm during ice ages and 300 ppm during warm periods (Fig. 1).
Concentrations of methane and nitrous oxide have likewise increased since the
industrial revolution (Fig. 2) and, for methane, are higher now than they have
been in the 650,000 years before the industrial revolution.

![figure 2](https://www.skeptic.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/v14n01resources/tapio_figure2.jpg)

**Figure 2. Greenhouses gases then and now.**

##### How do we know the increase in carbon dioxide

concentrations is caused by human activities?

There are several lines of evidence. We know approximately how much carbon
dioxide is emitted as a result of human activities. Adding up the human
sources of carbon dioxide -- primarily from fossil fuel burning, cement
production, and land use changes (e.g., deforestation) -- one finds that only
about half the carbon dioxide emitted as a result of human activities has led
to an increase in atmospheric concentrations. The other half of the emitted
carbon dioxide has been taken up by oceans and the biosphere -- where and how
exactly is not completely understood: there is a "missing carbon sink."

Human activities thus can account for the increase in carbon dioxide
concentrations. Changes in the isotopic composition of carbon dioxide show
that the carbon in the added carbon dioxide derives largely from plant
materials, that is, from processes such as burning of biomass or fossil fuels,
which are derived from fossil plant materials. Minute changes in the
atmospheric concentration of oxygen show that the added carbon dioxide derives
from burning of the plant materials. And concentrations of carbon dioxide in
the ocean have increased along with the atmospheric concentrations, showing
that the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations cannot be a
result of release from the oceans. All lines of evidence taken together make
it unambiguous that the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations
is human induced and is primarily a result of fossil fuel burning. (Similar
reasoning can be evoked for other greenhouse gases, but for some of those,
such as methane and nitrous oxide, their sources are not as clear as those of
carbon dioxide.)

##### How can such a minute amount of carbon dioxide

affect Earth's radiative energy balance?

Concentrations of carbon dioxide are measured in parts per million, those of
methane and nitrous oxide in parts per billion. These are trace constituents
of the atmosphere. Together with water vapor, they account for less than 1% of
the volume of the atmosphere. And yet they are crucially important for Earth's
climate.

Earth's surface is heated by absorption of solar (shortwave) radiation; it
emits infrared (longwave) radiation, which would escape almost directly to
space if it were not for water vapor and the other greenhouse gases. Nitrogen
and oxygen, which account for about 99% of the volume of the atmosphere, are
essentially transparent to infrared radiation. But greenhouse gases absorb
infrared radiation and re-emit it in all directions. Some of the infrared
radiation that would otherwise directly escape to space is emitted back toward
the surface. Without this natural greenhouse effect, primarily owing to water
vapor and carbon dioxide, Earth's mean surface temperature would be a freezing
-1°F, instead of the habitable 59°F we currently enjoy. Despite their small
amounts, then, the greenhouse gases strongly affect Earth's temperature.
Increasing their concentration augments the natural greenhouse effect.

![figure 3](https://www.skeptic.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/v14n01resources/tapio_figure3.jpg)

**Figure 3. How We Know the Globe is Warming.**

##### How do increases in greenhouse gas concentrations

lead to surface temperature increases?

Increasing the concentration of greenhouse gases increases the atmosphere's
"optical thickness" for infrared radiation, which means that more of the
radiation that eventually does escape to space comes from higher levels in the
atmosphere. The mean temperature at the level from which the infrared
radiation effectively escapes to space (the emission level) is determined by
the total amount of solar radiation absorbed by Earth. The same amount of
energy Earth receives as solar radiation, in a steady state, must be returned
as infrared radiation; the energy of radiation depends on the temperature at
which it is emitted and thus determines the mean temperature at the emission
level. For Earth, this temperature is -1°F -- the mean temperature of the
surface if the atmosphere would not absorb infrared radiation. Now, increasing
greenhouse gas concentrations implies raising the emission level at which, in
the mean, this temperature is attained. If the temperature decreases between
the surface and this level and its rate of decrease with height does not
change substantially, then the surface temperature must increase as the
emission level is raised. This is the greenhouse effect. It is also the reason
that clear summer nights in deserts, under a dry atmosphere, are colder than
cloudy summer nights on the U.S. east coast, under a relatively moist
atmosphere (Figs. 4 and 5).

![figure 4 and 5](https://www.skeptic.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/v14n01resources/tapio_figure4and5.jpg)

**Figure 4 and 5. Two Cheers for the Greenhouse Effect.** Some global warming
is necessary in order to make the Earth habitable for creatures like us. These
two graphics show how it works. The IPCC caption reads: "Estimate of the
Earth's annual and global mean energy balance. Over the long term, the amount
of incoming solar radiation absorbed by the Earth and atmosphere is balanced
by the Earth and atmosphere releasing the same amount of outgoing longwave
radiation. About half of the incoming solar radiation is absorbed by the
Earth's surface. This energy is transferred to the atmosphere by warming the
air in contact with the surface (thermals), by evapotranspiration and by
longwave radiation that is absorbed by clouds and greenhouse gases. The
atmosphere in turn radiates longwave energy back to Earth as well as out to
space." Source: Kiehl and Trenberth (1997). (Graphics are FAQ 1.1, 1.3, Figure
1 from the IPCC Report.)

In fact, Earth surface temperatures have increased by about 1.3°F over the
past century (Fig. 3). The temperature increase has been particularly
pronounced in the past 20 years (for an illustration, see the animations of
temperature changes). The scientific consensus about the cause of the recent
warming was summarized by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
in 2007: "Most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since
the mid-20th century is very likely due to the observed increase in
anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations… The observed widespread warming
of the atmosphere and ocean, together with ice mass loss, support the
conclusion that it is extremely unlikely that global climate change of the
past 50 years can be explained without external forcing, and very likely that
it is not due to known natural causes alone."

![figure 6](https://www.skeptic.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/v14n01resources/tapio_figure6.jpg)

**Figure 6. The History of Climate Models.** The IPCC caption reads: "The
complexity of climate models has increased over the last few decades. The
additional physics incorporated in the models are shown pictorially by the
different features of the modelled world." (Graphic is Figure 1.2 from the
IPCC Report.)

The IPCC conclusions rely on climate simulations with computer models (Fig.
6). Based on spectroscopic measurements of the optical properties of
greenhouse gases, we can calculate relatively accurately the impact increasing
concentrations of greenhouse gases have on Earth's radiative energy balance.
For example, the radiative forcing owing to increases in the concentrations of
carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide in the industrial era is about 2.3
Watts per square meter. (This is the change in radiative energy fluxes in the
lower troposphere before temperatures have adjusted.) We need computer models
to translate changes in the radiative energy balance into changes in
temperature and other climate variables because feedbacks in the climate
system render the climate response to changes in the atmospheric composition
complex, and because other human emissions (smog) also affect climate in
complex ways. For example, as the surface and lower atmosphere warm in
response to increases in carbon dioxide concentrations, the atmospheric
concentration of water vapor near the surface increases as well. That this has
to happen is well established on the basis of the energy balance of the
surface and relations between evaporation rates and the relative humidity of
the atmosphere (it is not directly, as is sometimes stated, a consequence of
higher evaporation rates).

Water vapor, however, is a greenhouse gas in itself, and so it amplifies the
temperature response to increases in carbon dioxide concentrations and leads
to greater surface warming than would occur in the absence of water vapor
feedback. Other feedbacks that must be taken into account in simulating the
climate response to changes in atmospheric composition involve, for example,
changes in cloud cover, dynamical changes that affect the rate at which
temperature decreases with height and hence affect the strength of the
greenhouse effect, and surface changes (e.g., loss of sea ice). Current
climate models, with Newton's laws of motion and the laws of thermodynamics
and radiative transfer at their core, take such processes into account. They
are able to reproduce, for example, Earth's seasonal cycle if all such
processes are taken into account but not, for example, if water vapor feedback
is neglected. The IPCC's conclusion is based on the fact that these models can
only match the observed climate record of the past 50 years if they take
human-induced changes in atmospheric composition into account. They fail to
match the observed record if they only model natural variability, which may
include, for example, climate responses to fluctuations in solar radiation
(Fig. 7).

![figure 3](https://www.skeptic.com/wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/v14n01resources/tapio_figure7.jpg)

**Figure 7. Global and Continental Temperature Change.** The IPCC caption
reads: "Comparison of observed continental -- and global -- scale changes in
surface temperature with results simulated by climate models using either
natural or both natural and anthropogenic forcings. Decadal averages of
observations are shown for the period 1906-2005 (black line) plotted against
the center of the decade and relative to the corresponding average for the
period 1901-1950. Lines are dashed where spatial coverage is less than 50%.
Darker shaded bands show the 5 to 95% range for 19 simulations from five
climate models using only the natural forcings due to solar activity and
volcanoes. Lighter shaded bands show the 5 to 95% range for 58 simulations
from 14 climate models using both natural and anthropogenic forcings."
(Graphic is Figure SPM.4 from the IPCC Report.)

Climate feedbacks are the central source of scientific (as opposed to socio-
economic) uncertainty in climate projections. The dominant source of
uncertainty are cloud feedbacks, which are incompletely understood. The area
covered by low stratus clouds may increase or decrease as the climate warms.
Because stratus clouds are low, they do not have a strong greenhouse effect
(the strength of the greenhouse effect depends on the temperature difference
between the surface and the level from which infrared radiation is emitted,
and this is small for low clouds); however, they reflect sunlight, and so
exert a cooling effect on the surface, as anyone knows who has been near
southern California's coast on an overcast spring morning. If their area
coverage increases as greenhouse gas concentrations increase, the surface
temperature response will be muted; if their area coverage decreases, the
surface temperature response will be amplified. It is currently unclear how
these clouds respond to climate change, and climate models simulate widely
varying responses. Other major uncertainties include the effects of aerosols
(smog) on clouds and the radiative balance and, on timescales longer than a
few decades, the response of ice sheets to changes in temperature.

Uncertainties notwithstanding, it is clear that increases in greenhouse gas
concentrations, in the global mean, will lead to warming. Although climate
models differ in the amount of warming they project, in its spatial
distribution, and in other more detailed aspects of the climate response, all
climate models that can reproduce observed characteristics such as the
seasonal cycle project warming in response to the increases in greenhouse gas
concentrations that are expected in the coming decades as a result of
continued burning of fossil fuels and other human activities such as tropical
deforestation. The projected consequences of the increased concentrations of
greenhouse gases have been widely publicized. Global-mean surface temperatures
are likely to increase by 2.0 to 11.5°F by the year 2100, with the uncertainty
range reflecting scientific uncertainties (primarily about clouds) as well as
socio-economic uncertainties (primarily about the rate of emission of
greenhouse gases over the 21st century). Land areas are projected to warm
faster than ocean areas. The risk of summer droughts in mid-continental
regions is likely to increase. Sea level is projected to rise, both by thermal
expansion of the warming oceans and by melting of land ice.

![SUBSCRIBE to eSkeptic and get free science articles in your inbox once a

week.](https://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/images/subscribe-to-eSkeptic.jpg)

Less widely publicized but important for policy considerations are projected
very long-term climate changes, of which some already now are unavoidable.
Even if we were able to keep the atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration
fixed at its present level -- this would require an immediate and
unrealistically drastic reduction in emissions -- the Earth surface would
likely warm by another 0.9-2.5°F over the next centuries. The oceans with
their large thermal and dynamic inertia provide a buffer that delays the
response of the surface climate to changes in greenhouse gas concentrations.
The oceans will continue to warm over about 500 years. Their waters will
expand as they warm, causing sea level rise. Ice sheets are thought to respond
over timescales of centuries, though this is challenged by recent data from
Greenland and Antarctica, which show evidence of a more rapid, though possibly
transient, response. Their full contribution to sea level rise will take
centuries to manifest. Studies of climate change abatement policies typically
end in the year 2100 and thus do not take into account that most of the sea
level rise due to the emission of greenhouse gases in the next 100 years will
occur decades and centuries later. Sea level is projected to rise 0.2-0.6
meters by the year 2100, primarily as a result of thermal expansion of the
oceans; however, it may eventually reach values up to several meters higher
than today when the disintegration of glaciers and ice sheets contributes more
strongly to sea level rise. (A sea level rise of 4 meters would submerge much
of southern Florida.)

##### Certainties and Uncertainties

While there are uncertainties in climate projections, it is important to
realize that the climate projections are based on sound scientific principles,
such as the laws of thermodynamics and radiative transfer, with measurements
of optical properties of gases. The record of past climate changes that can be
inferred, for example, with geochemical methods from ice cores and ocean
sediment cores, provides tantalizing hints of large climate changes that
occurred over Earth's history, and it poses challenges to our understanding of
climate (for example, there is no complete and commonly accepted explanation
for the cycle of ice ages and warm periods). However, climate models are not
empirical, based on correlations in such records, but incorporate our best
understanding of the physical, chemical, and biological processes being
modeled. Hence, evidence that temperature changes precede changes in carbon
dioxide concentrations in some climate changes on the timescales of ice ages,
for example, only shows that temperature changes can affect the atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations, which in turn feed back on temperature changes.
Such evidence does not invalidate the laws of thermodynamics and radiative
transfer, or the conclusion that the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations
in the past decades is human induced.

##### This article can be found in

![Skeptic volume 14 number

1](https://shop.skeptic.com/graphics/backissues/magv14n1_sm.jpg)

#### volume 14 number 1

A Climate of Belief

How We Know Global Warming is Real: The Science Behind Human-induced Climate
Change; How to solve the global warming problem by 2020…  
BROWSE this issue >  
ORDER this issue >

**TAGS** : anthropogenic global warming, climate change, global warming,
global warming articles, global warming causes, global warming facts,
greenhouse effect, is global warming real, what is climate change, what is
global warming

« PREVIOUS

NEXT »

##### Recommended by Amazon

#### 123 Comments

  1. Anthony says:

March 16, 2011 at 3:53 am

I was going to subscribe to your site and newsletter, but I see you have no
more rational way of dealing with belief-driven drivel than do people like
Graham Hancock or Billy Graham.

Where's your skepticism when we, the consuming public, need it the most? Why
do you accept the test data as factual, when so many of the testing stations
have been PROVEN to give fundamentally flawed readings? Why are you just
accepting, as dogma, the IPCC reports? Where's your healthy skepticism of the
data?

By your standards, David Copperfield has harnessed the real power of magic
because video cameras don't lie.

How incredibly disappointing to see an article like this on a site that prides
itself on its rational thinking.

    
    
    * steve says:
    

April 6, 2011 at 10:21 pm

Deniers attack the science by saying it's flawed. Please point to the science
that says their science is wrong. Please indicate where I can read the peer
reviewed science that says the planet is not warming and that humans are not
responsible.

    
    
      * Scott says:
    

June 16, 2012 at 10:48 pm

Hi Steve,

Why is it that you attack skeptical people on a skeptic website, labelling
anyone that questions popularly held views on science as a "Denier?" Have you
watched this? Being a skeptic I'm sure you'll have the patience and
intelligence to watch it:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iMQk-q8SpBU

I await your answers to all the points raised by these Scientists. I hope they
are wrong and you can show me why rather than dismissing my skeptical attitude
as denial. Thank you in advance.

    
    
        * Tony says:
    

October 2, 2012 at 11:06 am

Canadian Senate Climate Science and Economics Hearing - 15/12/11  
Ian Clark has no peer-reviewed publications on anthropogenic climate change.
This video is an embrassment to all Canadians. The fact that hard questions
that were not asked should raise alarms. Maybe you think its okay to to allow
someone to bring scientfic misinformation to Canadians.

    
    
        * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:52 am

It's your blatant use of two distinct standards for evidence that supports
your 'skepticism' and the evidence which suggests otherwise. Stating you are
willing to be convinced isn't enough when you insist on applying an ever-
moving standard of proof to those who don't believe what you want to be true.

    
    
    * Tom H says:
    

May 15, 2011 at 7:07 am

I share Anthony's disappointment in your lack of skepticism concerning the
global warming issue. I just got done watching your admirable refutation of
reincarnation on CBS's "Sunday Morning" 15 May 11 show. Excitedly, I said to
myself, "Here's an organization/magazine that finally gets it, by using
science to crush ridiculous hypotheses. Here's a magazine that will look at
the quality and weight of evidence on both sides of the argument, then make a
logical decision. This is a magazine that I would buy."

But before I was willing to purchase a subscription to Skeptic Magazine, I
wanted to see what your stance was on my personal "litmus test," which is the
man-made global warming farse. The fact that you embrace the flimsy evidence
of what is actually a "redistribution of wealth" scheme is very disappointing.
I have studied the man-made global warming issue deeply, including the reading
of the IPCC's current and past reports. The "science" in their reports is very
sloppy, and they actually undermine their own arguments in the earlier
versions of their reports. For instance, they cannot adequately explain why
the average global temperature was going down (not up) during the 1940-1975
period, when CO2 was rising sharply. They also claim that there was a warming
period during the Middle Ages (when CO2 concentrations were obviously lower
due to a less-populated, less-industrialized world). Interestingly, these two
references were removed from subsequent IPCC reports.

Therefore, I will not be purchasing your magazine at this time.

"Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence." -- Carl Sagan

    
    
      * Don says:
    

May 27, 2011 at 5:55 am

I agree and I am no longer going to subscribe to the magazine.

My MIT professor, Richard Lindzen was on the IPCC committee and disagreed with
its conclusions. IPCC is dominated by politics, which is obvious given that it
is Intergovernmental. The UN loves anything where it can get more power.

My personal question is: If the CO2 has risen so sharply, why hasn't the
temperature also risen sharply? If it had risen sharply between 2001 and 2011,
it would be so obvious that we wouldn't be having this discussion.

    
    
        * Alexander Cooke says:
    

June 11, 2011 at 9:15 pm

The increase in the temperature caused by CO2 happens over a timescale of a
few decades, the change is moderate and not spread out evenly, the increased
pressure in the north pole has sent cold air surging southward, cooling the
areas around it and heating itself up.

    
    
          * sunsettommy says:
    

August 19, 2011 at 8:28 pm

There is no evidence that the slight warming trend since the 1850's is
accelerating or deviating from the long term trendline.

    
    
      * BadReligion says:
    

May 21, 2012 at 10:13 am

wow, you must be a scientist lol

    
    
        * Burgerr9 says:
    

July 11, 2012 at 8:21 am

This- my friend- is a pile of poo. And wow.. look at me, I can write long-
winded sentences that make no sence at all but it's okay because if I use
loooong words like thermodynamics and carbondioxide people will think i'm
smart. AND BREATH. You know what the problem is with you skeptics? You can't
accept the fact that things are really what they seem sometimes. You disagree
with the fact that global warming is real? Well f*** you! Polar Bears die just
so you can get to work you bastards! I hope you spend all eternity in hell,
which is extra hot now. Do you now why? Global warming…….

    
    
          * IABConsulting says:
    

July 19, 2012 at 2:39 pm

If global warming is true, then why do the weather people make comments like,
"This is the hottest it's been in 25 years." That means 25 years ago it was
hotter. I would also want to know why there has been record snow fall, record
cold in most parts of the world, even in countries that never had snow, it's
been snowing and colder. Take all the temperatures around the entire world
from every source, for the full year. Add them all up and get an average
temperature. Now do this for every year from 1800 on, oops can't be done
because until the 1960s, we were not keeping such accurate data. You can't use
a small sample from a few areas on the planet and make claims like they are
doing. Records prove that it has been warming for 10,000 years due to the ice
age we had. We will have another Ice Age for that is the natural cycle of this
planet.

    
    
        * Burgerr9 says:
    

July 11, 2012 at 10:41 am

This- my friend- is a pile of poo. And wow.. look at me, I can write long-
winded sentences that make no sense at all but it's okay because if I use
loooong words like thermodynamics and carbondioxide people will think i'm
smart. AND BREATH. You know what the problem is with you skeptics? You can't
accept the fact that things are really what they seem sometimes. You disagree
with the fact that global warming is real? Well f*** you! Polar Bears die just
so you can get to work you bastards! I hope you spend all eternity in hell,
which is extra hot now. Do you now why? Global warming…….

    
    
    * Pat says:
    

June 16, 2012 at 10:01 am

<>

Where's YOUR skepticism you are not following right wing lies?

# 1 Weather Station Data:

\  
Here are the weather station temperature data == per NASA. And one can see the
rise.  
http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/graphs_v3/Fig.A2.gif

The satellite data (UAH and RSS) shows roughly the same trend (but only goes
back to the 1970s); Same with weather balloons.  
Recently the land weather station data was independently reviewed AND found
comparable to NASA’s results.  
-- Here is where Judith Curry notes that Dr. Richard Muller's independent
results were similar with NASA's

Prof.JudithCurry says of the project discussing it with MULLER:

<>

http://judithcurry.com/2011/10/30/discussion-with-rich-muller/#more-5540

Which is where the science is. YOU appear to be get getting your "facts" from
ideological sources.

  1. Steve LeMaster says:

March 16, 2011 at 9:29 am

Patently absurd.

Temperature stations are known to be flawed, due to where they have been
erected.

We now know that the data has been manipulated, via the HADCRUT emails and
data sets contained in those emails.

Given the events that took place on December 26, 2004 and most recently in
Japan, to even think that the modern human industrial population can cause the
earth's climate to change is patently absurd.

Computer climate models are fundamentally flawed, in that "scientists" are
placing worst case scenarios into the software. Isn't it obvious what the
results will be? It's called GIGO (Garbage In, Garbage Out).

Science demands that data is to be reproducible and verifiable in the present,
not 10, 15 or 100 years in the future. If the local weatherman can't be a
hundred percent accurate for 5 days, what makes you think the bureaucrats at
the IPCC can do it in a hundred years?

After reading this article, which smacks of Al Gore dogma, I fail to see even
the slightest bit of skepticism.

    
    
    * CM says:
    

July 17, 2011 at 10:00 am

"Temperature stations are known to be flawed, due to where they have been
erected."

What rubbish. There are tens of thousands of professionally-sited
meteorological stations, plus hundreds of thousands of readings taken by other
professional disciplines (e.g. Coastguards, ATC, etc.). Yes, you can find some
poorly-sited instruments, but their contributions is _far_ outweighed by data
from consistently-reliable sites.

"Computer climate models are fundamentally flawed, in that “scientists” are
placing worst case scenarios into the software."

Can we see some proof of this accusation? If you understood weather and
climate models, you'd know that models are constrained by climatology - e.g.
if the rainfall in (say) Inverness had _never ever_ totalled 500mm, then
models won't predict 500mm, even though that really would be a very damaging
worst case. That is why forecasting centres still keep human forecasters.
Models are accurate, but humans can improve on them just where we need it most
- the worst-case scenarios. Climate change models, if anything, are not
pessimistic enough, with regards to what is happening to the world's climate.

    
    
      * Robert O. Becker says:
    

June 4, 2012 at 7:46 am

My fundamental problem with the Climate Change hypothesis is the Temperature
measurement :  
1) Weather stations are very sparsely located throughout the world, and are
often put nearby densely populated areas (that's where the day-to-day weather
reports are economically interesting)  
2) As any respectable meteorological scientist is well aware, weather around
cities, due to localized pollution (NOx, SOx, smelly exhaust fumes), is
usually hotter than in the country side … technical term for it being the
Thermal Pocket Effect  
3) What about 100m up in the air ? No tree-harvested CO2 isotopes there, or
18th century weather balloons temperature records  
4) What about 100m down in the sea ? Even less tree-harvested CO2 isotopes can
be found, or 18th century oceanic weather stations  
5) Let's also not forget that the very accuracy of weather measurement is at
best doubtfull until standardized & homogenous weather station's placement
around the _whole_ planet (that point is still lacking for most parts of the
world)

So, all in all, what the current _measurements_ point to is that VERY CLOSELY
around densely populated areas, one can see that there is such a thing as
Thermal Pocket Effect (ie. localized temperature increase).

Another side issue is the (hidden in plain sight) political agendas for
financing C-C research :  
1) Most of the so-called solutions to AGW involves creating new broad-based
Taxes, creating new financing for said political bodies (conflict of interest
?)  
2) Every once in a while, there is a bloom of Malthusian thinking (whose
theories have been already proven wrong); AGW provides a comfortable home for
those  
3) Of course, the Western part of the World has caused massive over-
consumption of ressources, along with widespread pollution of land, air and
sea … AGW is providing a single-cause, easy to make the public focus on,
instead of multiplying the causes for concern (which, psychologically
speaking, makes people stop bothering : "Oh, just another man-made destruction
cause, why even bother counting them all ?")

So, what the current research papers point to is that there is a research-
granting agenda for AGW, due to either of the previous point (please point to
ANY Climate researcher who DOES NOT DEPEND upon a political body ?).

  1. Derek says:

March 16, 2011 at 9:41 am

" While there are uncertainties in climate projections, it is important to
realize that the climate projections are based on sound scientific principles,
such as the laws of thermodynamics and radiative transfer, with measurements
of optical properties of gases. "

The laws of thermodynamics are, it is plain to see for all,  
mangled beyond recognition and reality in K&T and computer climate models.  
ONLY in "greenhouseland physics" are such "laws" obeyed.

Somewhere between (real world) observation (and a lot of guesses)  
a "mother of all averages" approach has been applied to an unphysical reality.  
(Somewhere = incorrect / invalid conversion of Joules to W/m2)

"Certainties and Uncertainties" - you are having a patently divorced from
reality laugh at our expense are you not.  
Playstations and that type of virtual reality are for racing cars and mock
battles,  
NOT climate science.

  1. Anthony says:

March 16, 2011 at 10:02 am

And for those interested in the REAL science, you might try this:

"Although carbon dioxide is capable of raising the Earth's overall
temperature, the IPCC's predictions of catastrophic temperature increases
produced by carbon dioxide have been challenged by many scientists. In
particular, the importance of water vapor is frequently overlooked by
environmental activists and by the media. The above discussion shows that the
large temperature increases predicted by many computer models are unphysical
and inconsistent with results obtained by basic measurements. Skepticism is
warranted when considering computer-generated projections of global warming
that cannot even predict existing observations. "

From here: http://brneurosci.org/co2.html

  1. Steve LeMaster says:

March 16, 2011 at 11:28 am

Water vapor is always ignored by these people, because taking it into account
will always destroy their "science".

Until they can reconcile how carbon dioxide can be a pollutant, when it's a
nutrient fertilizer, they have no argument.

    
    
    * Greg says:
    

May 25, 2011 at 12:36 am

Steve, your comment, "Until they can reconcile how carbon dioxide can be a
pollutant, when it’s a nutrient fertilizer, they have no argument." is
completely absurd.

Lots of things that are "healthy" in "moderate" quantities can be
poisonous/deleterious at higher levels.

You comment is similar to saying: "How can someone argue that oxygen can kill
you when it's essential for survival?"

Easily….try breathing in pure O2. You won't be able to tell me the outcome of
that experiment.

    
    
      * sunsettommy says:
    

August 19, 2011 at 8:33 pm

"Easily….try breathing in pure O2. You won’t be able to tell me the outcome of
that experiment."

That is really dumb Greg.

The subject is CO2 concentration.

Most of the existing plants today EVOLVED in much higher levels of CO2 than
today.Have you even thought about that?

    
    
    * Jonny Ashton says:
    

March 7, 2012 at 3:26 pm

This forum in hilarious….

Rather than this being a calm intellectual debate on climate change, it seems
it is a battle of ego's. Take a step back from fighting each other about who
is an authentic skeptic and address the actual issue of whether we are
responsible for increasing global climatic temperatures.

I am no climatologist or geochemist but I do have enough intellectual
horsepower to study the world in which I live and the current way in which we
treat it and realise that change is required….we simply cannot go on polluting
to this level and expect that future generation will not be affected.

We have to reduce our demand for fossil fuels and transition to renewable
energies..we have no choice in this. By flying the flag of climate denial
further ads doubt and confusion into the public domain and stalls any progress
to reduce our insatiable appetite for oil and gas…

That's my two cents….

  1. Steve LeMaster says:

March 16, 2011 at 1:19 pm

That's an excellent article, Anthony.

  1. sunsettommy says:

March 18, 2011 at 7:29 am

Here is a reply at my forum on particular point in my simple counterpoint
against this blog entry.It only covers on a small part.

http://www.globalwarmingskeptics.info/forums/thread-1153-post-8155.html#pid8155

It is a common error,that never seems to be noticed by those who embrace the
AGW hypothesis.

  1. sunsettommy says:

March 18, 2011 at 5:20 pm

Your very statement destroys your claim that CO2 is driving temperatures
upward.I quote you,

"Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are higher today than at any time
in at least the past 650,000 years."

But the chart you used to bring it up shows temperature range from the bottom
the ice age phases to the warmest interglacial phases.While not shown on YOUR
misleading chart.It is in the range of 15+C.

Not only that several peer reviewed papers published since 1999 (you never
point out) shows that major CO2 trends changes FOLLOWS major temperature
changes.The range is commonly 400 + years lagging.This means significant
temperature changes goes first and CO2 follows later.

This takes away the unverified idea that CO2 drives up temperatures.It has
also been shown that when temperatures are in a sustained downward trend,CO2
is still trending upward for a long while.

You also show an undue reliance in modeling simulations for supporting the AGW
hypothesis.This is not valid science research.Not only that the IPCC allowed a
lot of Grey literature or unpublished papers to be added in.This website
covers it well:

http://nofrakkingconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/04/14/climate-bible-gets-21-fs-
on-report-card/

The IPCC 2007 report did make a testable prediction that we would find the
Tropospheric "hotspot" and a cooling trend in the Stratosphere.All based on
modeling runs of course.

Unfortunately despite the pretty modeling runs that were supposed to make it
real.Was not supported by Radio Sonde balloons and Satellite temperature data.

The Stratosphere stopped cooling in 1993.

It is a serious failure of the AGW hypothesis.Why did you not bring it up?

Here is my brand new report I just published on my forum that discussed it:

http://www.globalwarmingskeptics.info/forums/thread-1158.html

  1. Steve LeMaster says:

March 20, 2011 at 11:15 am

I see that sunsetommy has completely destroyed this article.

For shame, Michael Schermer….you should know better.

  1. Alfred Smith says:

March 31, 2011 at 1:54 am

OMG. I used to have a great deal of respect for this site. How can you publish
such a one-sided article?

  1. Dan Cook says:

April 6, 2011 at 8:33 pm

In the aviation world, manufacturing to tight tolerances of +/- .0002″ is not
uncommon. The ability to accurately and repeatedly measure a part required to
meet this tolerance is of paramount importance. Quality control personnel need
to select a gauge capable of measuring the part to the required tolerance
while simultaneously assuring a discrepant part is not erroneously identified
(through measurement) as being conforming and vice-versa. Welcome to the world
of gauge capability studies.

Absent in ANY forum I have ever heard or read on the topic of global warming
is any discussion about gauge capability. For example, let's consider the
temperature measurements taken in the 1840's as presented in the Global
Temperature Time Series chart included with the "How We Know Global Warming is
Real" article and begin to ask basic questions. Keep in mind that we are
trying to measure a small fraction of one degree Celsius (this seems to be
important in the global warming theory):

1) Exactly what gauges were used to make the recorded observations and how
were they maintained?  
2) What were their respective tolerances?  
3) Were the gauges all within calibration when their readings were recorded?  
4) How was each gauge calibrated?  
5) By whom were they calibrated and what standard was used to calibrate each
gauge? (unlike today, I am unsure there was an agreed upon international
standard for calibration like NIST for example, in the mid 19th century)  
6) What was the calibration interval for each gauge and how was this
determined to be adequate?  
7) If from one calibration interval to the next a particular gauge was found
to be out of tolerance, what procedure was used to call into question data
recorded during the interval between the last known good calibration and the
non-conforming calibration?  
8) Was it the same operator recording the same data the same way every time?
How repeatable and reproducible are the results and how was this validated?  
9) As individuals who recorded data were rotated out, either through
relocation, death, boredom, etc., how was the new operator technique verified
and validated and how was any variation in technique factored into recorded
values?  
10) If training was required to accurately utilize a specific measuring
device, did the recorder of the data displayed on a particular gauge receive
that training? How do we know?

What I am driving at here is to question what has been accepted as axiomatic
in global warming discussions; that the methods and procedures used to measure
the data presented to support the theory is valid.

    
    
    * Greg says:
    

May 25, 2011 at 12:43 am

Dan, seemly legitimate questions, but have you ever heard of ice cores?

    
    
      * markx says:
    

July 24, 2012 at 5:01 am

Sure, we've all heard of ice cores I think..

…but they show pretty clearly that today's temperature is nothing remarkable,
and probably currently about 1 degree C cooler than the early holocene…

  1. RICHARD MEREDITH says:

April 10, 2011 at 9:02 pm

Let's say for a hypothetical moment that we accepted AGW, what are the
consequences of the projected temperatures rises? We've heard a lot from the
'cataclysmics' because bad news makes better press but surely there are
positives too. If we accpet the inevitability of change surely we should be
focusing on adapting to it, whatever its cause, and looking to take advantage
for all life forms.

    
    
    * Dan Cook says:
    

April 13, 2011 at 8:12 pm

Good take as humans have an abysmal track record for predicting, forecasting,
projecting, etc. (all euphemisms for "guessing") and are much more adroit at
adaptation.

  1. Ian B says:

April 26, 2011 at 2:05 am

No critical thinking in this article, just regurgitating the same rubbish that
the IPCC, Wikipedia & the likes have been putting out

  1. Mikalai says:

April 28, 2011 at 7:17 am

If we go to http://scienceandpublicpolicy.org/  
we can find, among other things, this:
http://scienceandpublicpolicy.org/images/stories/papers/originals/10_major_consensus_failures.pdf

Quote from introduction:  
"""We are going to ignore all the many 'gates' that were uncovered like the
Himalayan glaciers, Amazon rain forests, how many real scientists there were
who authored the key summaries and all the issues as to whether the summaries
truly reflected the scientific information in the chapters and despite claims
to the contrary, how a significant percentage of citations were not peer
reviewed.  
We will not attempt to address the issues of sensitivity for CO2 or solar and
cloud and water vapor feedbacks relative to the models. We will also ignore
the many model shortcomings - like inability to forecast regional patterns,
ocean oscillations, etc. We will focus on how actual data compares to the
consensus science, model based virtual world view of climate."""

And it shows simple DATA from REAL world!

After reading this data, one most definitely starts to question if Skeptic
magazine takes sides issues if it involves politics. Human-induced warming
equals Carbon Taxes, right?

Skeptic, you do good work with debunking witches and ghosts, and supernatural.
Unfortunately, you seem to be mislead about global warming. Real skeptics know
that they may be wrong at times. Real skeptics look closer at their own
believes, question them, and print "sorry, I was wrong".

  1. Frank F says:

May 19, 2011 at 9:54 am

It is very unfortunate that the term skeptic has been co-opted by people who
are in denial of the evidence for anthropogenic climate change.  
The modern climate-"skeptic" movement is being driven by extreme conservative
ideologues. This movement is incredibly dangerous, as it is stridently opposed
to building a more resilient society. These types of people have been at the
core of civilizational decline since the earliest states and empires.  
The un-adaptability of societies has been identified by a number of historians
as one of the key reasons for societal collapse. If we refuse to even accept
the idea of adaptation to a rapidly changing environment, then we are in for
some serious trouble.

In any event, it is clear that many, even among those who consider themselves
"skeptics" in the sense promoted by this society, have no intention of looking
at the scientific evidence for the high certainty of anthropogenic climate
change, so there's no use discussing it.

    
    
    * Curt says:
    

June 8, 2011 at 8:19 am

This sounds like one of those logical fallacies that Shermer cautions his
readers to watch out for. Don't try to discredit the people on one side of the
arguement from a political perspective. This is about evidence.

    
    
    * sunsettommy says:
    

August 19, 2011 at 9:03 pm

You are a funny guy Frank.

You badmouth people who are Skeptics.But ignore posted comments right here in
THIS thread.That are based on climate science.My posts 7 and 8 was based on
the authors own data and the IPCC.I was able to show why they were wrong.Using
their own favored data.

I run a climate skeptic forum,probably the largest in the internet.I never got
any of that much blabbed about "oil" funding.Or be awarded a bogus big dollar
prize.Maybe YOU can send me some money?

There,AGW believers are too chicken to join or even post in the guest forum.I
KNOW that Joe Romm,Gavin Schmidt and a few warmists have visited.Ok So John
Cook did make a guest post.But never comes back to make replies.To our
comments.

Anyone who thinks CO2 "Traps" is really seriously out of their minds.The
demonstrated fact is that CO2 molecule absorbs and emits in a very narrow
frequency in less than a tenth of a second.Or conducts the energy in molecular
collisions (which is more common than radiating it away) with other atmosphere
gases.Most commonly N2 and O2.

Again there is no compelling evidence of any AGW going on.

    
    
      * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:47 am

Because peer review doesn't happen in a comment thread where anonymous
postings are allowed.

  1. jeff says:

May 23, 2011 at 6:33 am

The evidence has been debunked. The many models do not produce the same
results. This was admitted in a recent (may 10) study concerning tree ring
records.  
If the models cannot predict El Nino effects which "cause climate extremes"
with absolutely no confidence: "Current models diverge in their projections of
its future behavior, with some showing an increase in amplitude, some no
change, and some even a decrease." They are absolutely 100% invalid.

"Since El Nino causes climate extremes around the world, it is important to
know how it will change with global warming," says co-author Shang-Ping Xie.

"Current models diverge in their projections of its future behavior, with some
showing an increase in amplitude, some no change, and some even a decrease.
Our tree-ring data offer key observational benchmarks for evaluating and
perfecting climate models and their predictions of the El Nino-Southern
Oscillation under global warming."

one of many appearances of the article:

http://www.terradaily.com/reports/Tree_rings_tell_a_1100_year_history_of_El_Nino_999.html

  1. John says:

May 26, 2011 at 12:46 pm

I also came here looking at whether I would subscribe to an organization that
otherwise seems to make a lot of sense.

I was shocked with a simple search to see that there appears to be no
skepticism here about AGW!

I want go into the detailed arguments repeated by many here, but surveys of
climate skeptics and AGW proponents show consistently higher IQ levels amongst
skeptics. It is unclear why an organization like this would allow the clearly
less intelligent post such biased and badly documented arguments.

Shame. Time for someone to found a real society for skeptics.

  1. Guinnevere says:

June 4, 2011 at 5:39 pm

Hello ladies. AGW is on the line.

You know how bad it is out there? After days of recognition:  
— Forum closed beacuse of abuse.  
— Discussions with long rails of arguments with links leading nowhere.  
— Arguments so low, I would insult even the worst of us here even spelling one
single letter of it.  
— This website seems a fair one. Thank you.

SUBJECT

Tom H, Don, and all (above) others observed in »the Quiet Hot, Discarded,
Forgotten Desert» out there:  
— Your questions are just;  
— Provided we accept the given measured NASA temperature curve (link below) as
the only adequate proof of global warming: You are mislead:  
— Deniers, skeptic, claim THIS (short illustration to you, with already well
known given established sources)

http://www.universumshistoria.se/AAAPictures/AGW1.htm  
NASA-CURVE COMPONENT EQUIVALENT  
— the dotted (industry + sea period) over the solid measure  
— matching any precise PREDICTIVE POWER we need, all the way from 1860 till
now, and hence further, [small] additive components from the effect itself
omitted

doesn’t hold — that it is a »hoax» and a »scam»:  
— The reason asked by Tom H and Don, and others, is easy to see directly;  
— It is the periodic part from the sea period that gives smaller troughs and
crests; these smaller deviations (now a cooling one until ca 2016) are the
reason why the layman is confused, favoring analogies to »a warming trend»:
any »warming trend» seems to have vanished.  
— Fatally (due to »many friends») the skeptic becomes a denier, collecting a
tail of »screamers» having their own industry on »hoax», »scam» and »fraud» —
until truth is revealed: AGW holds in exceptional detail.

As you can see from the match — same power of predictability as can be seen
all the way from 1860:

— About two decades ahead, the climate will level about the same as it is now
(2011): two minor troughs follow at 2018 and 2038 with one minor crest in-
between at 2025 (the preceding at 2005); From 2038 a steep rise will follow
(up to ca 2070) of the same nature as the one 1972-2005 (called »The Great
Pacific Climate Shift» _), which apparently will speed up the global warming —
perhaps beyond all further achievable rejective control.  
IF people will witness such a global climate history (which I hope they will
not), those in our special concern today compared with theirs will (most
probably) be a play in the teagarden (also given in an answer on Yahoo).  
_ page 1 bottom of  
http://icecap.us/docs/change/OceanMultidecadalCyclesTemps.pdf

ADDITION — SHORT BACKGROUND

— On the preciseness of the percept of the equality of components (dotted
compared to solid), making up the measured NASA global warming curve, I must
(only on my account), in some sense, give you skeptics (but not deniers) right
(»emotionally») — by strict mathematics:  
— The mathematical analogy to the shown equal (by two, industry Fossil-Carbon
+ sea period) components  
— including the set of seven (7) functional curves (derivatives, integrals)
that must fit into the total picture  
(including a final Carbon-Dioxide table with values matching the measured to
within 98%)  
— has nowhere, at no place, an expression for the Planck radiation law.  
— It’s not there — but the established models all build upon that one (they
are also included by comparison and examples in the general description of the
match, [possibly] explaining why the Planck law is not needed there).  
— Planck radiation law math has nothing to do with explaining the global
warming phenomena — as measured during the 20th century: Its calculation is
never used in the above exemplified match. Its formula is never mentioned nor
consulted.  
— Why is that? That is because the industrially (Anthropogenic) triggered
Global Warming (AGW) has no such mathematical-physical connection to explain
for the net effect: Not at the driving energy side, not at the distributing
effective side — even if such components exist along (these are negligible).  
— The complex shows a pure thermodynamic resistive picture of a (complex) heat
dump [with Solar interference] of industrial energy-temperature into the
oceans by a net height of just 50 meters (calculated result) above land-marine
geography, taken during a longer period (150 years) by small daily amounts of
additional carbon emissions: steady minute by minute. It’s all caused by man
made industry from fossil carbon, as you can see from (the two component
equivalent) the dotted predictive match to the solid measured NASA-curve.  
— Carbon-Dioxide concentrations resulting from the calculations agree with the
measured values within 98%; Every atom of this global warming story during the
20th century is industrial fossil carbon. Exact, precise, clear.

wkg/Guinnevere

  1. Kel says:

July 12, 2011 at 6:57 pm

The question debated has never been is AGW legitimate, but rather how much do
humans contribute to the warming trend. Is it negligible? Is it the majority?
20 percent? 80 percent? Or somewhere in between? Obviously, I agree with the
latter statement, but where does it fall? That is what the argument is all
about.

  1. CM says:

July 17, 2011 at 10:10 am

"If the local weatherman can’t be a hundred percent accurate for 5 days, what
makes you think the bureaucrats at the IPCC can do it in a hundred years?"

I can't say if you might die in the next 5 days, but I'm sure you won't be
around in 2111. Looking at short-term and long-term are 2 totally different
things.

To forecast weather, you need to know what's happening right now to
temperature, moisture, wind, etc. You can project that forward, but that
current information has less and less relevance as time progresses. To
forecast climate in a world where greenhouse gases are increasing in 2011, all
you need to know (or estimate) is "How much more of those gases will there be
in year 2011+X?" Double? Triple? Quadruple? or Worse?

    
    
    * Kel says:
    

July 23, 2011 at 10:14 pm

Thank you. People don't seem to realize that climate and weather are two
completely different things. Climate is a trend. Weather is instantaneous.

    
    
      * sunsettommy says:
    

August 19, 2011 at 8:21 pm

Climate is composed of a series of weather events.

They can not separated from each other.They can not exist without the other.

    
    
      * Nickster says:
    

September 19, 2011 at 7:31 pm

Climate is about trends. It's like looking at the stock market and saying "the
Dow can't be up, all my stocks are down!"

  1. r Beers says:

July 23, 2011 at 1:49 pm

A magazine named Skeptic on board with AGW? This is a joke, right? I'm
supposed to plop down 70 dollars for 3 years of this drivel. Change the name
to "Sucker" magazine.

    
    
    * Kel says:
    

July 23, 2011 at 10:15 pm

Skepticism doesn't mean you never believe in things, it means you don't
believe in things without good reason.

    
    
      * Nickster says:
    

September 19, 2011 at 7:49 pm

Penn Jillette put it this way: "'Nobody can convince me?' Bells should go off
in your head when you hear those words. That's his bullshit idea of
skepticism. A real skeptic _demands_ to be convinced - with evidence."

I don't have any problem with the science if AGW turns out to be false, but it
has to be backed with good evidence. It's dangerous to fall back on the null
hypothesis that if current climate science on AGW is bad, then there's no
problem.

  1. Gil says:

July 26, 2011 at 10:22 am

For just a moment, put aside all the science, all the counter-arguments, rants
and ravings. We, as a race, simply cannot continue pouring billions of tons of
refuse into the environment without consequence. Have you ever visited your
local dump? It does give an incredible sense of perspective on how poorly we
have acted and continue to act as a species. There is absolutely no doubt that
pouring so much garbage about, consequence of our galloping consumerism,
impacts our environment. You can trot out models and counter-models but the
message is simple and clear: we are destroying ourselves. While too many of
you are busy closing your eyes and refusing to work toward a more sustainable
future, some of us are pointing fingers at you saying: “Where is your
contribution to making things better?” Counter-arguments serve an effective
purpose in science however where is your proof that what we are doing to the
planet, all of actions, causes no harm?

    
    
    * markx says:
    

July 24, 2012 at 6:24 am

Perhaps missing the point Gil…

Is CO2 classifiable as refuse, or not? That's perhaps where the whole argument
about its role in global warming becomes important.

Remember, all this CO2 we are putting into circulation, was once in
circulation ..

Does CO2 really cause warming to the extent claimed (bring on the added
forcing of water vapor please ….hang on,…is water vapor dangerous…?

There are certainly things we shouldn't be putting into atmosphere … but is
the focus n CO2 going to be counterproductive in relation to regulating
those..?

  1. Murray says:

August 7, 2011 at 4:10 pm

I was as shocked as most of the above respondents at seeing this totally
unscientific article on a skeptic web-site. Is skepticism so selective? I too
am very disillusioned.

The article just makes claims with no evidence, no references, no mention of
contrary evidence, no mention of alternative arguments, no mention of model
prediction failings etc. IOW it contravenes entirely the scientific
requirements expressed elsewhere on this blog.

Bye, bye. Murray

  1. Jeff says:

September 7, 2011 at 5:28 pm

What a joke. I was going to subscribe until I read this. Sounds like the "real
skeptics" have commented and rejected your blog post.

At first I thought that this was an april 1st post.

For an honest attempt at pointing some obvious flaws, check out  
http://lrak.net/globalwarming.htm

Its a brilliant article, IMO.

Also, NASA refutes much of the models' assumptions on humidity:  
http://www.nasa.gov/centers/goddard/news/topstory/2004/0315humidity.html

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:01 am

More likely, you were looking for something that supports your ideology-driven
views and have no interest in genuine skepticism. You confused the adopted
distortion of the term used to confuse with what it actually is, or are here
to promote confusion.

  1. sean says:

September 18, 2011 at 8:06 am

I'm not going to claim to be the skeptic's skeptic, but I still have trouble
with just swallowing the AGW pill. I think several things are being "missed"
or ignored by those to pushing the GW issue as solely man's fault.

We still do not know all the facts and intricacies of our biosphere. Do we
have an impact? Yes. Is it to the scale that they say? Hmm?

The largest object in the solar system is the sun at a mere 99%, it goes
through cycles. I've read in astronomy articles that the average temperature
on mars has increased ay a degree or two. Man? CFCs whipped into space and
pushed out to the martian orbit? In open space, exposure to direct sunlight
will subject you to 250 degrees F. It's nowhere near that anywhere on earth.
(Even if it might feel like it sometimes.) Obviously the atmosphere blocks a
lot of that radiation as well.

There is too much vested interest by scientists and universities to get
funding; a sad fact in a society that venerates sports and media more than
science. There is also too much arrogance and elitism within the science
community to be ignored, many scientists hated Carl Sagan for "dumbing down"
science so that the layman can understand it and become excited. At one time
the world was flat, and the center of the universe. (I guess that's true in an
infinte universe, but then so is everywhere.) Einstein once backed the static
earth view, turns out, like the meteor that wiped out the dinosours (also
thought a myth), plate tectonics does exist. If one of the more brilliant men
in science can be mistaken, can't the "experts" be as well?

"Climategate" clearly demonstrated that some scientists won't share the data.
Why? If you fully believe what you say, then share. People have had to sue
(and won) to get the data released under the UK's FOIA. Again, why? If you're
so confident, then make the data available. It's called peer review, not "pal
review." That's the only way science improves. Douglas Adams' character, Wanko
the Sane, said it best, "If a scientist sees something, he must say he sees
it. Otherwise he will only see what he expects."

Reading Superfreakonomics puts a new light on what's going on. A volcano
explodes and the world's temperature drops by a couple of degrees. I think
mother nature has a far larger impact than we do.

Back to Climategate, comments in the code on what to change to produce the
desired results is a clear indication of the faulty thinking of AGW pushers.
Finding one anomalous tree in 10,000 that produces the "hockey stick," then
basing your entire thesis on it takes a leap of faith. For faith I look to
religion, for truth I look to philosophy, for facts I look to science.

For those surprised by this article, I encourage you to overlook a "mistake"
and subscribe. It is a very good society.

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:23 am

'Climategate' clearly demonstrated that the anti-science crowd associates with
computer criminals when it suits them, which does not say anything good about
credibility.

  1. Stuart Mathieson NZ says:

October 26, 2011 at 2:56 am

Oh dear! Farce not farse  
Sea levels are rising. You can see the changes in Dunedin and along the Otago
coastline. The increase is not huge but it magnifies the surges. Glaciers are
receding in NZ. I should know. I have been tramping and climbing for 50 years.
Temperatures are rising. Frosts and snows are now unusual events in Dunedin.
Yet solar output has not changed significantly. It is deeply disturbing but
denial (a common response) is not the answer.

    
    
    * Bammster says:
    

February 5, 2012 at 4:29 pm

G'Day Stewy!

Firstly, let me say CO2 man made global warming is a FRAUD. CO2 is not
responsible for climate change. Show me the warming! There isn't any!  
Secondly, not one researcher has provided any mechanism to illustrate how CO2
actually 'taps heat' in the Earth's atmosphere. Simply put - it can't.

You should be more worried about fallout in Dunedin - that will kill you
before 'Climate Change' ever will! lol!

Google 'Radiation Cloud Dunedin' - I'd be more concerned about sucking in
Plutonium, Strontium and Iodine than exhaling CO2.

How do I know that there is fallout in Dunedin? Because someone I know has
been measuring it!  
As for sea level change in Dunedin, well. One end of the Peninsula is rising,
the other end is sinking, and it is moving more than any 'natural' sea level
change!  
Please people, go learn some science, and do some measurements!

May I suggest, that you start with Radiation - and start taking your Iodine!

    
    
      * RunRabbit says:
    

February 5, 2012 at 4:37 pm

Stew is one of the largest personal emitters of CO2 in Dunedin!  
He emits somewhere in the order of 120-150 kgs of CO2 per week!  
Well done Stewy!

  1. julie says:

October 27, 2011 at 9:03 am

If the deniers who have posted were honest, they would admit that they were
never interested in subscribing to Skeptic Magazine. They are trolls who keep
a lookout for any mention that global climate change has anything to do with
human activity, and then they blast the comments with scientific-sounding
garbage to confuse the issue of what skepticism is really all about - the
quote by Penn Jillette above being right on the money.

I experienced this when my husband had the gall to post an article about the
professional climate science denier who was funded by the Kotch brothers (I
don't recall his name) which mentioned the London Fog that existed back at the
hight of the industrial revolution's spewing of pollutants into the air
unabated on a website about expatriation. Suddenly, our readership was filled
with experts on how wrong all the other scientists were and that global
warming is obviously due to sunspots. We were also instructed to not bring up
the matter again because it is "too controversial."

I am not a climate scientist myself, but someone who has been familiar with
satellite studies of arctic ice flows because a good friend from engineering
school was writing software for programs that do this for Jet Propulsion Labs
decades ago (long before Al Gore or the attempt to find a market solution
through carbon trading because convincing the powerful dirty oil, gas, and
coal companies to spend a small proportion of their vast profits on cleaner
technology was like talking to, well, a climate denier about real science came
onto the scene) and I studied just enough physics, engineering, and math to
understand how science works, as opposed to how the deniers keep claiming that
it works.

So when a climate scientist weighed in about core samples, and I see the same
point being made here, it really makes me wonder what climate science deniers
have to say about the unrefutable evidence that is gleaned from these core
samples. They never address this issue. Hmmm, I wonder why.

  1. Kat says:

November 1, 2011 at 4:46 pm

How would you cite this article? In MLA newest addititon?

  1. Raul says:

November 29, 2011 at 7:11 am

This is my first visit to Skeptic via a Richard Dawkins video. I'm a sceptical
layman but am also a bit… gullible. So what to conclude? The article is not
independently analytical as I would have hoped and the sceptic comments and
links have not really convinced me against AGW.

I'll remain on the fence for now since I get the best view from here.

  1. Mark N. says:

December 22, 2011 at 1:05 am

Wow, just because you disagree with someone means that they aren't a skeptic.
Interesting concept.

Anyone who argues that the planet is not warming has their head in a hole.
Anyone who argues that CO2 is not increasing also has their head in a hole.
More than a decade ago, it was shown that the isotopic carbon ratio of the
additional CO2 matches the prediction made by the anthropomorphic hypothesis.
This is mentioned in the article, but not with enough fanfare. This really is
the silver bullet to deniers and I don't know why it's not mentioned more
often.

  1. Carla says:

February 5, 2012 at 2:02 am

Yes Julie. I wouldn't be surprised if these 'deniers' are bots, sock-puppets
or some other form of artificial 'opinion-generators'. There is money to be
had in this kind of thing now.

    
    
    * Bammster says:
    

February 5, 2012 at 4:34 pm

Deniers?

Hardly. We're realists!  
You go do the research, take the measurements, and learn Real Science. Then if
you are qualified, rational and sane - you should be able to comment on it.

There are certain professors and academics whom make too much money off
milking the fat cow of climate change.  
Look at Bob Lloyd! "The Oceans Will Boil" - the most outrageous comment ever,
and as a physicist - he knows he's lying!

I propose that the man is tested for Syphilis … because that's the most
demented statement that anyone can make.

  1. Bammster says:

February 5, 2012 at 10:41 pm

And why do 'Skeptics' have a UFO in their header??  
C'mon people - get with the 21st Century. According to the Interior Ministry,
and the Russian Government, UFOs are real phenomena. Take a look at this
video.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LVquycLqAaE

It's a UFO! There you go - you no longer have to be a sceptic!

Now for a quick Quiz. Which man mad objects move above M6+ at 80,000 ft?
Tovarish? Voprossi e Otvii?  
Those other slow moving dots are commercial flights out of and into Yakutsk.  
Of course, whom would I believe, the Russian Interior Ministry whom say UFOs
are real phenomena, or a bunch of under educated 'sceptics' masquerading as
'Climate Religious Zealots?

You can't even prove that global warming from CO2 is theoretically real … or
even possible.

Move along people … nothing to see here …

  1. VeraK says:

February 9, 2012 at 5:11 pm

This is hilarious.  
A radio active cloud is reported passing over Dunedin bringing contamination
and fallout to the people below. It passes over New Zealand's leading research
University and no one notices!  
http://www.odt.co.nz/news/your-news/196344/weird-light-seen-taieri-beach-otago  
Are these the particles in the air that were radioactive Bammy?  
The evacuation level for Chernobyl is set at 110 micro-Roentgens.  
Look at this  
http://sccc.org.au/archives/2517  
You all are not going to be alive long enough to see climate change!

Vera

  1. Jonahan Henry says:

February 14, 2012 at 8:03 am

i do not think global warming is real because the worled has not changed a bit
over like a period of like 200 years

  1. Keith's Left Testicle says:

February 17, 2012 at 6:36 pm

Hi Everyone!

I'm Big Keith's Left Testicle.  
Keith like Gary a lot because he likes boats and rocks and is a publicity
whore even before his Big talk.  
I get depressed a lot because the rest of my body thinks that CO2 causes
global warming. But who believes me? I'm just a Testicle.  
I sit down in a smelly confined space all day and never see the Light.  
Just as well.  
Everyone else is freezing their Balls Off, but I'm still nice and warm being
heated by the funding of global warming.

http://www.canadafreepress.com/index.php/article/44602

Yours,

Keith's Left Testicle

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:06 am

Now there is genuine scientific reasoning! (as taught in Logic 101 at Trolling
University)

  1. homminare kelly says:

February 23, 2012 at 10:31 am

GLOBAL WARMING IS REAL, AND EFFECTIVE. IF YOU DON'T BELIEVE YOU ARE A
LIIIIARRR!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

    
    
    * Mr Floppy Ploppy Panties says:
    

February 29, 2012 at 1:28 am

Global warming is bullshit

  1. SmithP says:

February 25, 2012 at 12:30 am

Dear Bammster,

We in Australia are recording levels of Fukushima fallout in the wind and
rain. I was reading this article here and have become truly shocked and
saddened after reading this. While I'm not shocked that the University of
Otago has had plutonium accidents and death of its workers, it does shock me
that this is going on in violation of your governments Anti-Nuclear
legislation?!  
My heartfelt prayers and wishes go out to the families of these poor students
that have died of radiation poising in your country.

Yours,

Paul Smith  
Canberra  
Australian Capital Territories

  1. SmithP says:

February 25, 2012 at 12:30 am

http://www.godlikeproductions.com/forum1/message1770322/pg1

  1. Keith's Right Testicle says:

February 29, 2012 at 2:09 am

Look Here!

An Alien Story by an Astronaut!!!!!!

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvvgdxBocfc

You'd think he would know more than he is saying?

Fuck Global Warming Kooks!

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:09 am

Have you met a logical fallacy you didn't like?

Please try to stay within at least 5 nautical miles of the topic.

  1. Jonny Ashton says:

March 7, 2012 at 3:27 pm

This forum in hilarious….

Rather than this being a calm intellectual debate on climate change, it seems
it is a battle of ego’s. Take a step back from fighting each other about who
is an authentic skeptic and address the actual issue of whether we are
responsible for increasing global climatic temperatures.

I am no climatologist or geochemist but I do have enough intellectual
horsepower to study the world in which I live and the current way in which we
treat it and realise that change is required….we simply cannot go on polluting
to this level and expect that future generation will not be affected.

We have to reduce our demand for fossil fuels and transition to renewable
energies..we have no choice in this. By flying the flag of climate denial
further ads doubt and confusion into the public domain and stalls any progress
to reduce our insatiable appetite for oil and gas…

That’s my two cents….

  1. Kevin says:

March 14, 2012 at 10:20 am

Just like Global Cooling in the 70's, here is another rediculous governmental
idea for us to all freak out over. By 2030, we going to talking about "Global
Just Right". You heard it from me. Too cold, too hot, just right.

  1. sheldon says:

March 29, 2012 at 9:52 am

i think global warming is real because mother nature hates us i mean we are
cutting down her trees for paper that 50% of people throw away for nothing so
i think it is mother nature is melting all the glachers and she is the one
that is doing all the damage but we just half to realise that she is doing all
of what we blamed on are selfs so dont blale it on our slefs blame it on
mother nature THANK YOU ANG GOOD NIGHT!

  1. Dr.A.Jagadeesh says:

April 5, 2012 at 7:39 am

Excellent analysis on Global Warming and Climate Change and its causes and
consequences.

Dr.A.Jagadeesh Nellore(AP),India  
E-mail: [email protected]

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:10 am

Peer reviewed and publish in your email. Wow! So authoritative!

  1. Keith Hunter says:

April 12, 2012 at 5:08 am

I have an admission to make.  
I no longer believe that CO2 has anything to do with global warming.  
I now think it might be the Sun.

  1. Vesa Kaihlavirta says:

May 24, 2012 at 6:20 am

Well, if nothing else, at least the Dunning-Kruger effect has been thoroughly
witnessed on this thread…

Now where was that subscription link…

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:12 am

Anecdotal as that is, the evidence is indeed most compelling.

  1. Nobody Special says:

May 24, 2012 at 6:23 am

It's so saddening that in the face of overwhelming evidence, even when
presented in all corners, are more eager to put their heads in the sand and
insist that the science is never good enough. This reminds me of the old
stories of Vatican bishops and "scientists" claiming there was never enough
evidence to conclude the world was round, even after presented with all of the
observational evidence of the time. They kept insisting that it was impossible
to measure with current technology, and threatened anyone who claimed
otherwise, and anyone who wanted to begin teaching or treating the world as
such. They did so in the guise of "skepticism," and when even their own minds
began to come around, they threatened them with marginalization, and pointed
to their own private dissention as being somehow indicative of overall
dissention with the issue.

Sound familiar? Read some of the comments here. You'll see the similarities.
Take little stock in anyone who says things like "I was going to subscribe but
now I won't because you disagree with me!" or "I don't believe the science"
while ignoring the actual science, or even better, those people who choose to
poke very specific holes in very specific things, "temperature stations have
errors" does not invalidate the mass of evidence, nor does it invalidate the
readings of those stations. One hole does not swiss cheese make, and one hole
does not destroy conclusive evidence - especially when it's not even a hole.

It saddens me that people who claim to support science are so willing to
dismiss it when their political agenda insists they march in step. Especially
when our homes, societies, and future depend on our clear-headedness.

    
    
    * Scott says:
    

June 16, 2012 at 10:59 pm

I am assuming that you realise the irony of your post?

It would seem that the authorities are on your side and that "deniers" are
asking questions - only to be villified rather than answered. Have you studied
environmental science?

    
    
    * M says:
    

January 10, 2013 at 12:57 pm

This is funny since it was universally accepted that the Earth was a sphere
since Eratsothenes measured it's circumference in 240 BC. In fact the Vatican
never denied the Earth was a sphere. It is a common misconception that anyone
other than completely uneducated people thought the Earth was flat after the
Roman era.

    
    
      * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:46 am

Universally accepted? Where is your evidence that Earth had a world-wide
civilisation during those times?

  1. Jay says:

May 24, 2012 at 7:40 am

Thanks for a well written article, understandable by the layman.

This article is flawed in that, as boring as it may be, it really needs to go
into more depth regarding how the computer models are validated.

It is not enough to merely say, the models only predict the right temperatures
when man made global warming is included. Because this part of the global
warming argument relies on man made computer models instead of provably
correct mathematics, or scientifically testable theories, you need to go into
much greater detail about how the computer models are verified and tested.

  1. SoTired says:

May 28, 2012 at 3:28 pm

The surest way to ensure that dialog will not take place is to denigrate and
castigate anyone who deigns to question one's views. More than taking away
some lucid arguments or facts, that was the unfortunate take-away that I had
in reading this article in Skeptic magazine.

No matter what your understanding of the science behind the models for global
warming, simply attaching labels to your adversaries does nothing to support
your position and, for me, it simply makes me tired. I have seen articles
bashing all AGW supporters as 'leftists', 'liberals' and 'hoaxers' in it only
for the grant monies. Then there is this article which, while purporting to
directly answer questions in a scientific manner, describes any person who has
questions with labels that include (and I quote from the magazine article):
Deniers (of course!), anti-science (but there are legitimate scientists who
question aspects of AGW), right wing, referenced the 'denialist Heartland
Institute' without mentioning the forged document created by Peter Glieck,
linking anyone who questions AGW with creationists and virtually equating them
with Holocaust deniers (at least creating the illusion that they might be
similar) and cites Mueller as shocking his 'GOP sponsors'.

All in an article that theoretically was to focus on clear answers.

So, what one is left with is that if your political persuasion is to the left
of center, you are on the sides of god and the environment and the truth of
AGW, whereas those that differ or still think we need to learn more are on the
side of God, Big Oil, Creationists and Holocaust deniers. So much for dealing
in facts, science and leaving the politics and polemics to Fox and MSNBC. So
much for letting those of us who neither fit into the left or right, and who
enjoy understanding as much as we can on issues, thirsting for actual
substance without the diatribes.

Very sad. And I am so tired of this crap. From both sides.

  1. Scott says:

June 16, 2012 at 10:51 pm

Can someone please explain to me why someone that questions a skeptic is a
denier? If you know and we're wrong - please enlighten us with your wisdom. As
it is you're just burning intelligent people at the stake.

  1. Marmot says:

July 5, 2012 at 9:07 am

Thank you very much for writing this fine, concise article, and having the
patience to fend off record number of trolls and delusional people.

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:14 am

I second the motion.

  1. Tesla says:

July 21, 2012 at 5:49 am

The temperature going up or down, the accuracy of the readings, or the
manifestations of a change in temperature on this planet are all irrelevant to
an extent.

Just because one thing happens and another thing happens at the same time does
not mean they are necessarily related. So carbon goes up and temperatures go
up. Linked or a coincidence? What gasses are going down at this time? Linked
or coincidence.

Most of the 'science' and articles say 'the increase in GHG's is blah blah'
inferring that its a given that CO2 is responsible, but where is the evidence
that GHG's exist?  
Where is the science that CO2 holds heat? How can it, it is an inert gas!!! It
is a gas, essential to plants and provides an important function. Show me the
science.

Most of the 'science' and articles say 'the increase in GHG's is blah blah'
but where is the evidence that GHG's exist? Water vapour I can understand
might hold heat, but this disburses rapidly.

Extrapolating a graph into the future is a guess, not absolute fact. If we
extrapolate the worlds population 50 years into the future it might show we
will have 100 billion people on the planet. This can't possibly occur, so
extrapolations are meaningless, or at least can't be cited as 'absolute truth'

I read somewhere (yes, its only heresy until its proved, but it might be worth
checking) that the planet is at present colder than it has been for 83% of its
recorded and ascertainable history. Food for thought.

The other danger in making carbon dioxide the bogeyman is that attention is
taken off all the other chemical and gases that are polluting the planet, some
of which may indeed be effecting the atmosphere.

I do agree, however, that we can't keep shitting in our own nest and expect
our children to have happy, healthy lives, so as a permaculturalist I work
towards creating a cleaner planet by minimising my footprint. Not my carbon
footprint necessarily but my energy, waste, resource footprint.

This experiment in capitalism, consumerism and fiat currencies is almost over.
Bring it on I say. Only then can we rebuild using sustainable, ethical
practices.

  1. bessy says:

November 7, 2012 at 11:50 am

this is to long.

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:15 am

Your 'to' is too short.

  1. sick of stupidity says:

November 13, 2012 at 8:23 pm

Why is it that everyone is now a scientist and at that a MUCH MORE INTELLIGENT
scientist than Mr. Schneider…who is an actual Professor at a prestigious
university-Cal Tech. P.S. that means he has a degree, in fact two + cuz you
cant teach this stuff if you dont have a Master's. you all pick at what you
want but ask yourself this: how can you convince yourself that the world's
most studied scientists (with degrees in REAL atmospheric, oceanographic,
physical, chemical science and math) are secretly plotting against you. WHAT
WOULD FUEL THEM TO LEAD YOU TO FALSE CLAIMS? what do they get out of faking
this stuff? Then ask yourself this: why are oil companies and politicians
involved with oil/natural gas/coal companies against it?what do THEY have to
gain from denouncing climate change?

you guys are seriously stupid. stupid stupid stupid. luck for you! stupid can
be educated! at least… that's what they keep telling me…

  1. Henry Hopp says:

November 15, 2012 at 11:11 am

You know what I think we should do about global warming? Give ice cream to the
whole world so that everybody cools down and thus, the world. :D

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:16 am

You know why nobody cares what you think?

  1. Tris says:

November 22, 2012 at 3:54 pm

I learned more from the comments than the article. Thank you for helping me
understand my world a little better.  
here is what I learned  
There is no solid evidence that c02 is linked to global warming  
There is solid evidence that the the world is warming  
there is solid evidence that there was a ice age and that man was existed
during it.  
There is solid evidence that many animals have gone extinct because of climate
change and because of humans.  
There is solid evidence we are hurting the environment.  
There is solid evidence that there are too many humans for the environment to
take.  
There is solid evidence that there is not enough oil for everyone and we will
run out.

The more I learn about the world confused and awed I get.

  1. Kyle Serrecchia says:

January 10, 2013 at 12:07 am

Even if this is all true, and it probably all is, this says nothing about
whether or not it will be catastrophic and warrants any action to be taken
whatsoever. THAT has not been proven. This seems to be attacking a strawman. I
don't know many people, even so called global warming denialists, who would
disagree that warming is occurring and yet they still would be against any
carbon emissions reductions because it hasn't been proven global warming will
be harmful. Or, even if it will in fact be harmful, that it will be more
harmful than cutting industry would be. So even if it is proven someday that
the warming that we are certain is occurring is going to be horrible,
scientists would still need to confer with economists in order to ensure that
the "cure" of cutting emissions and thus hurting the energy industry upon
which all of our lives depend would not in fact be worse than the disease.

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:18 am

Another standard denier talking point, either the third or fourth goal post
position as they keep getting moved.

  1. RS Amblee says:

January 10, 2013 at 1:52 pm

Global Warming is a case of mistaken identity!  
Global warming should not have been called global warming at all.This misnomer
has confused many, and has added to its development as such a controversial
subject in the world today.

"If global warming exists, why is it so darn cold outside?"

You may have heard these kind of retorts quite often. Globally, the Earth has
warmed about 2 degrees Celsius. This is number is really not very big,and
should not raise our eyebrows. What we should really be talking about is the
climactic effect this raise in temperature has rather than the warming itself.
Many of us do not know how delicately our atmosphere is balanced. Wind speeds
and rain patterns are heavily dependent on the global temperature gradient.
Our easterly and westerly winds are so well set that we have a very well
defined climate geography. Even if there is a slight change in the global
temperature gradient, be it half a degree, it will affect global wind patterns
which in turn affects rain patterns. This is why many places that used to
receive regular rainfall are now suffering from drought, and many formerly
dead-dry places are flooded. Colder regions are becoming milder and some hot
regions are getting surprise snowfalls. It is hard to comprehend that all this
abnormal weather behavior is because of a 2 degree temperature hike.

Global warming is not heating up our neighborhood. The localrise in
temperature is because the disturbed wind pattern, which actually is caused by
the 2 degree rise in global temperature, circulates warm air from hotter
regions to colder regions and vice-versa where it did not used to before. To
make it moreclear, if you see an unusual rise of 20 degrees in the winter, it
is the side effect of disturbed weather patterns because of the 2 degree
global temperature rise.

The orientation of forests and grass lands are fully dependent on global rain
patterns. It is the stability of this system that keeps our ecosystems
consistent, which is something that we all depend on. Anychange in rain
patterns will have disastrous effects.

We are very dependent on mother nature, and this dependency will be heavily
challenged in the days to come. Whether we believe in global warming or not,
the underlying issue is that we should not be living under the mercy of a
delicately balanced ecosystem. Throughout man's history, Mother Nature has
provided for us, and we had no other alternative but todepend on her. But now
with all our technological developments, we have the tools necessary to break
our umbilical cord with Mother Nature. However, it is not happening fast
enough, and the reason for this is pureand simple - money. Anything that
Mother Nature gives us is free (e.g.food, water,air,light).This has made us
develop environmentally dependent technologies (irrigation, fresh water
utilization) and stuck to this system. Now as the same ecosystem is changing,
it is throwing us a challenge. Rain is not dependable any more. Fresh water
supply is changing. The economics of food supply is being rewritten. Floods,
hurricanes, and twisters are happening more frequently and are causing
billions of dollars in damages. These challenge from global climate change are
forcing us to move away from our dependency on the ecosystem and control our
own world.

Even without man-made global warming, climate change would have been
inevitable as our atmosphere is delicately balanced. The world climate has
historically gone through a cyclic pattern of climate shifts and ice ages. It
is a great relief that climate change is happening in this current age, when
we are ready with technology. Surviving thru the ice age and preserving the
human race is something our ancestors have proved is possible, but if it had
happened just two hundred years ago, we would have lost all the marvels of
human civilization and survived with only with the bare necessities. But now
the scenario is different. It is just a matter of time before we integrate
robotics and automation in our lives and evolve towards an advanced future. We
have the technology to protect us,and free us from our dependency on nature.

  * R.S. Amblee  
Author "The Art of Looking Into the Future: The Five Principles of
Technological Evolution"

  * Bob says:

February 3, 2013 at 3:00 am

are your graphs accurate?!

  1. lol says:

April 24, 2013 at 6:16 am

lol, lol, lol, lol, lol.

  1. lol says:

April 24, 2013 at 6:18 am

u load of jammy cunts

  1. Alex says:

April 24, 2013 at 6:21 am

"lol" you're comments are most immature. Please stop posting silly comments in
future.

  1. Lol says:

April 24, 2013 at 1:42 pm

I am terribly sorry for my horrific behaviour i am very very sorry for my
stupidity

  1. poop says:

April 26, 2013 at 9:14 am

Niggers are ugly

  1. rape a bitch says:

April 28, 2013 at 2:08 am

I think the article would be better if it provided examples of repeatable
experiments that showed elevated CO2 and temperature are harmful to
biodiversity, then framed the global warming controversy in terms of risk
management to avoid damage to local biodiversity. The remote sensing
temperature data available from the US government does not go back far enough
to show any clear trend.

    
    
    * Slartibartfast says:
    

June 2, 2013 at 9:25 am

Your selected user name says enough.

  1. Cyberknight says:

May 13, 2013 at 11:05 am

This article never even talks about the very thing I was just looking for:
proof!

I have been looking all over the web, and every article that is supposed to
"convince" me that GHGs are causing global warming have completely failed.
Every one of them, including this one, use "Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc"
fallacies (after which therefore because of which). Yes, global average
temperatures are increasing. Yes, GHGs are increasing. However, what proof do
we have that temps are rising BECAUSE GHGs are rising? None at all!

This article does a very good job of telling how GHGs COULD POTENTIALLY cause
warming, but if you want to convince a "skeptic", you need better evidence.

  1. shelby bagans and courtney bieber says:

May 14, 2013 at 11:27 am

thank you for this article. we really enjoyed this thank you.

  1. pickle bob shit stain says:

May 20, 2013 at 11:00 am

take a look, nigga. in a book, mah nigga.

  1. xXx420xBlazeXitXfagetxXx says:

May 20, 2013 at 11:01 am

pickle bob shit stain u a lyin snake foh

  1. poop says:

May 20, 2013 at 11:04 am

shut yer mouths u sicle cell havin cock goblins

  1. Slartibartfast says:

June 2, 2013 at 9:20 am

Trolls! A pox on all your mother's basements!

  1. Slartibartfast says:

June 2, 2013 at 9:28 am

At least the faux skeptics protesting their disappoint have half a chance of
convincing a few genuine skeptics, but most buffoons posting crud here are
deluding themselves.

  1. Marc Aurele says:

July 25, 2013 at 1:03 am

Nice models!  
How is the fund raising going?

  1. Tim says:

August 9, 2013 at 4:46 am

Two things:  
1. being a skeptic -means being reasonably skeptical - not ridiculously skeptical of everything. Eg. I know that smoking causes lung cancer, I have done no reading into this but it seems so completely accepted - why waste my time. I might as well try to prove that solid walls are not actually solid and can be walked through but I am also not skeptical of this.

  1. A lot of the criticism seems to be on weather measurements, surely one can easily model the impact of extra carbon in the atmosphere in very controlled greenhouse conditions. And one can easily get carbon levels through ice core examples. So we know that humans have put extra carbon in the atmosphere. Extra carbon causes the earth to heat. If I drop a rock into a well - I know what will happen even though I can't see it.

  2. blurred lines says:

August 24, 2013 at 1:28 pm

I know you want it

  1. idgl says:

September 3, 2013 at 5:34 am

The articles references the Vostok ice core data (Petit et all, 1999) but
fails to mention that for 420000 years air temperature and CO2 levels moved in
step with the CO2 level lagging the temperature by 800 years. To say that
increased CO2 levels cause a rise in temperature is akin to saying that lung
cancer causes smoking.  
As ocean temperatures rise dissolved CO2 is released and when the oceans cool
CO2 is reabsorbed.

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how Akismet processes your
comment data. Comments are closed 45 days after an article is published.

![Patreon: a new way to support the things skeptic

creates](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/Patreon-sidebar.png)

### Get _e_ Skeptic

![eSkeptic logo](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/newssmall-eSkeptic-

logo.jpg)

#### Science in your inbox!

_e_ Skeptic delivers great articles, videos, podcasts, reviews, event
announcements, and more to your inbox.

Sign me up!

### Digital Free Trial

![30 day FREE TRIAL on new digital subscriptions on your iOS or Android

devices. Digital subscriptions are 1-year \(US

$14.99\).](https://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/2018/images/18-03-07/Skeptic-23.1-banner-

multi-iPhone-static.jpg)

### Donate to Skeptic

Please support the work of the Skeptics Society. Make the world a more
rational place and help us defend the role of science in society.

  * Donate directly
  * Donate via PayPal Giving Fund
  * Make a monthly recurring donation
  * Donate via eBay

### Browse by Topic

  * ## Tags

aliens alternative medicine atheism belief biology brain Carl Sagan
consciousness creationism Darwin debate evolution evolution and/or creationism
God human nature Intelligent Design morality mythology neuroscience
paranormal/supernatural/occult physics pseudoscience psychology religion
review science Science Salon skepticism UFOs universe

### Detecting Baloney

![Baloney Detection Kit Sandwich \(Infographic\) by Deanna and Skylar \(High

Tech High Media Arts, San Diego,

CA\)](https://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/2017/images/17-04-26/HS-Students-

Baloney-Detection-Kit-Sandwich-Infographic-detail.jpg)

#### The Baloney Detection Kit Sandwich (Infographic)

For a class project, a pair of 11th grade physics students created the
infographic shown below, inspired by Michael Shermer's _Baloney Detection Kit_
: a 16-page booklet designed to hone your critical thinking skills.

  * View the infographic

### FREE PDF Download

![Wisdom of Harriet Hall](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/wisdom-of-

harriet-hall.jpg)

#### Top 10 Things to Know About Alternative Medicine

Harriet Hall M.D. discusses: alternative versus conventional medicine, flu
fear mongering, chiropractic, vaccines and autism, placebo effect, diet,
homeopathy, acupuncture, "natural remedies," and detoxification.

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE Video Series

![Science Based Medicine vs. Alternative

Medicine](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/doctor-vs-witch-doctor-

sidebar.jpg)

#### Science Based Medicine vs. Alternative Medicine

Understanding the difference could save your life! In this superb 10-part
video lecture series, Harriet Hall M.D., contrasts science-based medicine with
so-called "complementary and alternative" methods.

  * Watch the free series

### FREE PDF Download

![Top 10 Myths of Terrorism](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/terrorism-

top-10-myths-banner-3x.png)

#### Is Terrorism an Existential Threat?

This free booklet reveals 10 myths that explain why terrorism is not a threat
to our way of life or our survival.

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE PDF Download

![The Top 10 Weirdest

Things](https://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/2015/images/15-12-30/top-10-weird-

countdown-banner.jpg)

#### The Top Ten Strangest Beliefs

Michael Shermer has compiled a list of the top 10 strangest beliefs that he
has encountered in his quarter century as a professional skeptic.

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE PDF Download

![Reality Check: How Science Deniers Threaten Our Future \(paperback

cover\)](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/conspiracy-theories-

banner-198px.jpg)

#### Who believes them? Why? How can you tell if they're true?

What is a conspiracy theory, why do people believe in them, and can you tell
the difference between a true conspiracy and a false one?

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE PDF Download

![The Science Behind Why People See

Ghosts](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/Why-People-See-Ghosts-

banner-198px.jpg)

#### The Science Behind Why People See Ghosts

Mind altering experiences are one of the foundations of widespread belief in
the paranormal. But as skeptics are well aware, accepting them as reality can
be dangerous…

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE PDF Download

![Top 10 Myths About

Evolution](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/top-10-evolution-

myths-198px.jpg)

#### Top 10 Myths About Evolution (and how we know it really happened)

If humans came from apes, why aren't apes evolving into humans? Find out in
this pamphlet!

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE PDF Download

![Learn to be a Psychic in 10 Easy

Lessons](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/psychic-reading.jpg)

#### Learn to do Psychic "Cold Reading" in 10

_Easy_ Lessons

Psychic readings and fortunetelling are an ancient art -- a combination of
acting and psychological manipulation.

  * Download the free PDF

### FREE PDF Download

![The Yeti or Abominable Snowman](https://www.skeptic.com/images_news/yeti-

sidebar.jpg)

#### 5 Cryptid Cards

Download and print 5 Cryptid Cards created by _Junior Skeptic_ Editor Daniel
Loxton. Creatures include: The Yeti, Griffin, Sasquatch/Bigfoot, Loch Ness
Monster, and the Cadborosaurus.

  * Download the free PDF

#### Society

  * Donate
  * About the Society
  * What We Do
  * Membership
  * Skepticism 101
  * Skeptical Activism

#### Magazine

  * Current Issue
  * Subscribe/Renew (Print)
  * Subscribe (Digital)
  * Buy Print Issues
  * Buy Digital Issues 
  * Submit an article

#### eSkeptic

  * Current Issue
  * Back Issues
  * Subscribe
  * Unsubscribe
  * Change Address
  * Browse by Subject

#### Shop

  * Shop Online
  * Subscriptions/Renewals
  * Back Issues
  * Books
  * Lectures
  * Clothing

#### Science Salon

  * About Science Salon
  * Upcoming Science Salons
  * Watch Past Salons
  * Listen on iTunes
  * Listen on Spotify
  * Listen on Soundcloud

#### Tours

  * About Our Tours
  * Grand Irish Odyssey
  * Area 51
  * Grand Canyon
  * Death Valley
  * Mojave Desert

#### Junior Skeptic

  * Get Junior Skeptic
  * Current Issue
  * Back Issues
  * Meet the Creators
  * Read sample issue (PDF)
  * Junior Skeptic FAQ

#### Podcasts

  * Science Salon
  * Watch Live
  * Skepticality
  * Skepticality App
  * MonsterTalk
  * MonsterTalk App

#### RSS feeds

  * Main
  * Reading Room
  * eSkeptic
  * Insight Blog
  * Skepticality
  * MonsterTalk

#### Contact

  * 1-626-794-3119 
  * General Inquiries
  * Website Inquiries
  * Orders Support
  * Subscriptions Support
  * Change Address

![Facebook icon](https://cdn-images.mailchimp.com/icons/social-block-v2/dark-

facebook-48.png) ![Twitter icon](https://cdn-

images.mailchimp.com/icons/social-block-v2/dark-twitter-48.png) ![YouTube

icon](https://cdn-images.mailchimp.com/icons/social-block-v2/dark-

youtube-48.png) ![Email icon](https://cdn-images.mailchimp.com/icons/social-

block-v2/dark-forwardtofriend-48.png)

Copyright (C) 1992-2019. All rights reserved. The Skeptics Society | P.O. Box
338 | Altadena, CA, 91001 | 1-626-794-3119. Privacy Policy.

  * Magazine
    * Home
    *       * Overview 
    * The Magazine
    * Current Issue
    * Back Issues
      * The Magazine
      * Buy Print Issues 
      * Buy Digital Issues 
    * Subscriptions
      * The Magazine
      * subscribe or renew (print) 
      * subscribe (digital) 
    * About the Magazine 
    * Editorial Board 
    * Masthead 
    * Submit an Article 
    * Carbon Comic 
    * Tables of Contents
    * The Magazine
    * Volume 21-25 
    * Volume 16-20 
    * Volume 11-15 
    * Volume 6-10 
    * Volume 1-5 
    * Junior Skeptic
    * The Magazine
    * About Junior Skeptic 
    * Current Issue 
    * Back Issues
      * Junior Skeptic
      * issues 71-present 
      * issues 61-70 
      * issues 51-60 
      * Issues 41-50 
      * Issues 31-40 
      * Issues 21-30 
      * Issues 11-20 
      * Issues 1-10 
    * Read Sample Issue 
    * Get Junior Skeptic 
    * Meet The Creators 
    * FAQ 
    * Book Projects 
    * Skeptics Mix Tape 
    * On Pyramid Power 
  * Society
    * Home
    *       * Overview 
    * The Society
    * A Brief Introduction 
    * What We Do 
    * The Founders
      * The Society
      * Michael Shermer 
      * Pat Linse 
    * A Skeptical Manifesto 
    * Media Appearances 
    * Contact Us 
    * Get Involved
    * The Society
    * Become a Member 
    * Donate 
    * Skeptic Forum 
    * Fight Fraud 
    * Fix Wikipedia 
    * Related Organizations 
  * Education
    * Home
    *       * Science Salon
    * Education
    * About Science Salon 
    * Upcoming Salons 
    * Watch Past Salons 
    * Listen on iTunes
    * Listen on Spotify
    * Listen on Soundcloud
    * Conferences
    * Education
    * About Our Conferences 
    * Upcoming Conferences 
    * Past Conferences 
    * Geology Tours
    * Education
    * About Our Tours
    * Upcoming Tours
      * Geology Tours
      * 2018 Grand Irish Odyssey 
    * Past Tours
      * Geology Tours
      * 2017 Grand Canyon 
      * 2016 Great Britain 
      * 2015 Central California Classics 
      * 2014 Grand Canyon, Zion & Bryce 
      * 2014 Area 51 & Alien Landscapes 
      * 2013 Skeptics at the Beach
      * 2013 Death Valley Redux
      * 2012 Viva Mojave!
      * 2011 Whale Watching
      * 2011 Glacier Cruise
      * 2011 Anza-Borrego
      * 2010 San Andreas
      * 2010 Owens Valley
      * 2010 Death Valley
      * 2009 San Andreas
      * 2009 Utah
    * eSkeptic
    * Education
    * Current Issue 
    * Back Issues
      * eSkeptic
      * 2019
      * 2018
      * 2017
      * 2016
      * 2015
      * 2014
      * 2013
      * 2012
      * 2011
      * 2010
      * 2009
      * 2008
      * 2007
      * 2006
      * 2005
      * 2004
      * 2003
    * Subscribe
    * Unsubscribe
    * Insight Blog
    * Education
    * Read the Blog 
    * About the Blog
    * About the Authors
    * Comment Policy
    * Podcasts
    * Education
    * Our Podcasts 
    * Science Salon
      * Podcasts
      * About Science Salon 
      * Watch or Listen 
    * Skepticality
      * Podcasts
      * About Skepticality 
      * About the Hosts 
      * Get the App
      * Skepticality
      * iOS
      * Android
      * Windows
      * Past Episodes
      * Skepticality
      * 2018 
      * 2017 
      * 2016 
      * 2015 
      * 2014 
      * 2013 
      * 2012 
      * 2011 
      * 2010 
      * 2009 
      * 2008 
      * 2007 
      * 2006 
      * 2005 
    * MonsterTalk
      * Podcasts
      * About MonsterTalk 
      * About the Hosts 
      * Support MonsterTalk 
      * Get the App
      * MonsterTalk
      * iOS
      * Android
      * Windows
      * Past Episodes
      * MonsterTalk
      * 2019 
      * 2018 
      * 2017 
      * 2016 
      * 2015 
      * 2014 
      * 2013 
      * 2012 
      * 2011 
      * 2010 
      * 2009 
    * Skepticism 101 
    * Education
    * About Skepticism 101 
    * Contribute 
    * Reading Room 
    * Education
    * About Reading Room 
  * Shop
    * Home
    *       * Skeptic Magazine
    * Shop
    * Subscribe or Renew
    * All Back Issues
      * Skeptic Magazine
      * Buy Print Issues 
      * Buy Digital Issues 
      * Volume 21 + 22
      * Volume 19 + 20
      * Volume 17 + 18
      * Volume 15 + 16
      * Volume 13 + 14
      * Volume 11 + 12
      * Volume 9 + 10
      * Volume 7 + 8
      * Volume 5 + 6
      * Volume 3 + 4
      * Volume 1 + 2
    * Books
    * Shop
    * All Books
    * Critical Thinking Classics
    * Evolution/Creationism
    * For Children
    * Nature of Human Nature
    * Pseudohistory
    * Pseudoscience
    * Religion & Ethics
    * Science
    * Science History
    * Skepticism
    * Social Forces
    * Junior Skeptic
    * Shop
    * All PDFs for sale
    * Quick Links
    * Shop
    * Shop Homepage
    * Donate
    * Gift Certificates
    * Best Sellers
    * Recommended 
    * $10 Books
    * $5 Booklets
    * Clothing & Swag
    * Audio Books
    * DVDs & CDs
    * Shipping Info 
  * Donate

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

