

Accessibility links

  * Skip to main content
  * Keyboard shortcuts for audio player

  * ![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)

  *     *       * NPR Shop
  *     * Open Navigation Menu 

Close Navigation Menu

  * Home

  * News Expand/collapse submenu for News

    * National
    * World
    * Politics
    * Business
    * Health
    * Science
    * Technology
    * Race & Culture
    * Arts & Life Expand/collapse submenu for Arts & Life

    * Books

    * Movies
    * Television
    * Pop Culture
    * Food
    * Art & Design
    * Performing Arts
    * Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music

    * Tiny Desk 

    * All Songs Considered 
    * Music News 
    * Music Features 
    * New Music 
    * Best Music Of 2019 
    * Shows & Podcasts Expand/collapse submenu for Shows & Podcasts

Daily

    
    
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/morning-edition.jpg) Morning Edition 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesat_sq-cbde87a2fa31b01047441e6f34d2769b0287bcd4-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Saturday 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesun_sq-4a03b35e7e5adfa446aec374523a578d54dc9bf5-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Sunday 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/all-things-considered.png) All Things Considered 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/fresh-air.png) Fresh Air 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/up-first.jpg) Up First
    

Featured

    
    
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hibt_podcasttile_sq-98320b282169a8cea04a406530e6e7b957665b3f.jpg?s=100) How I Built This with Guy Raz 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/05/23/screen-shot-2019-05-23-at-8.46.21-am_sq-7dcea391e7a87ca3569fe3d2047dda0144e5d86f.png?s=100) Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me! 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/02/npr_planetmoney_podcasttile_sq-7b7fab0b52fd72826936c3dbe51cff94889797a0.jpg?s=100) Planet Money 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hiddenbrain_podcasttile_sq-270ab642de6948802f485c6ad1f087239ef6e324.jpg?s=100) Hidden Brain 
    * More Shows & Podcasts
    

  * Search

  *     * NPR Shop
  * ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-dark.svg) ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-light.svg)

  * Tiny Desk 
  * All Songs Considered 
  * Music News 
  * Music Features 
  * New Music 
  * Best Music Of 2019 

  * About NPR

  * Overview
  * Support
  * Careers
  * Connect
  * Press
  * Ethics

**The Science Behind the Stem-Cell Debate** **The science behind the debate
over federal funding of stem-cell research has evolved since it first became a
political issue. Opponents of stem-cell research suggest there are
alternatives to using embryonic stem cells, while proponents say the cells
could lead to cures of a number of diseases.**

![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)

#### The Science Behind the Stem-Cell Debate

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** **

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/9533577/9533578" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

  * **_*_ *Transcript**

**The Science Behind the Stem-Cell Debate**

### Science

# The Science Behind the Stem-Cell Debate

#### The Science Behind the Stem-Cell Debate

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** **

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/9533577/9533578" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

  * **_*_ *Transcript**

  * **Facebook**

  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

April 12, 20076:00 AM ET

Heard on Morning Edition

![Joe Palca, photographed for NPR, 17 January 2019, in Washington

DC.](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/01/31/npr_64874306_sq-c0c0d04c2558b7ff409d475bde974ca938f966bc-s100-c85.jpg)

Joe Palca

Twitter Facebook

![Steve Inskeep

2010](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2011/09/12/steveinskeep_sq-c32611278115690f79fe7e30d83c92a384d30858-s100-c85.jpg)

Steve Inskeep

Twitter

The science behind the debate over federal funding of stem-cell research has
evolved since it first became a political issue. Opponents of stem-cell
research suggest there are alternatives to using embryonic stem cells, while
proponents say the cells could lead to cures of a number of diseases.

* * *

STEVE INSKEEP, host:

Let's try to explain some of the science behind the politics of stem cells, or
rather turn to someone who can explain the science behind the politics. NPR's
Joe Palca.

Joe, good morning.

JOE PALCA: Good morning, Steve.

INSKEEP: I think you've got the hardest job on the program this morning,
explaining what these people are talking about. Can I start with a really
basic question? Just remind us, what is a stem cell line?

PALCA: Well, that's a good question, actually. Let's start talking about
embryonic stem cell lines, since that's what the fiery part of the debate is
all about.

So an embryonic stem cell line is when you take a human embryo that's being
created in a laboratory - using in vitro fertilization, typically - and you
remove some cells from it at a very early stage, making it no longer capable
of turning into a baby because you've now essentially destroyed it for those
purposes; but you can take these cells from the embryo and get them to start
growing. And they grow and they grow and they grow, and they become a colony
of what's called embryonic stem cells. And they can keep making more copies of
themselves and more copies and more copies, and that becomes a line of cells.
And what you can do with that is you can essentially grow them forever.

And the beauty part that scientists say is that you can then, by giving them
certain signals, get them to turn into any cell type in the body. So if you
want them to become a nerve cell, you give them a certain set of chemicals and
they become nerve cells. That's the theory, anyway. And it's those cells that
you've derived from these embryonic stem cells that might be used for treating
diseases.

INSKEEP: So we know what a stem cell line is or an embryonic stem cell line
is. We know why people are interested in them - scientists and doctors and
many other people. What is wrong with the embryonic stem cell lines that are
already available for research? Because President Bush did allow some at the
time that he restricted federal funding.

PALCA: Yes, that's the interesting part. President Bush said - when he took
office, he put the whole plans for the federal government to fund the
embryonic stem cell research on hold; he said, I want to think about this. But
on August 9th, he said okay, I'm going to let funds be available for embryonic
stem cell lines that were created before August 9th, 2001, which was the day
he made his decision.

And so the reason that those cell lines are thought to be inadequate is,
basically, it was only three years after the first reports of being able to do
this at all. And, you know, like anything, the first attempts at doing it tend
to be a little clunky. And so the cells, the first cells were grown with
chemicals and various products along with them that made sense at the time
because nobody knew really how to do it. But now, it's thought that they were
done improperly and that it would make more sense to derive these in a
different way. And so that's basically why the science has moved on even
though the federal funding hasn't expanded.

INSKEEP: Now let's talk about alternatives here, try to understand them,
anyway. Opponents of embryonic stem cell research who say that their religious
beliefs, or other beliefs, lead them to say that this is a taking of the human
life have promoted the use of adult stem cells for research. Are there real
possibilities there?

PALCA: Oh, absolutely. I mean, they are 100 percent right. The only successful
stem cell therapies that are currently in existence have been using adults
themselves. These are bone stem cells that are derived from bone marrow. And
I'm sure people heard of bone marrow transplants for curing various blood
cancers and other blood diseases.

So yes, there is a tremendous amount of promise and potential for studying the
so-called adult cells. The difference between these adult cells and the
embryonic stem cells is that the adult cells are typically more limited, so
that the cells you get from the bone marrow typically can only make more blood
cells.

And if you have a skin stem cell, that can only make more skin cells, although
there are some fluctuation around that that maybe they are more potent. But
the point is that embryonic stem cells can make any cells.

So if you're having trouble finding a brain stem cell, for example, which
people have a hard time finding - they're not very easy to get your hands on
-if you have already embryonic stem cells, you could make brain cells. That's
the difference.

INSKEEP: Basic explanation of what they are arguing about in Congress from
NPR's Joe Palca. And Joe, before you go, one other quick question: Is this
whole debate in Congress becoming less relevant because states like California
are going ahead in spending billions of dollars of their own on this research?

PALCA: Well, you know, in a sense I suppose it is because that is a large
chunk of change for research that California and New York and Connecticut and
New Jersey and Massachusetts, I mean, a lot states are getting involved.

But I think the problem is that you don't want to organize a national
campaign, a research campaign with every state doing its own thing so that
California may be copying what's going on in New Jersey and it may be just a
mess. And so it's easier to have central coordination.

INSKEEP: Joe, thanks very much.

PALCA: You're welcome.

INSKEEP: Very clear. NPR science correspondent Joe Palca.

Copyright (C) 2007 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use
and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR
contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed
with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised
in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of
NPR's programming is the audio record.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes

#### Thursday, June 6th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/730212455/730216255" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

## Q&A;: Embryonic Stem Cells: Exploding the Myths

  * **Facebook**
  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

March 30, 200710:09 AM ET

![Joe Palca, photographed for NPR, 17 January 2019, in Washington

DC.](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/01/31/npr_64874306_sq-c0c0d04c2558b7ff409d475bde974ca938f966bc-s100-c85.jpg)

Joe Palca

Twitter Facebook

![](https://media.npr.org/programs/morning/features/2006/may/stem_cells/embryonic_cells200-b0dca7b68a98e043c5af4c912f35bff55949660b-s800-c15.jpg)

A colony of embryonic stem cells. **Institute for Stem Cell Research**
**_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

Institute for Stem Cell Research

### A Stem-Cell Timeline

Key Events in the Debate Nov. 20, 2007

![](https://media.npr.org/programs/morning/features/2006/may/stem_cells/weissman200-be79bff589b11b30174d2f2b4f8ad8bd9eb8dc84-s800-c15.jpg)

Enlarge this image

Dr. Irving Weissman looks into a microscope at the Stanford University Cancer
and Stem Cell Biology Institute in Stanford, Calif. Stanford has received six
grants, worth $15 million, from the California Institute of Regenerative
Medicine for stem-cell research. **Getty Images** **_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

Getty Images

Dr. Irving Weissman looks into a microscope at the Stanford University Cancer
and Stem Cell Biology Institute in Stanford, Calif. Stanford has received six
grants, worth $15 million, from the California Institute of Regenerative
Medicine for stem-cell research.

Getty Images

### Related NPR Stories

Stem-Cell Scientists Compete for Human Eggs May 3, 2006

When it comes to embryonic stem cells, you can find just about any opinion you
like: They are an untapped elixir of life; they will lead to embryo "farms"
where potential lives are snuffed out; they will cure all diseases; their
potential is overhyped. NPR science correspondent Joe Palca looks at the facts
and fictions behind stem-cell science:

**Will embryonic stem cells cure diseases?**

Maybe.

The excitement about the potential of embryonic stem cells to cure disease
comes from their unique potential to turn into any cell type in the body.

There are many diseases that are caused when a particular cell type in the
body starts behaving badly. Take diabetes. The disease occurs when special
cells in the pancreas, called islet cells, stop making insulin. Another
example is Parkinson's disease, which occurs when neurons in the brain that
make a chemical called dopamine are selectively destroyed.

The idea is that embryonic stem cells could be grown in great quantities in
the laboratory. The cells would then be coaxed into becoming islet cells to
treat diabetics, or into dopamine-producing neurons that could be transplanted
into Parkinson's patients, replacing those destroyed by disease.

That's the theory. In practice, no one has tried it in humans. And there have
only been sporadic attempts using animals. Many scientists are convinced this
approach will work eventually, but their optimism, at this point, is driven by
theory.

Alzheimer's disease is frequently mentioned as one that might be cured by
stem-cell therapy, but most neuroscientists think this is unlikely. It does
not appear to be a disease caused by damage to a particular cell, so cell
therapy probably wouldn't be the most appropriate treatment.

**Can adult stem cells do everything embryonic stem cells do, but without
controversy?**

Unlikely.

All stem cells have certain capabilities. They can divide and renew themselves
for long periods; they are unspecialized (which means they are not a specific
type of cell); and they have the ability to give rise to specialized cells.

Embryonic stem cells are obtained from human embryos. They have the capacity
to turn into any cell type in the body. Adult stem cells have been found in
some mature human tissues, including the brain and bone marrow. There is a
scientific debate over whether their ability to become specialized is limited
to their tissue of origin, or whether they can turn into other types of
tissue.

Adult stem cells have proven their value to medicine. For example, bone marrow
transplants are routinely used to treat some cancers and blood diseases. But
it's unlikely that bone marrow stem cells can replace all of the different
types of cells that are damaged by disease. Embryonic stem cells are the only
ones that are likely to do that.

**Critics of embryonic stem-cell research say those cells have never cured
anyone. Is that true?**

True, but pointless.

Transplanting a kidney never cured anybody until someone had the idea of
trying it, and then worked out the regimen that would prevent a transplanted
kidney from being rejected by its grateful recipient. The proper way to phrase
the statement is "embryonic stem cells haven't cured anybody yet."

**Is it necessary to destroy an embryo to obtain embryonic stem cells?**

Yes, for now.

To derive embryonic stem cells, it is necessary to take critical cells out of
the embryo. What is left no longer has the capacity to produce a baby if
transplanted into a uterus.

Critics of embryonic stem-cell research say the destruction of an embryo is
murder. Whether it is or not is a social and ethical question, not a
scientific one.

Several teams of scientists are working on methods to create embryonic stem
cells without destroying an embryo. Although the work is promising, success is
most likely many years off, if it is ever achieved.

In 2006, the Massachusetts biotech company Advanced Cell Technology showed
that it may be possible to remove a single cell from an embryo created by IVF
before the embryo is transferred into a woman. That single cell could then be
used to derive embryonic stem cells.

**If the federal government doesn't expand funding for embryonic stem cells,
will U.S. scientists flee to other countries?**

Probably not.

A few top scientists have left, but there is no evidence of a wholesale
exodus. If there is any fleeing going on, it is to California because of the
California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM). That's the state agency
that will decide how to spend the $3 billion that California voters approved
for stem-cell research. So far, however, lawsuits filed by taxpayer advocates
and anti-abortion rights groups have prevented the agency from selling the
bonds needed to raise the $3 billion. But the agency has managed to raise
interim funding from philanthropists, and combined with a $150 million state
loan approved by Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, the agency has been able to issue
grants worth about $120 million.

California research institutions, such as UCSF, Berkeley and USC, meanwhile,
aren't waiting for state money; they have received tens of millions of dollars
in pledges from private donors.

**Given the diffcult funding climate, does America run the risk of falling
behind in stem-cell research?**

Maybe.

On Aug. 9, 2001, President Bush said federal money could only be spent for
research on about 60 lines that had been created prior to that date, where the
"life-and-death" decision about the embryos used to create those lines had
already been made. In reality, less than a dozen of the 60 lines have become
widely available to scientists, and therefore eligible for federal funds.

Other countries have taken a very different approach. For example, the United
Kingdom and Singapore have stated that stem-cell research is a national
priority, and have been spending money freely on this research.

**Are U.S. scientists prohibited from doing certain kinds of embryonic stem-
cell research?**

No.

There are virtually no restrictions on the kind of stem-cell research that may
be done in this country. The federal restrictions are on the use of _federal
dollars_ for embryonic stem-cell research. With private money, scientists can
do practically anything they want.

That said, the federal funding restrictions do create problems for scientists.
Most academic institutions receive some federal money, and it requires
scrupulous accounting. In some cases, university researchers must use separate
facilities that are off-campus if they want to work on any stem-cell lines not
approved for federal funding.

**Some scientists are using cloning techniques to obtain embryonic stem cells.
Is the cloning technique to make stem cells the same as the cloning technique
to make a baby?**

Yes and no. The process starts out the same in both scenarios. The nucleus of
an adult cell is inserted into an egg from which the DNA has been removed. The
egg is then coaxed to start dividing, becoming an embryo.

But here the similarities end. In cloning to make stem cells, scientists let
the embryo grow in the lab until it turns into a hollow ball of about 100
cells. They then remove special cells from the interior of this ball, and
transfer them to a laboratory dish. After certain nutrients and other
ingredients are added, these cells will become an embryonic stem-cell line.

If the cloning technique were used to make a baby, doctors would transfer the
embryo to a woman's uterus well before it had grown to the 100-cell stage. If
implanted, it's possible that embryo could be carried to term and produce a
child that would be the clone of the adult-cell donor (though no one has
succeeded — that we know of). It is not illegal in the United States, although
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has asserted that anyone planning to try
it would first have to get FDA approval.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes

#### Thursday, June 6th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/730212455/730216255" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

  * **Facebook**
  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

#### Thursday, June 6th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/730212455/730216255" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

##### Up First

#### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

###### Read & Listen

  * Home
  * News
  * Arts & Life
  * Music
  * Podcasts
  * Programs

###### Connect

  * Newsletters
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * Contact
  * Help

###### About NPR

  * Overview
  * Finances
  * People
  * Press
  * Public Editor
  * Corrections

###### Get Involved

  * Support Public Radio
  * Sponsor NPR
  * NPR Careers
  * NPR Shop
  * NPR Events
  * Visit NPR

  * Terms of Use

  * Privacy
  * Your Privacy Choices
  * Text Only
  * 

NPR thanks our sponsors

Become an NPR sponsor

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

