

__ 1

Desktop notifications are on | Turn off

Get breaking news alerts from The Washington Post

Turn on desktop notifications?

Yes Not now

  * __
  * Sections __
  * __
  * Home

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

  * Try 1 month for $1
  * Username
  * Sign In

* * *
    
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    

  * My Post __
  * My Reading List __
  * Account Settings __
  * Newsletters & alerts __
  * Gift subscriptions __
  * Contact us __
  * Help desk __

  * Accessibility for screenreader

Share Options

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share via Email

Share on LinkedIn

Share on Pinterest

Share on Tumblr

Comments

Link to homepage

Resize Text

Print Article

Health & Science

# Could intelligent life have existed on Earth millions of years before

humans?

Add to list

In my list

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/qdUwf0hbgoP8rMJLFRNVc5RVgKA=/1484x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/AZGVQOCD3II6RBLJE362NNAEY4.jpg)  
The 2,100-year-old Antikythera mechanism is believed to be the earliest
surviving mechanical computing device. Such items are only rarely found.
(Thanassis Stavrakis/AP)

By Charles Q. Choi

April 21, 2018

Reptilian menaces called Silurians evolved on Earth before humankind — at
least in the “Doctor Who” rendition of the universe. But, science fiction
aside, how would we know if some advanced civilization existed on our home
planet millions of years before brainy humans showed up?

This is a serious question, and serious scientists are speculating about what
traces these potential predecessors might have left behind. And they’re
calling this possibility the Silurian hypothesis.

When it comes to the hunt for advanced extraterrestrial civilizations that
might exist across the cosmos, one must reckon with the knowledge that the
universe is about 13.8 billion years old. In contrast, complex life has
existed on Earth’s surface for only about 400 million years, and humans have
developed industrial civilizations in only the past 300 years. This raises the
possibility that industrial civilizations might have been around long before
human ones ever existed — not just around other stars, but even on Earth
itself.

[Greetings, Earthlings! 8 Ways Aliens Could Contact Us]

“Now, I don’t believe an industrial civilization existed on Earth before our
own — I don’t think there was a dinosaur civilization or a giant tree sloth
civilization,” said Adam Frank, an astrophysicist at the University of
Rochester and a co-author of a new study on the topic. “But the question of
what one would look like if it did [exist] is important. How do you know there
hasn’t been one? The whole point of science is to ask a question and see where
it leads. That’s the essence of what makes science so exciting.”

Artifacts of human or other industrial civilizations are unlikely to be found
on a planet’s surface after about 4 million years, wrote Frank and study co-
author Gavin Schmidt, director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
For instance, they noted that urban areas currently take up less than 1
percent of Earth’s surface and that complex items, even from early human
technology, are very rarely found. A machine as complex as the Antikythera
mechanism — used by the ancient Greeks, it is considered the world’s first
computer — remained unknown when elaborate clocks were being developed in
Renaissance Europe.

One may also find it difficult to unearth fossils of any beings who might have
lived in industrial civilizations, the scientists added. The fraction of life
that gets fossilized is always extremely small: Of all the many dinosaurs that
ever lived, for example, only a few thousand nearly complete fossil specimens
have been discovered. Given that the oldest known fossils of _Homo sapiens_
are only about 300,000 years old, there is no certainty that our species might
even appear in the fossil record in the long run, they added.

[In Images: The Oldest Fossils on Earth]

Instead, the researchers suggested looking for more-subtle evidence of
industrial civilizations in the geological records of Earth or other planets.
The scientists focused on looking at the signs of civilization that humans
might create during the Anthropocene, the geological age of today,
characterized by humans’ influence on the planet.

“After a few million years, any physical reminder of your civilization may be
gone, so you have to look for sedimentary anomalies, things like different
chemical balances that just look wacky,” Frank said.

One sign of industrial civilization may have to do with isotopes of elements
such as carbon.

For instance, humans living in industrial civilizations have burned an
extraordinary amount of fossil fuels, releasing more than 500 billion tons of
carbon from coal, oil and natural gas into the atmosphere. Fossil fuels
ultimately derive from plant life, which preferentially absorb more of the
lighter isotope carbon-12 than the heavier isotope carbon-13. When fossil
fuels get burned, they alter the ratio of carbon-12 to carbon-13 normally
found in the atmosphere, ocean and soils — an effect that could later be
detected in sediments as hints of an industrial civilization.

In addition, industrial civilizations have discovered ways to artificially
“fix” nitrogen — that is, to break the powerful chemical bonds that hold
nitrogen atoms together in pairs in the atmosphere, using the resulting single
nitrogen atoms to create biologically useful molecules. The large-scale
application of nitrogenous fertilizers generated via nitrogen fixing is
already detectable in sediments remote from civilization, the scientists
noted.

The Anthropocene is also triggering a mass extinction of a wide variety of
species that is probably visible in the fossil record. Human industrial
activity may also prove to be visible in the geological record in the form of
long-lived synthetic molecules from plastics and other products, or
radioactive fallout from nuclear weapons.

One wild idea the Silurian hypothesis raises is that the end of one
civilization could sow the seeds for another. Industrial civilizations may
trigger dead zones in oceans, causing the burial of organic material (from the
corpses of organisms in the zones) that could, down the line, become fossil
fuels that could support a new industrial civilization. “You could end up
seeing these cycles in the geological record,” Frank said.

All in all, thinking about the impact that a previous civilization has on
Earth “could help us think about what effects one might see on other planets,
or about what is happening now on Earth,” Frank said.

**— Live Science**

**Read more**

The government admits it studies UFOs. So about those Area 51 conspiracy
theories ...

The world’s oldest computer is still revealing its secrets

Humanity’s strange new cousin is shockingly young — and shaking up our family
tree

How will humanity react to alien life? Psychologists have some predictions.

Comments

__

Sign up for email updates from the "Confronting the Caliphate" series.

You have signed up for the "Confronting the Caliphate" series.

✕

Thank you for signing up

You'll receive e-mail when new stories are published in this series.

Most Read National

  * 1 

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Surgeons opened her skull to remove a cancerous tumor. Instead, they found a
tapeworm.

  * 2 

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

‘So much mystery’: After a man died in prison, his body was returned without
vital organs.

  * 3 

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

No one could open a safe for 40 years. A tourist cracked it on his first try.

  * 4 

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Perspective The case for why Catholics should march in LGBT Pride parades

  * 5 

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

An anguished Dutch teenager, who was raped as a child, dies at home after ‘sad
last post’

  * __

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Opinion Trump is destroying three decades of hard work with Mexico

  * __

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Opinion Forget impeachment. Tee up prosecution.

  * **washingtonpost.com**
  * (C) 1996-2019 The Washington Post
  *   * Help
  * Policies and Standards
  * Terms of Service
  * Privacy Policy
  * Print Products Terms of Sale
  * Digital Products Terms of Sale
  * Submissions and Discussion Policy
  * RSS Terms of Service
  * Ad Choices
  * Contact Us

Read content from allstate

Content from Allstate __ This content is paid for by an advertiser and
published by WP BrandStudio. The Washington Post newsroom was not involved in
the creation of this content. Learn more about WP BrandStudio.

We went to the source. Here’s what matters to millennials.

A state-by-state look at where Generation Y stands on the big issues.

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

