  
  
  *   * Look up a Term Close Panel
  *   * CLAM Bake Close Clams
  * 

# Climate Science Glossary

## Term Lookup

Enter a term in the search box to find its definition.

## Settings

Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of
terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off).

# Term Lookup

Term:

Define

# Settings

Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life: 5 seconds 10
seconds 20 seconds 30 seconds 1 minute Until closed

* * *

_All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science
Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. 941-954.
Cambridge University Press._

![](images/_core/head/button_sks_200.jpg)
![](images/_core/head/button_sks2_200.jpg)

![](images/_core/head/wflag_english.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_chinese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_czech.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_croatian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_danish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_dutch.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_finnish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_french.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_german.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_israel.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_hungarian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_icelandic.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_indonesian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_italian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_japanese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_korean.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_norwegian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_polish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_portugese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_russian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovak.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovene.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_spanish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_swedish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_thai.gif)

* * *

Home ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) Arguments
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Software ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Resources
Comments ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)The Consensus Project
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Translations ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)About
Donate  
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![Twitter](images/_core/head/icon_twitter.gif)
![Facebook](images/_core/head/icon_facebook.gif)
![YouTube](images/_core/head/icon_youtube.gif)
![Pinterest](images/_core/head/icon_pinterest.gif)

![RSS Posts](images/_core/head/icon_rss_posts.gif) ![RSS

Comments](images/_core/head/icon_rss_comments.gif) ![Email

Subscribe](images/_core/head/icon_email2.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_header.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/left_1.gif) |
Climate's changed before  
---|---  
![](images/_core/head/left_2.gif) | It's the sun  
![](images/_core/head/left_3.gif) | It's not bad  
![](images/_core/head/left_4.gif) | There is no consensus  
![](images/_core/head/left_5.gif) | It's cooling  
![](images/_core/head/left_6.gif) | Models are unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_7.gif) | Temp record is unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_8.gif) | Animals and plants can adapt  
![](images/_core/head/left_9.gif) | It hasn't warmed since 1998  
![](images/_core/head/left_10.gif) | Antarctica is gaining ice  
![](images/_core/head/left_11.gif) | View All Arguments...  
![](images/_core/head/left_therm_bottom.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

![](images/_core/left_margin/IPCC_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/rcp_icon.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/theConsensusProject_88.png)
![](images/_core/left_margin/trend_button_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/pp88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/Predictions_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_oanotok_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/climate_myths88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_history.gif)
![](images/_core/left_margin/button_misinformers_88.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
Username| |  
---|---|---  
Password| |  
Keep me logged in  
| | New? Register here  
Forgot your password?  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

## Latest Posts

  * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
  * Climate Change vs Cosmological Catastrophe
  * Effects of Global Warming
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #22
  * Humans and volcanoes caused nearly all of global heating in past 140 years
  * Four scientists make creativity a key to communicating their research
  * Beleaguered journalism interests seek to aid ailing planet
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #21
  * New research, May 13-19, 2019
  * Introducing a new citizens initiative for carbon pricing in Europe
  * Deep sea carbon reservoirs once superheated the Earth – could it happen again?
  * Climate Adam reacts to Bill Nye: "The planet's on f@*&ing; fire!"
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #20
  * New research, May 6-12, 2019
  * IPCC Updates Methodology for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
  * Inspiring, not depressing, film fest messages
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #19
  * New research, April 29 - May 5, 2019
  * Fox News made the US a hotbed of climate denial. Kids are the cure.
  * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
  * Nature’s Dangerous Decline ‘Unprecedented’; Species Extinction Rates ‘Accelerating’
  * Former climate 'denier' regrets 'how wrongheaded but certain I was'
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #18
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #18
  * New research, April 22-28, 2019
  * What's Earth's ideal temperature?
  * Climate change could cost the U.S. economy hundreds of billions a year by 2090
  * Rebellious Times
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #17
  * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #17

Archives

Climate Hustle

![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/flags/flag_finnish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_spanish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_german.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_polish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_portugese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_italian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovak.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovene.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_indonesian.gif)

# How do we know more CO2 is causing warming?

Link to this page

## What the science says...

| Select a level...| ![](images/_core/other/level1.gif) **Basic** | |
![](images/_core/other/level2.gif) Intermediate | |
![](images/_core/other/level3.gif) Advanced | |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 

An enhanced greenhouse effect from CO2 has been confirmed by multiple lines of
empirical evidence.

## Climate Myth...

Increasing CO2 has little to no effect  
"While major green house gas H2O substantially warms the Earth, minor green
house gases such as CO2 have little effect.... The 6-fold increase in
hydrocarbon use since 1940 has had no noticeable effect on atmospheric
temperature ... " (Environmental Effects of Increased Atmospheric Carbon
Dioxide)

### Predicting the Future

Good scientific theories are said to have 'predictive power'. In other words,
armed only with a theory, we should be able to make predictions about a
subject. If the theory's any good, the predictions will come true.

Here's an example: when the Table of Elements was proposed, many elements were
yet to be discovered. Using the theory behind the Periodic Table, the Russian
chemist Dmitri Mendeleev was able to predict the properties of germanium,
gallium and scandium, despite the fact they hadn't been discovered.

The effect of adding man-made CO2 is predicted in the theory of greenhouse
gases. This theory was first proposed by Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius in
1896, based on earlier work by Fourier and Tyndall. Many scientist have
refined the theory in the last century. Nearly all have reached the same
conclusion: if we increase the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,
the Earth will warm up.

What they don't agree on is by how much. This issue is called 'climate
sensitivity', the amount the temperatures will increase if CO2 is doubled from
pre-industrial levels. Climate models have predicted the least temperature
rise would be on average 1.65°C (2.97°F) , but upper estimates vary a lot,
averaging 5.2°C (9.36°F). Current best estimates are for a rise of around 3°C
(5.4°F), with a likely maximum of 4.5°C (8.1°F).

### **What Goes Down …**

The greenhouse effect works like this: Energy arrives from the sun in the form
of visible light and ultraviolet radiation. The Earth then emits some of this
energy as infrared radiation. Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere 'capture'
some of this heat, then re-emit it in all directions - including back to the
Earth's surface.

Through this process, CO2 and other greenhouse gases keep the Earth's surface
33°Celsius (59.4°F) warmer than it would be without them. We have added 42%
more CO2, and temperatures have gone up. There should be some evidence that
links CO2 to the temperature rise.

So far, the average global temperature has gone up by about 0.8 degrees C
(1.4°F):

> "According to an ongoing temperature analysis conducted by scientists at
NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS)…the average global
temperature on Earth has increased by about 0.8°Celsius (1.4°Fahrenheit) since
1880. Two-thirds of the warming has occurred since 1975, at a rate of roughly
0.15-0.20°C per decade."

The temperatures are going up, just like the theory predicted. But where's the
connection with CO2, or other greenhouse gases like methane, ozone or nitrous
oxide?

The connection can be found in the spectrum of greenhouse radiation. Using
high-resolution FTIR spectroscopy, we can measure the exact wavelengths of
long-wave (infrared) radiation reaching the ground.

![](https://skepticalscience.com/images/Greenhouse_Spectrum.gif)

_Figure 1: Spectrum of the greenhouse radiation measured at the surface._
_Greenhouse effect_ _from water vapour is filtered out, showing the
contributions of other_ _greenhouse gas_ _es (_ _Evans 2006_ _)._

Sure enough, we can see that CO2 is adding considerable warming, along with
ozone (O3) and methane (CH4). This is called surface radiative forcing, and
the measurements are part of the empirical evidence that CO2 is causing the
warming.

### **...Must Go Up**

How long has CO2 been contributing to increased warming? According to NASA,
"Two-thirds of the warming has occurred since 1975". Is there a reliable way
to identify CO2's influence on temperatures over that period?

There is: we can measure the wavelengths of long-wave radiation leaving the
Earth (upward radiation). Satellites have recorded the Earth's outbound
radiation. We can examine the spectrum of upward long-wave radiation in 1970
and 1997 to see if there are changes.

![](https://skepticalscience.com/images/harries_radiation.gif)

_Figure 2: Change in spectrum from 1970 to 1996 due to trace gases.
'Brightness temperature' indicates equivalent blackbody temperature (Harries
2001)._

This time, we see that during the period when temperatures increased the most,
emissions of upward radiation have _decreased_ through radiative trapping at
exactly the same wavenumbers as they _increased_ for downward radiation. The
same greenhouse gases are identified: CO2, methane, ozone etc.

### **The Empirical Evidence**

As temperatures started to rise, scientists became more and more interested in
the cause. Many theories were proposed. All save one have fallen by the
wayside, discarded for lack of evidence. One theory alone has stood the test
of time, strengthened by experiments.

We know CO2 absorbs and re-emits longwave radiation (Tyndall). The theory of
greenhouse gases predicts that if we increase the proportion of greenhouse
gases, more warming will occur (Arrhenius).

Scientists have measured the influence of CO2 on both incoming solar energy
and outgoing long-wave radiation. Less longwave radiation is escaping to space
at the specific wavelengths of greenhouse gases. Increased longwave radiation
is measured at the surface of the Earth at the same wavelengths.

**These data provide empirical evidence for the predicted effect of CO2.**

Basic rebuttal written by GPWayne

* * *

**Update July 2015** :

Here is a related lecture-video from Denial101x - Making Sense of Climate
Science Denial

Last updated on 1 August 2015 by MichaelK. View Archives

Printable Version | Offline PDF Version | Link to this page

## Further reading

A good summation of the physics of radiative forcing can be found in V.
Ramanathan's Trace-Gas Greenhouse Effect and Global Warming.

## Comments

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Next

Comments 1 to 50 out of 363:

  1. **HumanityRules** at 00:55 AM on 25 October, 2009

The graph you show is not "The resultant change in outgoing radiation was as
follows" as you state.

What it is the data that has been manipulated to highlight the drops in
radiance in the regions of the spectra that are absorbed by CO2 and CH4 (and
other trace gases). The fact that no area of the graph goes above the 0 point
(dotted line).

The real observed data shows a large region of the spectra above the 0 line.
You can see this in the original Harris 2001 paper (unfortunately
subscription) or Fig 3 in the Chen paper (free access). What this says is
there are other parts of the spectra which are letting more energy escape from
the planet in 2006 than in 1970.

if you take the CO2 part of the spectra in isolation this would suggest
greater energy retention (global warming). If you highlighted just the
positive areas (say spectra from 800-1000) you would conclude greater energy
radiance (global cooling). If you took the whole of the spectra I'm not sure
whether you'd conclude greater or less radiance in more recent years.

Why don't people look at the whole of the spectra and what would be the
explanation for greater radiance at other wavelengths? I accept that this
analysis might be way of highlighting the CO2 'signature' in the spectra I
don't see how you can conclude global warming without analysis of the whole
wavelength spectra.

**Response:** Harries 2001 does look at the full infrared spectrum except for
wavelengths less than 700nm (which happens to be where a large portion of the
CO2 absorption occurs). The observed changes in the spectrum from 1970 to 2006
are consistent with theoretical expectations. As the atmosphere warms, more
infrared radiation is radiated to space. However, less infrared radiation
escapes at CO2 wavelengths. The net effect is that less total radiation
escapes out to space.

This is independently confirmed by surface measurements which find the net
result is more longwave radiation returning back to the Earth's surface
(Philipona 2004, Evans 2006). It's also confirmed by ocean heat measurements
which find the oceans have been accumulating heat since 1950 (Murphy 2009).

  1. **iskepticaluser** at 13:33 PM on 20 November, 2009

re comment 1 (HumanityRules), referring to apparent increases in radiation in
the 800-1000 part of the spectrum in the Harries paper (the full version of
which you can find through Google Scholar): on page two, 2nd column, that
paper does indeed offer a potential explanation, viz. incompletely-cleared
artifacts in the data (due to ice-cloud absorption).

Considering the study is the first of its kind, its finding of reduced
radiation precisely in the wavelengths associated with increased GHG
concentrations remains remains highly suggestive, no?

  1. **Phil** at 08:26 AM on 10 December, 2009

Re #1 (Humanity Rules). My understanding is that Earth emissions are modeled
as black body radiation. Given the earths temperature of ~298K that means the
IR radiation emitted by the earth peaks at around 600cm-1 and tails off around
1500cm-1.

There is this on-line model that allows you to play with the earths emissions.
This **is** Climate science 101 so it may be hopelessly naive !

  1. **jabberwockey** at 13:17 PM on 23 December, 2009

Re #2 (Hugh)

Considering the study is the first of its kind, its finding of reduced
radiation precisely in the wavelengths associated with increased GHG
concentrations remains remains highly suggestive, no?

Suggestive that there is a slight increase heat absorbance of CO2 and MH4 -
but only if you cherry pick the data. Any atmospheric gas that absorbs
infrared is considered a GHG. If you look at the full data you will see that
although there is some increase in the heat absorbance of CO2 and MH4, you are
seeing more heat escape at wavelengths different from CO2 and MH4. When
talking about the causation of global warming, what does that suggest about
the "greenhouse effect"?

  1. **Riccardo** at 19:15 PM on 23 December, 2009

jabberwockey,  
it is nature that cherry picks wavelength as far as molecular absorption is
concerned. On the contrary, thermal emission is broad band and it depends on
temperature. Hence what you see in the full spectrum (the background) reflects
the increase of surface temperature.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 00:52 AM on 6 February, 2010

Some quesitons.  
1) Graph one is derrived from the difference between two satelites launched 26
years apart. How are their sensors callibrated so that they would give the
same readings on the same day?

2)Graph 2. Why is there no downward radiation for CFCs, HNO3 NO2 etc, as there
is for CO2, when the first graph shows that their energy is being 'trapped' in
the atmosphere?

Additionally. from the picture showing solar light penetrating the atmosphere
but terrestrial IR being trapped, what happens to the solar IR?

The sun produces aproximately 400000 times as much IR at the frequency
absorbed by CO2 as the earth. The atmosphere must therefore absorbs and re-
radiate half of this back into space.

Also given the far larger solar IR radiation the CO2 will be saturated.
Additional IR from the earth is a tiny amount in comparison.

Answers appreciated.

  1. **Riccardo** at 01:47 AM on 6 February, 2010

1) different satellites and/or instrumets are always calibrated against one
another in a better way than just the reading on a single day.  
2) the first graph is a difference between spectra taken in two different
points in time; the second graph is just a point in time. The difference
depenss on how much the relative contrbution changed over time.

IR from the sun is indeed absorbed by CO2. When you calculate an energy
balance in a layer of the atmosphere you take both the incoming and outgoing
energy into account. The tiny amount of energy (one and something W/m2) taken
up by increasing CO2 will not make the earth look like Venus but it's enough
to increase the temperature by a couple of degrees, maybe three by the end of
the century. That's unfortunately enough to produce a significant change in
the biosphere.

There is no saturation effect to help us. The lifetime of the CO2 excited
state is short enough for the CO2 molecules to be ready to absorb more of the
incoming photons.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 22:05 PM on 6 February, 2010

@Ricardo. Point #2. That doesnt answer my question. Graph 1 shows energy being
absorbed by all the gasses mentioned. Graph 2 shows enery be emitted by only
some of them. Thats my point. How is it selective so that only some of the
gasses emmit energy back o the surface which is what the second graph implies?

Point #3. Energy ballance. So an increase in CO2 will absorb, and re-emit to
space more IR from the sun as well as absorb and re-emit to earth more IR from
the earth.

Since the sun produces more IR than the earth how does the extra CO2 cause
warming and not cooling?

Point #4. Excited state duration. If the duration is less than 12 hours then
all the energy absorbed by CO2 during the day will be lost at night. How does
this generate net warming over a period of days-years?

I am not being argumentative, I am geneuinely interested in the science behind
GH gasses, it is just that logically there seem to be problems with the
theory. I am glad you mentioned excited state durtation by the way because I
could not find any information on this online and to me it is a critical
factor in heat storage.

  1. **Riccardo** at 01:40 AM on 7 February, 2010

matt sykes,

# 2

fig. 1 is a difference spectrum between 1976 and 1990. It shows only the
changes during this period of time. If you want to compare the spectrum in
fig. 3 (an emission spectrum), you need an absorption spectrum from space
looking down. You can play with this using calculated spectra

# 3

there's much more energy in the visible than IR coming from the sun. It is
this that warms the earth, not the IR. As far as CO2 absorption is concerned,
it's not true that the IR around the 700 cm-1 band is much more than what the
earth emits at the same wavelength. Integrating it over all the IR is wrong.  
Then the earth emits in the IR and this emission happens to peak around a CO2
absorption band; part of it is trapped producing warming. This is the very
basics of the greenhouse effect.

# 4

The lifetime of the excited state is of the order of nano- to -micro- seconds
depending on temperature and pressure. The extra energy can be released in two
ways, by re-emission of a photon or by thermalization by collision (warming)
of the surrounding air molecules; the re-emitted part will be absorbed again
by other CO2 molecules and the process repeats itself until the pressure is so
low that the photons have a high probability to escape to empty space. This is
the way it works, again the basics of the greenhouse effect. If you increase
CO2 concentration you slow down the process. You clearly still get cooling at
night but not all of the energy absorbed during the day. It is not going to
happen even if you do not increase CO2. A good example is the moon which,
having no atmosphere, have enormous temperature gradients across the day/night
line.

I would more easily believe in your genuine interest had you not said "that
logically there seem to be problems with the theory". Given that dozens of
really smart people have worked on this for decades you'd better ask yourself
"am i missing something?".

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 22:36 PM on 8 February, 2010

@Ricardo.

# 2 OK, lets ignore thins since no one understands my quesiton.

# 3 According to this, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Blackbody-lg.png, the

sun emmits far more IR then the earth at the frequencies absorbbed by CO2.
Surely all this IR saturates the CO2 in the atmopshere with energy, dwarfing
the IR coning form the earth?

# 4 OK, so you say that the CO2 primarially rleases energy as a photon of
light

at the same frequency it absorbed it at, and that due toi the volume of CO2 it
takes more than 12 hours for a photon on average to exit the atmosphere to
space.

Interesting you mention the moon, its daytime high is 105`c. Is it not the
case that the reason the earth has a lower daytime high is because gasses in
the atmosphere, including CO2, reduce the energy that strikes the surface?

As for the throry of GH gas warming dont forget the poles are supposed to warm
the most, but in fact only one of them is warming, so it seems the planet
earth also has a problem with the theory. I am however prepared ot accept that
I am in deed missing somehting, hence asking these quesitons.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 22:41 PM on 8 February, 2010

Sorry, final quesuiton, you say CO2 can release energy as a photon or by
direct warming of other molecules. Do you have any figures for the rough
percentage of energy released by each meathod?

Given CO2s absorbiton band is only 8% of the total IR spectrum 92% of any
release as a black body would not be re-absorbed by another CO2 molecule and
thus exit the atmosphere directly.

  1. **Riccardo** at 23:26 PM on 8 February, 2010

matt sykes,

# 3 the effect of CO2 is mainly on the band at about 700 cm^-1 or about 15

microns while the graph you show ends at 3 microns. Also, cosider that the
absorption band is relatively narrow, it's really a tiny fraction. It'd be
good if you calculate it yourself approximating the incoming radiation with
the Plank formula, it will probably be more convincing than my words.

# 4 i did not say that "it takes more than 12 hours for a photon on average to

exit the atmosphere to space.". Would it be so long you couldn't have
significant day/night temperature variation; just the opposite is true.

The warming of the poles depends on a lot of things, not least on atmospheric
and oceanic circulation. Antarctica is "isolated" both by the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current and by the strong westerly winds blowing in the Southern
Oceans. No one expect the same warming as in the Arctic.

I do not any rough figure on the ratio between collisional and radiative de-
excitation. It quite complicated and it also depends on density and
temperature. You can estimate the overall effect in the atmosphere from the
ratio of the energy leaving the atmosphere over energy emitted by the surface.

You last claim is definitely not true as can be easily seen in the absorption
spectra of CO2 from space. Indeed, at the surface level the absorption lenth
is pretty short, no way to escape directly to space.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 01:18 AM on 9 February, 2010

# 3 2, 4.3 and 15 microns in fact. The first of which is well inside the graph

I linked to. This one shows even more clearly how cooler bodies release less
IR than hotter ones. http://quantumfreak.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/black-
body-radiation-curves.png

Mind you, this isnt surprising. A piece of metal at 30 `C will be warmer to
the hand than one at 20`C becaue it is producing more IR.

As for calculating the IR of a particular frequency emitted by an object at a
particular frequency, I dont know how to, perhaps you could direct me to the
relevant formula althogh I think we have establisged that hotter bodies do
produce more IR than cooler ones.

# 4. You said "You clearly still get cooling at night but not all of the
energy

absorbed during the day" I understodd this to mean that the energy absorbed
during the day cane be entirely lost at night. If you meant something else
then I appologise for misunderstanding you although my understanding seems
logical still.

# 5 And there is clearly something else at play in the Arctic too since it is

only as warm as it was in the 1930's. But, thats the complexity of climate!

# 6 But you cant fell from space what is happening to the energy absorbed by

CO2. It is either re-emmitted at the same frequency and thus bounces around
the atmosphere fomr mollecule to mollecule or it is emmitted as broad band
radiation in which case all of it except the 8% absorbed by CO2 will end up
released to space.

So from a sensor looking down from space you will never see the CO2 absorbed
energy, ie those banmds will be missing from the spectrum, regardless of the
re-emmission mathod.

However, if the re-emission is of broad band, ie black body radiation, than
CO2 effectively converts narrow band to broad band radiation. This will
increase the levels of non absorbed energy transmitted to space, which is what
one of the other respondants above stated had occured in the later sattelite
measurement.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 01:32 AM on 9 February, 2010

@Ricardo. Just found an online Plank law calculator. For wavelenghts betweem
3.9 and 4.1 microns the sun produces 340,000 times as much energy as the
earth.  
This is close to my orevious estimate of 400,000.

So, what does all this SOlar IR energy do in the atmosphere in comparison to
terrestrial IR? Is it blocked in the uper atmosphere, does it saturate the
CO2? Is it absorbed and re-emmitted into space in tha same way as terrestrial
IR is absorbed and re-emmitted to the surface?

If so, and given that it is 400,000 times stronger the effect of CO2 is to
actually reduce the IR at the surface, not increase it.

  1. **Riccardo** at 05:10 AM on 9 February, 2010

matt sykes,  
from about 2 to 8 microns IR from the sun is absorbed by water vapour, CO2 has
no influence. Also, you still integrate over the whole IR, not just the CO2
bands. At 15 microns, instead, the atmosphere is transparent and the CO2 band
is centered at the peak of the thermal emission, the overall effect is then
larger.

Go back to your Plank calculator but this time plugin in the right numbers for
a meaningfull comparison. The visible is 0.4-0.8 microns, the CO2 absorbtion
band is centered at 15 micron and with a width of 2 microns (14-16 microns, in
reality it is much narrower than this). You end up with a ratio of the energy
coming from the sun in the CO2 related absorption band and the visible of the
order of 10^-4. Negligible.

# 6

In this very same post you can see absorption from CO2, you must be wrong.
Indeed, the radiation abosrbed is re-emitted isotropically and part of it will
be converted directly into heat in the atmosphere. At the top of the
atmosphere you will see less radiation.

I'd suggest to read how an idealized model works.

  1. **Riccardo** at 05:31 AM on 9 February, 2010

matt sykes,  
i forgot to add that in any case absorption of sunlight is included in the
radiative transfer codes.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 03:53 AM on 16 February, 2010

@Ricardo At 15 microns the sun produces 180 times as much energy as the earth.

It is irrelevant how much energy the sun produces in the visible, it is the
energy emmitted by the earth and absorbed by CO2 which is key.

Your Siki link states: "Thus heat is easily let in, but is partially trapped
by these gasses as it tries to leave. "

This isnt true. Visible energy is let in, not heat. The heat of the sun is
bloocked by the same GH gasses as block the heat going out.

The difference is that thr sun produces far more heat than the earth. The net
effect of GH ghasses is therefore to reduce the maximum temperaturs that would
be otherwise acchieved,

Consider the moon,. Its daytime temperature is 105`C. It gets this hot because
it hasnt got an atmosphere.

  1. **Ned** at 04:44 AM on 16 February, 2010

_The net effect of GH ghasses is therefore to reduce the maximum temperaturs
that would be otherwise acchieved,

Consider the moon,. Its daytime temperature is 105`C. It gets this hot because
it hasnt got an atmosphere. _

Er, sorry, but no. The moon's daytime temperature may average +105C, but its
nighttime temperature is around -150C. Thus, the mean temperature of the moon
is around -20C.

Now, the earth's albedo is higher than that of the moon, so if the atmosphere
had no effect (or a cooling effect, as you claim) then the earth should be
_cooler_ than the moon. Fortunately for us, water vapor and CO2 in the
atmosphere raise the earth's mean temperature via a phenomenon known as the
greenhouse effect.

  1. **Stuart** at 02:39 AM on 17 February, 2010

Matt, I think I see where your mistaken understanding is coming from.

I think you're calculating the spectral radiance from Planck's law (if not,
please explain where you get your figure of 180). I get about 150 by my
calculations, but that's close enough to demonstrate the problem.

The thing is that spectral radiance has a rather complicated definition:

_energy per unit time per unit surface area per unit solid angle per unit
frequency_

The surface area of the sun is different to the earth - it's about 12000 times
greater. 150 times 12000 is actually about 1.8 million. Hence the sun produces
about 1.8 million times as much energy at 15 microns. It's hotter and larger,
so this shouldn't come as a great surprise.

But consider the fact that the sun is radiating this energy out in all
directions, and that the earth captures only a tiny proportion of that energy
because of our small size. Even Jupiter only appears as a tiny dot in the sky
without a telescope.

We can work out exactly how much we capture by dividing the area of a circle
the size of the earth by the surface area of a sphere at the radius of the
earth's orbit:

pi _(6400^2)/(4_ pi*(150 million)^2) = 0.00000000046

Taking this, and the 1.8 million value found before into account, the earth
would (in the absence of atmospheric absorption) radiate out about 1200 times
as much energy at 15 microns as we receive from the sun.

_This isnt true. Visible energy is let in, not heat. The heat of the sun is
bloocked by the same GH gasses as block the heat going out._

Visible energy IS heat. The heat we get from the sun is mostly within the
visible and the near infrared, because the sun is hot and has a blackbody
curve centred in the visible. When we absorb it, we radiate it back into space
according to a much cooler blackbody spectrum, deeper into the infrared.

This is all fairly basic greenhouse theory, and I don't think you've quite
grasped the science behind it.

  1. **Tom Dayton** at 03:10 AM on 17 February, 2010

Matt, the implication of what Stuart just explained in his next-to-last
paragraph is that the energy coming from the Sun to the Earth is in the wrong
wavelengths to be much absorbed by CO2, but the energy being emitted by the
Earth is very much in the right wavelengths to be absorbed by CO2.

  1. **bit_pattern** at 21:01 PM on 25 April, 2010

Sorry, I meant Chen (2007)

Here is the working link

[Source]

**Response:** Thanks for pointing that out - I've updated the link.  
[RH] Hotlinked paper in order to fix broken page formatting.

  1. **babelsguy** at 05:08 AM on 18 May, 2010

A related question about the basics of the greenhouse effect: I have been sent
a "study" by a guy who claims that CO2 cannot be a greenhouse gas because any
warming would cause an instant increase in outward radiation due to the
increased temperature difference between the atmosphere and open space, which
would immediately diminish the warming.

I tried to discuss some sense into him, but in classic denier fashion, he
remained stubborn that nobody so far could give him a "convincing" reason why
his objection cannot be true.

I tried the earth system's heat capacity, speed of propagation of temperature
changes in a kilometer-thick atmosphere, dynamic equilibrium, I even quoted
the paragraphs from "A History of Global Warming" at aip.org that say that the
actual greenhouse effect is caused by a greenhouse gas concentration change at
the tropopause, effectively shifting it into higher, cooler layers of the
atmosphere, which radiate heat less effectively than warmer layers, which
forces the whole of the temperature gradient in the atmosphere to do something
like a parallel shift in order to achieve a high enough temperature at the
tropopause to force enough radiation out into space to re-establish the
equilibrium - all to no avail.

What would you experts here tell him (assuming he might still be convinced)?

Any reply very much appreciated!

Cheers,

babelsguy

  1. **doug_bostrom** at 07:12 AM on 18 May, 2010

Babelsguy, your friend apparently has not so much a quibble with C02 as a GHG
so much as he does with the concept of an atmosphere being able to trap heat.
After all, what he believes applies to any GHG.

How does he explain why Earth's climate is not the same as that of a planet
with no atmosphere?

  1. **babelsguy** at 17:50 PM on 18 May, 2010

doug_bostrom,

well, that is the interesting thing: He claims that his "study" would avoid
all discussion of other issues but just show that CO2 (and the other GHGs)
_cannot_ be the culprit due to what he calls the energy balance question...

  1. **babelsguy** at 07:04 AM on 20 May, 2010

Well I have now worked out on my own why the bigger temperature difference
between atmosphere and space does not cause an energy loss that lets global
warming collapse again:

There is no bigger temperature difference.

Due to the absorption length of GHGs being much shorter than the height of the
atmosphere, the only place that matters for outward radiation is the upmost
layer of the atmosphere that radiates at all - minus the absorption length to
any reasonably small non-absorbed residue.

Because the GHG concentration change effectively shifts this outward radiating
layer upward into colder heights, and the atmosphere below has an increasing
temperature gradient towards the ground, the ground has to heat up "a lot" to
let the boundary layer also heat up sufficiently _until is as warm as before_
, so it can radiate enough to re-establish equilibrium!  
Q.E.D.

So the guy's conclusion is wrong because his whole presupposition is wrong.
Garbage in - garbage out.

  1. **chris** at 07:22 AM on 20 May, 2010

babelsguy, you and I have just written more or less the same post in two
different contexts (see here)

I think that says a lot for the fundamental nature of scientific knowledge ;-)

  1. **Millennia** at 19:25 PM on 29 May, 2010

I'm confused; where is the backscatter represented in this NASA energy budget
representation of Earth?
http://eosweb.larc.nasa.gov/EDDOCS/images/Erb/components2.gif

Further to that the whole greenhouse gas theory is based on erroneous
assumptions of the Earth system acting as a black body. Incorrect application
of the Stephan-Boltzman constant in this case means that the entire theory is
based on a basic undergraduate error. NASA discovered this at the time of the
Apollo moon landings, when they discovered their assumptions on Moon surface
temperatures by day and night were out by up to 60K - because a black body is
a THEORETICAL two dimensional surface, there is no such comparison either with
the surface of a planet/moon or the 3 dimensional gaseous atmosphere that
surrounds it..

Therefore the entire reason we don't freeze is down to the dynamics of the
entire atmosphere that surrounds us, not to trace gases. The charge that the
second law of thermodynamics is broken by postulating that heat moves from
colder atmosphere to warmer surface has never been satisfactorily answered.
NASA know this and put in in plain sight in their energy budget diagram,
nothing in that allows for any change in composition of minor components of
the atmosphere causing large changes in the planetary heat budget - an
increase in heat content just increases the convection and radiation
components to maintain balance. The complexity of the climate system is caused
by the latent heat content of the oceans, which transfer heat in timescales of
hundreds and thousands of years due to the massive difference in their heat
capacity.

And finally the whole system is dependent on the only external energy source,
the Sun. It is that, plus the interaction with the oceans on a millennial
scale, that controls our planet's climate. For us to pretend we can contol
this system by tweaking one trace gas like a thermostat is arrogance of the
highest magnitude

  1. **Ib Nielsen** at 04:11 AM on 4 June, 2010

The temperature gradient in the atmosphere of 6K/km is mainly due to the
adiabatic compression of the air (gravitation) rather than to the mysterious
greenhouse effect.  
http://freenet-homepage.de/klima/atmoseff-en.htm

  1. **TOP** at 10:05 AM on 13 June, 2010

Curious but when showing changes in absorbtion of infrared why is the
contribution from H2O always filtered out? It would seem to me that this would
become more positive as the atmosphere warms.

  1. **scaddenp** at 10:30 AM on 13 June, 2010

TOP - because H2O is FEEDBACK. Any forcing,= that raises the temperature of
atmosphere will increase the water content and thus the GHG effect from it. If
you want to know about the FORCING due to increase in anthropogenic gases then
you need to filter out the feedback.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 22:05 PM on 16 July, 2010

Stuart, no, you cannot use area. The energy is not absorbed in the intervening
area between the sun and the earth, it is absorbed by the first surface it
strikes. Using this raito you get an almost 1 to 1 equivalency of IR.

  1. **ConcernedCitizen** at 22:07 PM on 16 July, 2010

Tom Dayton. Yes, the sun might produce the greater proportion of its energy in
the visible, but it produces more IR then the earth. Go back and take a look
at black body radiation, youo will see what I mean.

  1. **muoncounter** at 01:16 AM on 15 August, 2010

That good friend of AGW, Dr. Roy Spencer, has empirical evidence for the
greenhouse effect.

_"Particularly difficult to grasp is the concept of adding a greenhouse gas to
a COLD atmosphere, and that causing a temperature increase at the surface of
the Earth, which is already WARM. This, of course, is what is expected to
happen from adding more carbon dioixde to the atmosphere: “global warming”.
...  
This [Spencer's experiment] shows that the addition of an IR absorber/emitter,
even at a cold temperature (the middle level clouds were probably somewhere
around 30 deg. F), causes a warm object (the thermopile [in his IR
thermometer]) to warm even more! This is the effect that some people claim is
impossible._

  1. **Stylo** at 19:22 PM on 27 August, 2010

Poor Roy Spencer doesn't understand that what he is measuring is the
temperature of the night air not the absorption of IR from the ground. He
(perhaps subconsciously) confuses the phenomenon of emission with reflection.
The IR emission of CO2 downwards depends only on the temperature of the air
not on how that temperature was achieved; whether though IR absorption,
convection, water condensation or sunlight.

In this above article it says:

> "... Satellite measurements confirm less longwave radiation is escaping to
space...Surface measurements find more longwave radiation returning back to
Earth at these same wavelengths."

If the atmosphere is warmer, then it should emit more IR in both the down and
up directions. If it's in fact radiating more IR downward but less upward,
then this phenomena is _reflection_ not _absorption and emission_.

  1. **Ned** at 19:45 PM on 27 August, 2010

Stylo, "more longwave radiation returning back to Earth" means "more than
previously." The atmosphere still radiates in all directions, and John
actually _is_ referring to absorption/emission rather than reflection.

Imagine an Earth with no greenhouse gases in its atmosphere. 100% of the
thermal radiation leaving the surface and passing through the atmosphere goes
upward and out into space.

Now add a small concentration of greenhouse gases. A small part of that
longwave radiation will be absorbed by GHG molecules, which will then emit
energy in all directions, including downward. So now somewhat less than 100%
of the thermal radiation within the atmosphere is moving in an upwards
direction. And as you increase the concentration of GHGs, the downward
component becomes correspondingly larger.

The downward thermal IR flux is indeed caused by emittance, not reflectance.

  1. **muoncounter** at 13:27 PM on 15 January, 2011

New summary paper **Infrared radiation and planetary temperature** in Physics
Today. Covers the basic physics, addresses the 'saturation fallacy', compares
absorption of CO2 and H2O and ties in AIRS data.

_Adding more greenhouse gas to the atmosphere makes higher, more tenuous,
formerly transparent portions of the atmosphere opaque to IR and thus
increases the difference between ground temperature and the radiating
temperature. The result, once the system has come to equilibrium, is surface
warming._

  1. **KR** at 13:37 PM on 15 January, 2011

muoncounter - I was just reading that article this afternoon, wanted to put in
a link, but couldn't find a publicly accessible version! Thanks for putting it
in.

Excellent paper. I especially appreciated Figure 2d, showing the interleaving
of CO2 and H2O spectral lines.

  1. **muoncounter** at 13:56 PM on 15 January, 2011

# 37: I was surprised to find a way around the paywall. Nice that he also

mentions that molecules like N2 are transparent to IR 'in earthlike
conditions'. Perhaps some of our deniers are actually speaking about
conditions on Titan?

  1. **John Hartz** at 02:27 AM on 6 February, 2011

The link to Ramanathan's paper provided under the Further Reading's tab does
not work.

**Response:** [Daniel Bailey] The free abstract can be found **here**.

  1. **trunkmonkey** at 14:23 PM on 17 May, 2011

The absorbtion bands of CO2 and water vapor overlap making it difficult to
parse out the purely absorbtive greenhouse contribution of incremental CO2.

How are we so sure water vapor would not absorb the photons if CO2 were
removed, and for that matter, sure water vapor is not absorbing the photons
INSTEAD of CO2. I realize both signatures are visible from space, but is seems
the parsing problem should apply here as well.

  1. **scaddenp** at 14:38 PM on 17 May, 2011

Numerous articles about this, but try Schmidt et al, 2010 for serious crack at
it.

  1. **Dikran Marsupial** at 20:43 PM on 17 May, 2011

trunkmonkey@40 The upper atmosphere, where the Earth's energy budget is
decided is very cold and hence very dry. There isn't a great deal of water
vapour there to absorb the photons.

There is a good overview of most of this from Spencer Weart and Ray
Pierrehumbert at Realclimate here. The summary is here, **emphasis** mine:

_So, if a skeptical friend hits you with the "saturation argument" against
global warming, here’s all you need to say: (a) You’d still get an increase in
greenhouse warming even if the atmosphere were saturated, because it’s the
absorption in the thin upper atmosphere (which is unsaturated) that counts (b)
It’s not even true that the atmosphere is actually saturated with respect to
absorption by CO2, (c) **Water vapor doesn’t overwhelm the effects of CO2
because there’s little water vapor in the high, cold regions from which
infrared escapes, and at the low pressures there water vapor absorption is
like a leaky sieve, which would let a lot more radiation through were it not
for CO2** , and (d) These issues were satisfactorily addressed by physicists
50 years ago, and the necessary physics is included in all climate models._

There is also a follow up post here where Ray Pierrehumbert goes into the
physics in more detail.

Hopefully those two posts answer your questions, in short, physics has been
able to solve this problem for about sixty years.

  1. **CBDunkerson** at 21:38 PM on 17 May, 2011

This is one of the most bizarre things about the AGW 'skeptic' movement. After
Arrhenius first suggested the possibility of AGW in 1896 **real** skeptics
countered with arguments like 'the CO2 effect is saturated' and 'oceans would
absorb all the extra CO2'... which based on the limited knowledge of the time
were compelling enough that the vast majority of scientists rejected AGW. It
was only after these objections were disproved by other advancements, around
the 1960s, that science started looking at the possibility of AGW again... and
found that it was already underway.

Yet here we are half a century later and the modern 'skeptics' are recycling
these ancient arguments as if they were new and valid... rather than long
since proven false.

  1. **learner** at 10:25 AM on 18 June, 2011

I'm a math major but I haven't even finished my undergraduate degree yet. So,
while this stuff isn't a completely foreign language, it's close. I have a
couple questions that I haven't seen a straight answer for yet.

1: I know that the CO2 band is absorbing energy attempting to exit our
atmosphere and that the satellite readings prove this. What I've yet to find a
straight answer on is this: I read somewhere(I think here?), that despite this
absorption from the GHG bands, the actual radiant energy escaping is still
greater than going in from the sun. Is this true? Is so, how is this
explained? I've tried finding the answer to no avail.

  1. I've seen the graphs showing that since the start of the industrial era temperatures have clearly been on a steady climb and that there's no chance it's solely due to the sun's activity. I've read that temperatures pre-industrial age were also steadily rising. Is this true? If so, is it the rate of increase that is of concern? 

  2. Last one. I've read and seen in the graphs that methane can play a much bigger role in the GHG effect than can CO2. What are the real world applications to this? How do they compare to our CO2 production? 

Thanks

  1. **scaddenp** at 12:16 PM on 18 June, 2011

learner - as a maths major, you would probably enjoy the treatment of these
basic topics over at science of Doom. The questions are really require more
treatment than a blog answer can give you. Methane is I think 12 times more
powerful than CO2 as a GHG but its concentration is a/ measured in ppb instead
of ppm so its effect is less than CO2 and  
b/ eventually oxidized to CO2

  1. **Philippe Chantreau** at 16:37 PM on 18 June, 2011

Actually Scaddenp, CH4 is 24 times more powerful than a CO2 as a GHG, on a per
molecule basis. However, the total amount of CH4 in the atmosphere is nowhere
near that of CO2. This has been discussed already and is also treated on RC.
Truly interested readers should become proficient at using search engines on
both sites.

  1. **KR** at 07:33 AM on 30 June, 2011

thepoodlebites - _"How do you separate warming from natural climate
variability and CO2 rise?"_

Look at the levels of forcings that are currently causing climate change, up
in Figure 4 of the 'Advanced' tab of this page. It's really a simple case of
attributing cause and effect.

  1. **thepoodlebites** at 00:11 AM on 2 July, 2011

# 47 Have there been any updated model runs since Meehl et al. (2004)? It
would

be interesting to see how the temperature plots (1890-2000) would look
including data from the last decade, using the same model assumptions. I'm
wondering if all of the natural components have been properly accounted for.
Model parameters can be adjusted to match any set of temperature observations.
The statement that "late-twentieth-century warming can only be reproduced in
the model with anthropogenic forcing" is a bit too strong as a conclusion
without including the need for follow-up studies.

  1. **scaddenp** at 07:55 AM on 2 July, 2011

"Model parameters can be adjusted to match any set of temperature
observations"

I am tired of this bit of nonsense being repeated. Show me an example of
**any** model parameter in a GCM that is tuned to match a global temperature
record. Put up or shut up. Parameterization is done inside the narrow focus of
the particular response function. (eg wind speed to temperature gradient).

If it were possible to "tune" parameters arbitrarily in a physics model then
tell me why some skeptic hasn't produced a GCM that make CO2 irrelevant?

RC regularly updated model-data comparison. Furthermore, the model archives
would allow you compare prediction to actual yourself. As for updates - Hansen
et al 2011 discussed in "Oceans are cooling" is certainly doing that.

  1. **thepoodlebites** at 01:12 AM on 7 July, 2011

# 49 scaddenp So the statement “model parameters can be adjusted to match any

set of temperature observations" is not true? I don’t consider “put up or shut
up” or “do it yourself” as compelling arguments in a debate on the scientific
issues. And for the record, I have never said that CO2 is irrelevant. The
question remains climate sensitivity to CO2 rise.

I was specifically addressing the radiative forcing components that Meehl
used. The conclusion that “the negative and positive forcings are roughly
equal and cancel each other out, and the natural forcings over the past half
century have also been approximately zero” to be extremely convenient. So if
“radiative forcing from CO2 alone gives us a good estimate as to how much we
expect to see the Earth's surface temperature change,” why not run Meehl’s
2004 model again with the same forcings and include observations from the last
decade.

My guess is that the model temperature predictions based on CO2 rise alone
will not match the observed temperature record since 2000. If that is the case
then the radiative forcing components that Meehl used in 2004 were not
accurate and that forcing from natural climate variability has not been not
properly accounted for. Or to put it another way, the temperature record for
the last decade can not be reproduced in the model with anthropogenic forcing
alone. When you get a chance, can you please point me to RC’s regularly
updated model-data comparisons?

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Next

## Post a Comment

Political, off-topic or ad hominem comments will be deleted. Comments
Policy...

You need to be logged in to post a comment. Login via the left margin or if
you're new, register here.

Link to this page ![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/eureka.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/protruth_pledge.gif)

![](https://www.skepticalscience.com//pics/crowdsourcing.png)

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/Denial101x_ad.png)

:

:

![](images/_core/foot/tcpsite.png)  
The Consensus Project Website

THE ESCALATOR  
![](images/_core/foot/SkepticsvRealists_180.gif)  
(free to republish)

(C) Copyright 2019 John Cook | |  
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)  
Home | Links | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

