

![CNBC logo](//sc.cnbcfm.com/applications/cnbc.com/staticcontent/img/login-

cnbc-logo.png)

Ã—

  * LOG IN
  * SIGN UP

Keep Me Logged In

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

  * Sign In
  * Pro
  * Watchlist
  * Make It

  * USA

  * INTL

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

Markets

  * Pre-Markets
  * U.S. Markets
  * Currencies
  * Cryptocurrency
  * Futures & Commodities
  * Bonds
  * Funds & ETFs

Watchlist

Business

  * Economy
  * Finance
  * Health & Science
  * Media
  * Real Estate
  * Energy
  * Transportation
  * Industrials
  * Retail
  * Wealth
  * Small Business

Investing

  * Invest In You
  * Personal Finance
  * Financial Advisors
  * Trading Nation
  * Futures Now
  * Options Action
  * ETF Street
  * Buffett Archive
  * Earnings
  * Trader Talk

Tech

  * Cybersecurity
  * Enterprise
  * Internet
  * Media
  * Mobile
  * Social Media
  * Venture Capital
  * Tech Guide

Politics

  * White House
  * Policy
  * Defense
  * Congress
  * Elections

CNBC TV

  * Live TV
  * Live Audio
  * Latest Video
  * Top Video
  * Business Day Shows
  * Primetime Shows
  * CNBC World
  * Digital Originals
  * Full Episodes

Menu

SEARCH QUOTES __

##

Energy

  * Oil and Gas
  * Renewable Energy
  * Utilities

# Oil demand (and prices) set to drop dramatically as new technologies take

hold

  * Oil prices are rising now but it won't last.
  * Dropping prices for solar and wind, along with new battery technologies and growing use of electric cars, will create a dramatic shift in demand for oil and gas.
  * In the next 10 years the energy industry will see more change than it has in the past 100.

Geoffrey Heal, professor, Columbia Business School

Published 8:44 AM ET Thu, 3 May 2018 Updated 1:38 PM ET Thu, 3 May 2018
CNBC.com

![Dinosaur](https://fm.cnbc.com/applications/cnbc.com/resources/img/editorial/2015/03/24/102530694-508480217.530x298.jpg?v=1427206533)

Dave and Les Jacobs | Getty Images

Since the dramatic and unprecedented advances in production and manufacturing
of the Industrial Revolution from the late 1700s to the early 1900s, humans
have been digging up coal, oil and gas for energy.

Except for the introduction of nuclear power based on uranium in the 1950s and
60s, nothing has changed. Today, coal, oil and gas remain the primary sources
of energy, fueling human activities around the world.

But the recent and rapid decline in prices of alternative energy sources like
wind and solar, and the plunging cost to store them presage a very different
future on the horizon â€“ one in which fossil fuels go the way of the dinosaurs,
and where in the next 10 years we will see more changes to the energy industry
than we have seen in the past 100.

To begin, America only recently achieved its position as the largest producer
of oil and gas; a rise made possible by hydraulic fracturing, commonly
referred to as fracking.

> "The drop in demand for oil and gas will, therefore, lower prices and drive
out high-cost producers, including most deep-water wells and tar sands."

Controversial among environmentalists for the danger of environmental
contamination many argue it poses, fracking has nonetheless revolutionized the
energy industry by raising supply and lowering gas and oil prices.

This process of energy extraction involves drilling down into the earth, where
previously inaccessible energy reserves can be harvested, essentially
fracturing rock to release the hydrocarbons inside.

One major result of the adoption of this new technology and the dramatic drop
in gas prices it has produced is the hollowing-out of the U.S. coal industry,
reduced from a 35 billion-dollar industry in just 2011, to a 3 billion-dollar
industry in 2017.

Using this dramatic shift as an example, we can see the role cost plays in
driving the direction of the energy industry. Consider now that solar energy,
which has become steadily more competitive as its scale has grown, has gone
from producing electric power at $179 per megawatt hour (mWh) in 2009, to $50
per mWh in 2017.

At this rate, solar energy has already undercut gas ($60 per mWh), coal ($102
per mWh), and nuclear energy ($148 per mWh) in cost.

Similar strides have been made in harnessing wind energy sources, with onshore
wind costing $40 per mWh and offshore wind sources in 2017 priced at $60.

Posing zero threat to local communities and environments, offshore wind
sources are already being adopted by cities like New York, where a contract
was recently signed to build an offshore wind farm off the coast of Long
Island that will provide power to millions of homes in the nation's most
populous city.

#### Dramatic price drop

Extensive use of wind and solar energy requires large-scale energy storage to
handle their intermittency. The dramatic drop in energy storage costs, from
$3000/kWh to $170/kWh in about 20 years, has made increased storage capacity
possible, mainly through the development of the Lithium-ion battery.

For the same reason your new smartphone can hold a charge longer, wind and
solar energy are fast emerging as a viable and reliable way of powering the
entire economy.

Oil and gas will still have a market, though a reduced one, in supplying
feedstock to the petrochemical industry for making plastics, and in air and
sea transportation, where renewables or batteries are unlikely to be
competitive. The drop in demand for oil and gas will, therefore, lower prices
and drive out high-cost producers, including most deep-water wells and tar
sands.

With power increasingly coming from a large number of intermittent sources and
from energy stored in batteries, and with consumers increasingly generating
their own from solar panels, the utility model is fast-changing.

The process of passing power from large generators to consumers will not
support the complex power systems of the future without utilities taking a
more coordinating role.

For these reasons, it is possible and increasingly likely that beyond the
middle of this century fossil fuels will play little or no role in producing
electric power in advanced economies. And if electric vehicles gain ground, as
many in the auto industry expect, the future will be largely free of fossil
fuels.

The next decade will be an exciting one for the energy industry, and for those
who worry about climate change and the environmental impact of our energy use.

Commentary by _Geoffrey Heal, the Donald C. Waite III Professor of Social
Enterprise and a Chazen Senior Scholar at Columbia Business School. He is the
author of Endangered Economies: How the Neglect of Nature Threatens Our
Prosperity._

**_For more insight from CNBC contributors, follow_** **_@CNBCopinion_ **
**_on Twitter._**

Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly referred to (mWh) as
milliwat hours. (mWh) actually refers to megawatt hours. An editor inserted
that error.

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

  * Subscribe to CNBC PRO

  * Licensing & Reprints

  * Join the CNBC Panel

  * Supply Chain Values

  * Advertise With Us

  * Closed Captioning

  * Digital Products

  * Terms of Service

  * Privacy Policy

  * News Releases

  * Internships

  * Corrections

  * About CNBC

  * AdChoices

  * Site Map

  * Podcasts

  * Contact

  * Careers

  * Help

  *     *       *         *           *             *               * 

#### News Tips

Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.

Get In Touch

####

CNBC Newsletters

Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox

Sign Up Now

Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and
services. Privacy Policy.

Â© 2019 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal

Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global
Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.

Data also provided by
![Reuters](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

