

skip to main content

Advertisement

  * AGU.org
  * AGU Journals
  * AGU Geocalendar
  * Join AGU
  * Donate to AGU
  * Eos E-Alerts

  * __

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

![Eos Logo](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/eos-logo-

black-130x66.png) Earth & Space Science News

Search for:

__Search

  * __

![Eos Logo](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/eos-logo-

white-63x32.png)

  * __

    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
  * __

Search for:

__Search

## __Menu

  * News __
    * News & Features
    * Project Updates
    * Meeting Reports
    * AGU News
    * Postcards from the Field
  * News from AGU Journals __
    * Research Spotlights
    * Editors’ Highlights
    * Scientific Press Releases
  * Topics & Disciplines __
    * Topics
    * Centennial Collection
    * Climate Change
    * Hazards & Disasters
    * Natural Resources
    * Science Policy
    * Space & Planets
    * Education
    * Women in Geoscience
    * Scientific Disciplines
    * Atmospheric Sciences
    * Biogeosciences
    * Geochemistry, Mineralogy, Volcanology
    * Geohealth
    * Geology & Geophysics
    * Global Change
    * Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface
    * Mathematical Geophysics
    * Natural Hazards
    * Ocean Sciences
    * Planetary Sciences
    * Science Policy & Funding
    * Space Science & Space Physics
  * Opinions __
    * Opinions
    * Editors' Vox
    * GeoFIZZ
  * Blogs
  * AGU’s Centennial
  * Jobs & Resources

Climate Change __News

* * *

  * __
  * __

  * __

  * __
  * __
  * __

# Global Average Temperatures in 2017 Continued Upward Trend

Even when the warming from El Niño is removed, 2017 ranks among the hottest
years on record.

A newly released NASA analysis of global temperatures reveals that 2017 was
the second-hottest year on record. Here a map shows Earth’s average global
temperature from 2013 to 2017, compared with the average temperature from 1951
to 1980. Yellows, oranges, and reds show regions warmer than the 1951–1980
average, with redder hues indicating greater warmth. Credit: NASA’s Scientific
Visualization Studio

By JoAnna Wendel __19 January 2018

Earth’s average surface temperature in 2017 placed as the second or third
highest on record, according to new analyses by NASA and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

NASA’s analysis, released yesterday during a press conference, showed that
2017 is the second-hottest year on record and that the average global
temperature rose 0.9°C (1.6°F) above the 1951–1980 average. The size of the
temperature increase was calculated from thousands of measurements from more
than 6,000 weather stations, ship- and buoy-based observations of sea surface
temperatures, and measurements across Antarctic research stations.

“Despite colder than average temperatures in any one part of the world,
temperatures over the planet as a whole continue the rapid warming trend we’ve
seen over the last 40 years.”An analysis from NOAA, released during the same
press conference, produced similar results: According to NOAA’s models, 2017
ranked as the thi­rd-warmest year on record. Specifically, NOAA scientists
found that temperatures rose 0.84°C (1.5°F) above the 20th century average
(1901–2000).

“Despite colder than average temperatures in any one part of the world,
temperatures over the planet as a whole continue the rapid warming trend we’ve
seen over the last 40 years,” said Gavin Schmidt, director of NASA’s Goddard
Institute for Space Studies in New York City, at the press conference.

The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) also released a 2017 climate
report yesterday, which also placed last year among the top three warmest
years on record. According to WMO’s figure for 2017, the world’s average
surface temperature has risen 1.1°C since preindustrial times. 2016 remains
the warmest year on their record, with temperatures reaching 1.2°C above the
preindustrial era.

### **Atmosphere to Ocean**

At the press conference, Deke Arndt, a chief of the monitoring branch at
NOAA’s National Centers for Environmental Information, described warming
trends in different layers of the Earth system. He explained that temperatures
in the middle troposphere, between 3,000 and 10,000 meters (where most
commercial jets fly), ranked third or fourth warmest on record, depending on
which group assembled the data. The upper ocean, which scientists know
captures much of the excess energy trapped in the atmosphere, also reached its
largest heat content on record in 2017, Arndt said.

### **The Warming North**

Minimum sea ice extent continued to fall in 2017, the newly released analyses
show.In the Arctic, which warms at a faster rate than the rest of the globe,
minimum sea ice extent continued to fall in 2017, the newly released analyses
show. Similar results were highlighted in December, when NOAA released its
annual Arctic Report Card. In that report, scientists concluded that the mean
Arctic temperature rose 1.6°C in 2017 the (second-highest average after 2016),
and in March 2017, observed the lowest maximum sea ice extent on record.

Observations of Arctic conditions in 2017 “confirm that the Arctic shows no
signs of returning to the reliably frozen state that it was in just a decade
ago,” said Jeremy Mathis, director of NOAA’s Arctic Research Program, when the
report card was unveiled.

At play here is a key feedback mechanism, Arndt noted. Sea ice, with its
bright white surface, reflects solar energy back into the atmosphere, helping
to cool surface temperatures. But when sea ice melts, it exposes the darker
surface of the underlying water, which absorbs solar energy. And the more that
sea ice melts, the more energy is absorbed—a positive feedback mechanism of
accelerating warming and ice loss, he said.

### **ENSO Effects**

Some warmer than average temperatures can be attributed to a global climate
phenomenon called the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, or ENSO. Two distinct
temperature and weather trends make up ENSO. One is El Niño, in which the
tropical Pacific Ocean warms; the other is La Niña, in which it cools. El Niño
and La Niña can bring anomalously cool or warm, or dry or wet, conditions to
different regions of the world. On small timescales, the El Niño effect can
amplify warming signals.

Spanning all of 2015 and the first third of 2016, for example, warming from an
extreme El Niño fed into overall observed warming. However, Schmidt stressed
that even when scientists statistically remove the effects of El Niño and La
Niña from the record, 2017 is still one of the warmest years on record. The
WMO’s analysis, similarly, showed that 2017 was the warmest year without an El
Niño What’s more, studies have shown that as more greenhouse gases are
released, extreme El Niños could become more frequent.

—JoAnna Wendel (@JoAnnaScience), Staff Writer

**Citation:** Wendel, J. (2018), Global average temperatures in 2017 continued
upward trend, Eos, 99, https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EO091299. Published on 19
January 2018.

Text (C) 2018. The authors. CC BY-NC-ND 3.0  
Except where otherwise noted, images are subject to copyright. Any reuse
without express permission from the copyright owner is prohibited.

* * *

  * __
  * __

  * __

  * __
  * __
  * __

Advertisement

## Related Articles

__News __30 May 2019

### Senator Rips Trump on Anniversary of Plan to Leave Climate Pact

__News __23 May 2019

### Congress Hears Biodiversity Warning During a Charged Hearing

__Meeting Report __23 May 2019

### Understanding ENSO in a Changing Climate

__Research Spotlight __17 May 2019

### Did a Volcanic Eruption in 1783 Change the Climate in Europe?

__ 1 Comment

##

Advertisement

## Follow AGU Everywhere

## AGU News

__AGU News __3 June 2019

### Science in the Deep

__AGU News __30 May 2019

### In Appreciation of AGU’s Outstanding Reviewers of 2018

__Subscribe View More AGU News »

## From AGU Journals

Most Shared

__Geophysical Research Letters

### Variable solar irradiance as a plausible agent for multidecadal variations

in the Arctic‐wide surface air temperature record of the past 130 years

Willie W.‐H. Soon

Highly Cited

__G-Cubed

### Age, spreading rates, and spreading asymmetry of the world's ocean crust

R. Dietmar Müller et al.

Hot Article

__Earth’s Future

### Catalyzing Transformations to Sustainability in the World's Mountains

J. A. Klein et al.

View More Highlights »

##

Advertisement

## Current Print Magazine

![](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Jun-19_cover.jpg)  
__June 2019

Volume 100 Issue 6

View Issue »

View Archives »

## Most Popular

Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface

__Research Spotlight __30 May 2019

### Answer to California Landscape Riddle Lies Underground

Geochemistry, Mineralogy, Volcanology

__Research Spotlight __29 May 2019

### Big Data Help Paint a New Picture of Trace Element Cycling

Planetary Sciences

__News __21 May 2019

### New Book Examines the Legacy of Apollo

## Most Commented

Climate Change

__News __8 April 2019

### European Contact with the Americas May Have Triggered Global Cooling

__ 9 Comments

Geology & Geophysics

__News __9 April 2019

### Secrets from the New Madrid Seismic Zone’s Quaking Past

__ 4 Comments

Climate Change

__Project Update __4 April 2019

### Bridging the Gap with the Science for Climate Action Network

__ 3 Comments

## You Might Have Missed

Ocean Sciences

__Research Spotlight __4 June 2019

### Sea Level Rise May Reactivate Growth of Some Reef Islands

Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface

__Research Spotlight __4 June 2019

### Missing Lakes Under Antarctic Ice Sheets

Climate Change

__Research Spotlight __4 June 2019

### Improving Climate Predictions over Decades

![AGU Logo](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/eos-logo-

white-130x66.png)

_Eos_ is the leading source for trustworthy news and perspectives about the
Earth and space sciences and their impact. Its namesake is Eos, the Greek
goddess of the dawn, who represents the light shed on understanding our planet
and its environment in space by the Earth and space sciences.

### Connect with Eos

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

### I want to

  * Contact _Eos_
  * View Commenting Policy
  * Sign Up for E-Alerts
  * View Editorial Policy
  * Submit an Article or Idea
  * Inquire About Advertising
  * Learn More About _Eos_
  * View Terms and Conditions
  * Cite an Article
  * View Privacy Policy

### Help us improve your Eos experience

Leave Feedback

![IMA 2014 awards logo](https://eos.org/wp-

content/themes/eos/dist/images/ima-2014.png) ![The logo for American

Geophysical Union](https://eos.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/AGU100_logo_V-

WhiteTransparent-130x140.png)

(C) 2019 American Geophysical Union. All rights reserved.

![Creative Commons logo for the Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives

license.](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/cc-by-nc-nd.png)

  * News __
    * News & Features
    * Project Updates
    * Meeting Reports
    * AGU News
    * Postcards from the Field
  * News from AGU Journals __
    * Research Spotlights
    * Editors’ Highlights
    * Scientific Press Releases
  * Topics & Disciplines __
    * Topics
    * Centennial Collection
    * Climate Change
    * Hazards & Disasters
    * Natural Resources
    * Science Policy
    * Space & Planets
    * Education
    * Women in Geoscience
    * Scientific Disciplines
    * Atmospheric Sciences
    * Biogeosciences
    * Geochemistry, Mineralogy, Volcanology
    * Geohealth
    * Geology & Geophysics
    * Global Change
    * Hydrology, Cryosphere & Earth Surface
    * Mathematical Geophysics
    * Natural Hazards
    * Ocean Sciences
    * Planetary Sciences
    * Science Policy & Funding
    * Space Science & Space Physics
  * Opinions __
    * Opinions
    * Editors' Vox
    * GeoFIZZ
  * Blogs
  * AGU’s Centennial
  * Jobs & Resources
  * AGU.org
  * AGU Journals
  * AGU Geocalendar
  * Join AGU
  * Donate to AGU
  * Eos E-Alerts

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

