

![Phys.org](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/logo-

header.png)

Topics

  * Week's top
  * Latest news
  * Unread news
  * Subscribe

### Science X Account

__

__

Remember me

Sign In

Click here to sign in with or

Forget Password?

Not a member? **Sign up**

Learn more

  * Nanotechnology
  * Physics
  * Earth
  * Astronomy & Space
  * Technology
  * Chemistry
  * Biology
  * Other Sciences

  *     * share this!
  * 2

  * 6

  * Share

  * Email

  * Home

  * Earth
  * Earth Sciences

  *     *       * 

* * *

November 16, 2018

# How the Antarctic Circumpolar Current helps keep Antarctica frozen

by Helen Phillips, Benoit Legresy And Nathan Bindoff, The Conversation

![How the Antarctic Circumpolar Current helps keep Antarctica

frozen](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2018/howtheantarc.jpg)
Scientists deploying a vertical microstructure profiler (VMP-2000), which
measures temperature, salinity, pressure and turbulence, from RV Investigator
in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, November 2018. Credit: Nathan Bindoff

The Antarctic Circumpolar Current, or ACC, is the strongest ocean current on
our planet. It extends from the sea surface to the bottom of the ocean, and
encircles Antarctica.

It is vital for Earth's health because it keeps Antarctica cool and frozen. It
is also changing as the world's climate warms. Scientists like us are studying
the current to find out how it might affect the future of Antarctica's ice
sheets, and the world's sea levels.

The ACC carries an estimated 165 million to 182 million cubic metres of water
every second (a unit also called a "Sverdrup") from west to east, more than
100 times the flow of all the rivers on Earth. It provides the main connection
between the Indian, Pacific and Atlantic Oceans.

The tightest geographical constriction through which the current flows is
Drake Passage, where only 800 km separates South America from Antarctica.
While elsewhere the ACC appears to have a broad domain, it must also navigate
steep undersea mountains that constrain its path and steer it north and south
across the Southern Ocean.

**What is the Antarctic Circumpolar Current?**

A satellite view over Antarctica reveals a frozen continent surrounded by icy
waters. Moving northward, away from Antarctica, the water temperatures rise
slowly at first and then rapidly across a sharp gradient. It is the ACC that
maintains this boundary.

The ACC is created by the combined effects of strong westerly winds across the
Southern Ocean, and the big change in surface temperatures between the Equator
and the poles.

![How the Antarctic Circumpolar Current helps keep Antarctica

frozen](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2018/1-howtheantarc.jpg)
Map of the ocean surface temperature as measured by satellites and analysed by
the European Copernicus Marine Services. The sea ice extent around the
antarctic continent for this day appears in light blue. The two black lines
indicate the long term position of the southern and northern front of the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current.

Ocean density increases as water gets colder and as it gets more salty. The
warm, salty surface waters of the subtropics are much lighter than the cold,
fresher waters close to Antarctica. We can imagine that the depth of constant
density levels slopes up towards Antarctica.

The westerly winds make this slope steeper, and the ACC rides eastward along
it, faster where the slope is steeper, and weaker where it's flatter.

**Fronts and bottom water**

In the ACC there are sharp changes in water density known as fronts. The
Subantarctic Front to the north and Polar Front further south are the two main
fronts of the ACC (the black lines in the images). Both are known to split
into two or three branches in some parts of the Southern Ocean, and merge
together in other parts.

Scientists can figure out the density and speed of the current by measuring
the ocean's height, using altimeters. For instance, denser waters sit lower
and lighter waters stand taller, and differences between the height of the sea
surface give the speed of the current.

The path of the ACC is a meandering one, because of the steering effect of the
sea floor, and also because of instabilities in the current.

The ACC also plays a part in the meridional (or global) overturning
circulation, which brings deep waters formed in the North Atlantic southward
into the Southern Ocean. Once there it becomes known as Circumpolar Deep
Water, and is carried around Antarctica by the ACC. It slowly rises toward the
surface south of the Polar Front.

![How the Antarctic Circumpolar Current helps keep Antarctica

frozen](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2018/2-howtheantarc.jpg)
Map of how fast the waters around Antarctica are moving in an easterly
direction. It is produced using 23 years of satellite altimetry (ocean height)
observations as provided by the European Copernicus Marine Services. Author
provided

Once it surfaces, some of the water flows northward again and sinks north of
the Subarctic Front. The remaining part flows toward Antarctica where it is
transformed into the densest water in the ocean, sinking to the sea floor and
flowing northward in the abyss as Antarctic Bottom Water. These pathways are
the main way that the oceans absorb heat and carbon dioxide and sequester it
in the deep ocean.

**Changing current**

The ACC is not immune to climate change. The Southern Ocean has warmed and
freshened in the upper 2,000 m. Rapid warming and freshening has also been
found in the Antarctic Bottom Water, the deepest layer of the ocean.

Waters south of the Polar Front are becoming fresher due to increased rainfall
there, and waters to the north of the Polar Front are becoming saltier due to
increased evaporation. These changes are caused by human activity, primarily
through adding greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, and depletion of the ozone
layer. The ozone hole is now recovering but greenhouse gases continue to rise
globally.

Winds have strengthened by about 40% over the Southern Ocean over the past 40
years. Surprisingly, this has not translated into an increase in the strength
of the ACC. Instead there has been an increase in eddies that move heat
towards the pole, particularly in hotspots such as Drake Passage, Kerguelen
Plateau, and between Tasmania and New Zealand.

We have observed much change already. The question now is how this increased
transfer of heat across the ACC will impact the stability of the Antarctic ice
sheet, and consequently the rate of global sea-level rise.

* * *

Explore further

Wind holds key to climate change turnaround

* * *

Provided by The Conversation

This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons
license. Read the original article.![The

Conversation](https://counter.theconversation.com/content/106164/count.gif?distributor=republish-

lightbox-advanced)

**Citation** : How the Antarctic Circumpolar Current helps keep Antarctica
frozen (2018, November 16) retrieved 7 June 2019 from
https://phys.org/news/2018-11-antarctic-circumpolar-current-antarctica-
frozen.html

This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the
purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the
written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

8 shares

  * Facebook

  * Twitter

  * Email

Feedback to editors

  * Featured
  * Last Comments
  * Popular

#### Polarization-encryption based data storage in 3-D Janus plasmonic helical

nanoapertures

15 hours ago

0

#### Researchers find a way to produce free-standing films of perovskite

oxides

15 hours ago

0

#### Student gives possible explanation for female mating preferences that

decrease male survival chances

16 hours ago

0

#### Study shows penguins attract seabirds when they corral fish

Jun 05, 2019

0

#### Researchers discover bacterial diversity in Justinianic Plague

Jun 05, 2019

0

* * *

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Could climate change make Siberia habitable for humans?

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Planck finds no new evidence for cosmic anomalies

8 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Under the surface: Understanding the (ultra-small) structure of silicon

nanocrystals

8 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study confirms banded iron formations originated from oxidized iron

8 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Google's challenge to game consoles to kick off in November

10 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### The deep learning dive: how cells regulate division

10 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Argentine fossils take oak and beech family history far into Southern

Hemisphere

10 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Unusual Japanese plant inspires recalculation of equation used to model

leaf arrangement patterns

10 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Is sex primarily a strategy against transmissible cancer?

10 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Decoding Beethoven's music style using data science

10 hours ago

* * *

### Relevant PhysicsForums posts

#### Early moment detection that marks the start of massive tremor events

Jun 04, 2019

#### New study about the rise in global sea levels

May 29, 2019

#### My Project on the Effects Copper Sulfate on Plant Growth (thank you PF

for your help)

May 27, 2019

#### M8.0 central Peru coming in NOW

May 26, 2019

#### Walker Lane geologic trough - E. California, W. Nevada

May 22, 2019

#### Mysterious Ringing of the Earth

May 22, 2019

More from Earth Sciences

* * *

##

  * ## Related Stories

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Wind holds key to climate change turnaround

Oct 10, 2018

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Antarctic Ocean carbon dioxide helped end the Ice Age

Oct 25, 2018

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Stronger west winds blow ill wind for climate change

Jul 10, 2018

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study reveals new Antarctic process contributing to sea level rise and

climate change

Apr 18, 2018

##### Mathematics and the ocean: Movement, mixing and climate modeling

Oct 17, 2012

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Stronger winds heat up West Antarctic ice melt

Jul 17, 2017

  * ## Recommended for you

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study confirms banded iron formations originated from oxidized iron

8 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Magnetism discovered in the Earth's mantle

17 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Glacial sediments greased the gears of plate tectonics

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Building blocks of the Earth: Research team re-calculates distribution

of volatile elements

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### How deep-ocean vents fuel massive phytoplankton blooms

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Kelp DNA records destructive power of ancient earthquake

Jun 05, 2019

## User comments

Please sign in to add a comment. Registration is free, and takes less than a
minute. Read more

Sign in

Forgot Password  
Registration

##### What do you think about this particular story?

Your feedback will go directly to Science X editors.

Your message to the editors

Your email (only if you want to be contacted back)

Send Feedback

Thank you for taking your time to send in your valued opinion to Science X
editors.

You can be assured our editors closely monitor every feedback sent and will
take appropriate actions. Your opinions are important to us.

We do not guarantee individual replies due to extremely high volume of
correspondence.

###### E-mail the story

##### How the Antarctic Circumpolar Current helps keep Antarctica frozen

Your friend's email

Your email

I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more

Your name

###### Note

Your email address is used **only** to let the recipient know who sent the
email. Neither your address nor the recipient's address will be used for any
other purpose. The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message
and is not retained by Phys.org in any form.

Your message

Send

#### Newsletter sign up

Get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox. You can unsubscribe
at any time and we'll never share your details to third parties.

Subscribe

More information Privacy policy

![Medical

Xpress](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/MedicalXpress.svg)

### Medical Xpress

Medical Xpress covers all medical research advances and health news

![Tech

Xplore](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/techexploer.svg)

### Tech Xplore

Tech Xplore covers the latest engineering, electronics and technology advances

![ScienceX](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/ScienceX.svg)

### ScienceX

Science X Network offers the most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the
web

## Newsletters

Subscribe

Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow
you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox

## Follow us

  *     *       *         *   * Top

  * Home
  * Search
  * Mobile version

  * Help

  * FAQ
  * About
  * Contact

  * Science X Account

  * Sponsored Account
  * Archive
  * News wire

  * Android app

  * iOS app
  * RSS feeds
  * Push notification

(C) Phys.org 2003 - 2019 powered by Science X Network

Privacy policy Terms of use

#### Your Privacy

This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our
services, and provide content from third parties. By using our site, you
acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy and Terms of
Use.

Ok More Information

#### E-mail newsletter

Subscribe

#### Follow us

  *     *       *         * 

It appears that you are currently using **Ad Blocking software**. What are the
consequences? ×

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-5dNhPAnM9r0yY.gif)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

