

We think you are located in South Africa. Is this correct?

  * Yes, I reside in South Africa
  * Change country/curriculum

We use this information to present the correct curriculum and to personalise
content to better meet the needs of our users.

  * Products
    * back
    * Practice
    * back
    * Maths
    * Science
    * Exam Prep
    * back
    * Maths
    * Science
  * Textbooks
    * back
    * Maths
    * back
    * Mathematics Grade 10
    * Mathematics Grade 11
    * Mathematics Grade 12
    * Mathematical Literacy Grade 10
    * Science
    * back
    * Physical Sciences Grade 10
    * Physical Sciences Grade 11
    * Physical Sciences Grade 12
    * Life Sciences Grade 10
  * Features
    * back
    * For Learners and Parents
    * For Teachers and Schools
  * Pricing
  * Journal

![](/static/themes/emas/img/logo-symbol-ffffff.svg)

  * Log In
  * Sign Up
  * Menu

![](/static/themes/emas/img/logo.svg) ![](/static/themes/emas/img/logo-

ffffff.svg)

  * Products

    * # Practice

    * Maths

    * Science
    * # Exam Prep

    * Maths

    * Science
    * Textbooks
    * # Maths

    * Mathematics Grade 10

    * Mathematics Grade 11
    * Mathematics Grade 12
    * Mathematical Literacy Grade 10
    * # Science

    * Physical Sciences Grade 10

    * Physical Sciences Grade 11
    * Physical Sciences Grade 12
    * Life Sciences Grade 10
    * Features
    * For Learners and Parents
    * For Teachers and Schools
    * Pricing
    * Journal
  * Log In

  * Sign Up

# Emission And Absorption Spectra

  * Textbooks
  * Physical Sciences Grade 12
  * Optical Phenomena And Properties Of Matter
  * Emission And Absorption Spectra

Previous

The photoelectric effect

| |

Next

Chapter summary

---|---|--- 

## 12.3 Emission and absorption spectra (ESCQR)

### Emission spectra (ESCQS)

You have learnt previously about the structure of an atom. The electrons
surrounding the atomic nucleus are arranged in a series of levels of
increasing energy. Each element has a unique number of electrons in a unique
configuration therefore each element has its own distinct set of energy
levels. This arrangement of energy levels serves as the atom's unique
fingerprint.

In the early 1900s, scientists found that a liquid or solid heated to high
temperatures would give off a broad range of colours of light. However, a gas
heated to similar temperatures would emit light only at certain specific
wavelengths (colours). The reason for this observation was not understood at
the time.

Scientists studied this effect using a discharge tube.

![](images/discharge_tube.jpg)

Figure 12.5: Diagram of a discharge tube. The tube is filled with a gas. When
a high enough voltage is applied across the tube, the gas ionises and acts
like a conductor, allowing a current to flow through the circuit. The current
excites the atoms of the ionised gas. When the atoms fall back to their ground
state, they emit photons to carry off the excess energy.

A discharge tube (shown in Figure 12.5) is a gas-filled, glass tube with a
metal plate at both ends. If a large enough voltage difference is applied
between the two metal plates, the gas atoms inside the tube will absorb enough
energy to make some of their electrons come off, i.e. the gas atoms are
ionised. These electrons start moving through the gas and create a current,
which raises some electrons in other atoms to higher energy levels. Then as
the electrons in the atoms fall back down, they emit electromagnetic radiation
(light). The amount of light emitted at different wavelengths, called the
**emission spectrum** , is shown for a discharge tube filled with hydrogen gas
in Figure 12.6 below. Only certain wavelengths (i.e. colours) of light are
seen, as shown by the lines in the picture.

![2d26919d2e3d1ffecefcd255882ef91c.png](images/2d26919d2e3d1ffecefcd255882ef91c.png)

Figure 12.6: Diagram of the emission spectrum of hydrogen in the visible
spectrum. Four lines are visible, and are labelled with their wavelengths. The
three lines in the (\text{400})-(\text{500}) (\text{nm}) range are in the blue
part of the spectrum, while the higher line ((\text{656}) (\text{nm})) is in
the red/orange part.

Eventually, scientists realised that these lines come from photons of a
specific energy, emitted by electrons making transitions between specific
energy levels of the atom. Figure 12.7 shows an example of this happening.
When an electron in an atom falls from a higher energy level to a lower energy
level, it emits a photon to carry off the extra energy. This photon's energy
is equal to the energy difference between the two energy levels ((\Delta E)).

[\Delta E_{\text{electron}} = E_f - E_i]

As we previously discussed, the frequency of a photon is related to its energy
through the equation (E=hf). Since a specific photon frequency (or wavelength)
gives us a specific colour, we can see how each coloured line is associated
with a specific transition.

![19bc54b8c1683dcad52cbf8e1216816c.png](images/19bc54b8c1683dcad52cbf8e1216816c.png)![](images/Hydrogen_transitions.png)

Figure 12.7: In the first diagram are shown some of the electron energy levels
for the hydrogen atom. The arrows show the electron transitions from higher
energy levels to lower energy levels. The energies of the emitted photons are
the same as the energy difference between two energy levels. You can think of
absorption as the opposite process. The arrows would point upwards and the
electrons would jump up to higher levels when they absorb a photon of the
right energy. The second representation shows the wavelengths of the light
that is emitted for the the various transitions. The transistions are grouped
into a series based on the lowest level involved in the transition.

Visible light is not the only kind of electromagnetic radiation emitted. More
energetic or less energetic transitions can produce ultraviolet or infrared
radiation. However, because each atom has its own distinct set of energy
levels (its fingerprint!), each atom has its own distinct emission spectrum.

### Absorption spectra (ESCQT)

Atoms do not only emit photons; they also absorb photons. If a photon hits an
atom and the energy of the photon is the same as the gap between two electron
energy levels in the atom, then the electron in the lower energy level can
absorb the photon and jump up to the higher energy level. If the photon energy
does not correspond to the difference between two energy levels then the
photon will not be absorbed (it can still be scattered).

Using this effect, if we have a source of photons of various energies we can
obtain the **absorption spectra** for different materials. To get an
absorption spectrum, just shine white light on a sample of the material that
you are interested in. White light is made up of all the different wavelengths
of visible light put together. In the absorption spectrum there will be gaps.
The gaps correspond to energies (wavelengths) for which there is a
corresponding difference in energy levels for the particular element.

The absorbed photons show up as black lines because the photons of these
wavelengths have been absorbed and do not show up. Because of this, the
absorption spectrum is the exact _inverse_ of the emission spectrum. Look at
the two figures below. In Figure 12.8 you can see the line emission spectrum
of hydrogen. Figure 12.9 shows the absorption spectrum. It is the exact
opposite of the emission spectrum! Both emission and absorption techniques can
be used to get the same information about the energy levels of an atom.

![7324a0ef20fa64869d07266ae41ba515.png](images/7324a0ef20fa64869d07266ae41ba515.png)

_Emission_ spectrum of Hydrogen.

![46d3db3c826cbc48fae65b33906eca6d.png](images/46d3db3c826cbc48fae65b33906eca6d.png)

_Absorption_ spectrum of Hydrogen.

The dark lines correspond to the frequencies of light that have been absorbed
by the gas. As the photons of light are absorbed by electrons, the electrons
move into higher energy levels. This is the opposite process of emission.

The dark lines, absorption lines, correspond to the frequencies of the
emission spectrum of the same element. The amount of energy absorbed by the
electron to move into a higher level is the same as the amount of energy
released when returning to the original energy level.

## Worked example 4: Absorption

I have an unknown gas in a glass container. I shine a bright white light
through one side of the container and measure the spectrum of transmitted
light. I notice that there is a black line ( _absorption_ line) in the middle
of the visible red band at (\text{642}) (\text{nm}). I have a hunch that the
gas might be hydrogen. If I am correct, between which 2 energy levels does
this transition occur? (Hint: look at Figure 12.7 and the transitions which
are in the visible part of the spectrum.)

### What is given and what needs to be done?

We have an absorption line at (\text{642}) (\text{nm}). This means that the
substance in the glass container absorbed photons with a wavelength of 642 nm.
We need to calculate which 2 energy levels of hydrogen this transition would
correspond to. Therefore we need to know what energy the absorbed photons had.

### Calculate the energy of the absorbed photons

\begin{align _} E & = \frac{hc}{\lambda }\ & = \frac{\left(\text{6,63} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{34}}\right)\times \left(\text{3} \times
\text{10}^{\text{8}}\right)}{\text{642} \times \text{10}^{-\text{9}}}\ & =
\text{3,1} \times \text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J} \end{align_}

The absorbed photons had an energy of (\text{3,1} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}) (\text{J}).

### Find the energy of the transitions resulting in radiation at visible

wavelengths

Figure 12.7 shows various energy level transitions. The transitions related to
visible wavelengths are marked as the transitions beginning or ending on
Energy Level 2. Let us find the energy of those transitions and compare with
the energy of the absorbed photons we have just calculated.

Energy of transition (absorption) from Energy Level 2 to Energy Level 3:

\begin{align _} \Delta E_{electron} = {E} _{2,3} & = {E}_{2}-{E}_{3}\ & =
\text{16,3} \times \text{10}^{-\text{19}}- \text{19,4} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}\ & = -\text{3,1} \times \text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J}
\end{align_}

Therefore the energy of the photon that an electron must absorb to jump from
Energy Level 2 to Energy Level 3 is (\text{3,1} \times \text{10}^{-\text{19}})
(\text{J}). (NOTE: The minus sign means that _absorption_ is occurring.)

This is the same energy as the photons which were absorbed by the gas in the
container! Therefore, since the transitions of all elements are unique, we can
say that the gas in the container is hydrogen. The transition is absorption of
a photon between Energy Level 2 and Energy Level 3.

The energy of the photon does not correspond to the energy of an energy level,
it corresponds to the **difference** in energy between two energy levels.

### Applications of emission and absorption spectra (ESCQV)

The study of spectra from stars and galaxies in astronomy is i called
_spectroscopy_. Spectroscopy is a tool widely used in astronomy to learn
different things about astronomical objects.

#### Identifying elements in astronomical objects using their spectra

Measuring the spectrum of light from a star can tell astronomers what the star
is made of. Since each element emits or absorbs light only at particular
wavelengths, astronomers can identify what elements are in the stars from the
lines in their spectra. From studying the spectra of many stars we know that
there are many different types of stars which contain different elements and
in different amounts.

#### Determining velocities of galaxies using spectroscopy

You have already learnt in Chapter 9 about the Doppler effect and how the
frequency (and wavelength) of sound waves changes depending on whether the
object emitting the sound is moving _towards_ or _away_ from you. The same
thing happens to electromagnetic radiation (light). If the object emitting the
light is moving _towards_ us, then the wavelength of the light appears shorter
(called **blueshifted** ). If the object is moving _away_ from us, then the
wavelength of its light appears stretched out (called **redshifted** ).

The Doppler effect affects the spectra of objects in space depending on their
motion relative to us on the earth. For example, the light from a distant
galaxy that is moving away from us at some velocity will appear redshifted.
This means that the emission and absorption lines in the galaxy's spectrum
will be shifted to a longer wavelength (lower frequency). Knowing where each
line in the spectrum would normally be if the galaxy was not moving and
comparing it to the redshifted position, allows astronomers to precisely
measure the velocity of the galaxy relative to the Earth.

#### Global warming and greenhouse gases

The sun emits radiation (light) over a range of wavelengths that are mainly in
the visible part of the spectrum. Radiation at these wavelengths passes
through the gases of the atmosphere to warm the land and the oceans below. The
warm earth then radiates this heat at longer infrared wavelengths. Carbon
dioxide (one of the main greenhouse gases) in the atmosphere has energy levels
that correspond to the infrared wavelengths that allow it to absorb the
infrared radiation. It then also emits at infrared wavelengths in all
directions. This effect stops a large amount of the infrared radiation from
getting out of the atmosphere, which causes the atmosphere and the earth to
heat up. More radiation is coming in than is getting back out.

![0e65cd7c55d2ff289bcb21cfed0995b9.png](images/0e65cd7c55d2ff289bcb21cfed0995b9.png)

So increasing the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere increases the
amount of trapped infrared radiation and therefore the overall temperature of
the earth. The earth is a very sensitive and complicated system upon which
life depends and changing the delicate balances of temperature and atmospheric
gas content may have disastrous consequences if we are not careful.

# Practise now to improve your marks

You can do it! Let us help you to study smarter to achieve your goals.
Siyavula Practice guides you at your own pace when you do questions online.

Sign up to improve your marks

## Emission and absorption spectra

Exercise 12.2

Explain how atomic emission spectra arise and how they relate to each element
on the periodic table.

Atomic emission spectra arise from electrons dropping from higher energy
levels to lower energy levels within the atom, photons (light packets) with
specific wavelengths are released. The energy levels in an atom are
specific/unique to each element on the periodic table therefore the wavelength
of light emitted can be used to determine which element the light came from.

How do the lines on the atomic spectrum relate to electron transitions between
energy levels?

The lines on the atomic spectrum relate to electron transitions between energy
levels, if the electron drops an energy level a photon is released resulting
in an emission line and if the electron absorbs a photon and rises an energy
level an absorption line is observed on the spectrum.

Explain the difference between atomic absorption and emission spectra.

The difference between absorption and emission spectra are that absorption
lines are where light has been absorbed by the atom thus you see a dip in the
spectrum whereas emission spectra have spikes in the spectra due to atoms
releasing photons at those wavelengths.

Describe how the absorption and emission spectra of the gases in the
atmosphere give rise to the Greenhouse Effect.

The following needs to be in your answer: in what wavelength range the
sunlight reaches the earth, the absorption of the sunlight and the re-
radiation as infrared light, and finally the scattering of the infrared light
by the carbon-dioxide and how this scattering contributes to the Greenhouse
Effect.

What colour is the light emitted by hydrogen when an electron makes the
transition from energy level 5 down to energy level 2? (Use Figure 12.7 to
find the energy of the released photon.)

\begin{align _} \Delta E & = E_5 - E_2 \ & = \text{21,0} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J} - \text{16,3} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J} \ & = \text{4,7} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J} \end{align_}

\begin{align _} \lambda & = \frac{hc}{\Delta E} \ & = \frac{(\text{6,63}
\times \text{10}^{-\text{34}}\text{ m$^{2}$kg_s$^{-1}$})(\text{3} \times
\text{10}^{\text{8}}\text{ m _s$^{-1}$})}{\text{4,7} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J}} \ & = \text{423}\text{ nm} \end{align_} The
colour of light emitted at (\text{423}) (\text{nm}) is violet.

I have a glass tube filled with hydrogen gas. I shine white light onto the
tube. The spectrum I then measure has an absorption line at a wavelength of
474 nm. Between which two energy levels did the transition occur? (Use Figure
12.7 in solving the problem.)

\begin{align _} \Delta E & = \frac{hc}{\lambda} \ & = \frac{(\text{6,63}
\times \text{10}^{-\text{34}}\text{ m$^{2}$kg_s$^{-1}$})(\text{3} \times
\text{10}^{\text{8}}\text{ m _s$^{-1}$})}{\text{474} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{9}}\text{ nm}}\ & = \text{4,20} \times
\text{10}^{-\text{19}}\text{ J} \end{align_} This energy interval corresponds
to a transition from energy level 4 to energy level 2.

Previous

The photoelectric effect

| Table of Contents |

Next

Chapter summary

---|---|--- 

  * Frequently Asked Questions
  * Help for Learners
  * Help for Teachers

  * Features

  * Pricing
  * About Siyavula
  * Contact Us

Follow Siyavula:

  * Twitter 
  * Facebook 

All Siyavula textbook content made available on this site is released under
the terms of a Creative Commons Attribution License. Embedded videos,
simulations and presentations from external sources are not necessarily
covered by this license.

Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy.

![Payment gateway brands](/static/themes/emas/img/paygate-card-brand-

logos-40.png)

  * Switch to mobile site

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

