

  * __
  * Sections __
  * __
  * Home

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

  * Try 1 month for $1
  * Username
  * Sign In

* * *
    
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    

  * My Post __
  * My Reading List __
  * Account Settings __
  * Newsletters & alerts __
  * Gift subscriptions __
  * Contact us __
  * Help desk __

  * Accessibility for screenreader

Economic Policy

# Americans are drinking themselves to death at record rates

Add to list

In my list

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/soa-

QPJWQhoWKix7xnYi_JZmG8o=/1024x0/arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/56MZNQAQYYZ3HALNHJPTZ6C2CU.jpg)  
Delicious, and deadly. Ralph Daily/Flickr

By Christopher Ingraham

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham

Reporter covering all things data

Email **Bio __Follow**

December 22, 2015

Alcohol is killing Americans at a rate not seen in at least 35 years,
according to new federal data. Last year, more than 30,700 Americans died from
alcohol-induced causes, including alcohol poisoning and cirrhosis, which is
primarily caused by alcohol use.

In 2014, there were 9.6 deaths from these alcohol-induced causes per 100,000
people, an increase of 37 percent since 2002.

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/TXJKur-

cQ3m4AF9lqk_kkjfemkk=/3x2/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

This tally of alcohol-induced fatalities excludes deaths from drunk driving,
other accidents, and homicides committed under the influence of alcohol. If
those numbers were included the annual toll of deaths directly or indirectly
caused by alcohol would be closer to 90,000, according to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.

In recent years, public health experts have focused extensively on overdose
deaths from heroin and prescription painkillers, which have risen rapidly
since the early 2000s. But in 2014, more people died from alcohol-induced
causes (30,722) than from overdoses of prescription painkillers and heroin
combined (28,647), according to the CDC.

Philip J. Cook, a Duke University professor who studies alcohol consumption
patterns and their effects, notes that per-capita alcohol consumption has been
increasing since the late 1990s.

"Since the prevalence of heavy drinking tends to follow closely with per
capita consumption, it is likely that one explanation for the growth in
alcohol-related deaths is that more people are drinking more," he wrote in an
email.

The number of American adults who drink at least monthly rose by a small but
significant amount between 2002 and 2014 -- from 54.9 percent to 56.9 percent
-- according to data from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration. The change has been especially pronounced among women. The
percent of women drinking monthly or more rose from 47.9 in 2002 to 51.9 in
2014. And the percentage of women reporting binge drinking -- defined as five
or more drinks on at least one occasion -- rose from 15.7 to 17.4 percent over
the same period.

Cook notes that when you adjust the alcohol fatality rates for age, the
increase narrows somewhat. That's because older Americans are at more risk for
alcohol-induced diseases, like cirrhosis, and the American population has
gotten older over the past several decades. Once you adjust for age, the
increase in alcohol-deaths "could plausibly be accounted for by the growth in
per capita consumption," Cook said.

The heaviest drinkers are at the greatest risk for the alcohol-induced causes
of mortality charted above. And some drinkers consume plenty of alcohol
indeed. Prior research by Cook indicates that the top 10 percent of American
adults consume the lion's share of alcohol in this country -- close to 74
drinks a week on average.

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/TXJKur-

cQ3m4AF9lqk_kkjfemkk=/3x2/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)  
Drink icons via Gabriela Muniz, The Noun Project

For people who drink less, alcohol's effects on health are less clear-cut. A
large body of research seems to indicate that moderate alcohol consumption --
around a drink or two a day -- is associated with decreased risk of mortality.

But with alcohol, the line between "moderate use" and "dangerous use" can be a
thin one. A recent study quantified the risk of death associated with the use
of a variety of common recreational drugs. They found that at the level of
individual use, alcohol was the deadliest substance, followed by heroin and
cocaine. The reason? The ratio between a toxic dose and a typical dose is
extremely narrow with alcohol. If you're happily buzzed at say, three drinks,
three more might make you sick, and three after that may put you in alcohol
poisoning territory.

For this reason, some researchers are starting to urge public health officials
to focus more on the dangers posed by alcohol, and less on the dangers of less
toxic drugs, like marijuana and LSD. One way to rein in problem drinking would
be to simply raise federal alcohol taxes, which are currently at historically
low levels.

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham Christopher Ingraham writes about all things data. He
previously worked at the Brookings Institution and the Pew Research Center.
Follow __

Market Watch

Dow 25,720.66

Today 0.71%

S&P 2,843.49

Today 0.61%

NASDAQ 7,615.55

Today 0.53%

Last Updated:06/06/2019

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed youâ€™re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

