

Jump directly to the content

The Sun, A News UK CompanyClose

## Your Sun

  * Sign in

## Editions

  * Scottish Sun
  * Irish Sun
  * Sun Bingo
  * Dream Team

News Corp is a network of leading companies in the worlds of diversified
media, news, education, and information services.

## Follow The Sun

  *     * 

## The Sun

  * The Scottish Sun
  * The Irish Sun
  * Dream Team
  * Sun Bingo
  * Hols from £9.50
  * Superdays
  * Sun Savers
  * Sun Gifts

## News Corp

  * WSJ.com
  * New York Post
  * The Australian
  * News.com.au
  * Storyful
  * Harper Collins
  * Realtor.com
  * talkSPORT

## Services

  * Sign Up To The Sun
  * About Us
  * Editorial Complaints
  * Clarifications and Corrections
  * News Licensing
  * Advertising
  * Contact Us
  * Commissioning Terms
  * Help Hub
  * Topic A-Z
  * Sell Your Story
  * Cookie Settings

TOP

![The Sun](https://www.thesun.co.uk/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/sunmasthead_desktop_0404.jpg)![The

Sun](https://www.thesun.co.uk/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/sunmasthead_mobile_site_of_the_year.png)

Sign in

UK Edition

  * Scottish Sun
  * Irish Sun
  * Sun Bingo
  * Dream Team

Search

![The Sun](https://www.thesun.co.uk/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/sunmasthead_mobile_site_of_the_year.png)

  * Home
  * Football
  * Sport
  * TV & Showbiz
  * News
  * Fabulous
  * Money
  * Motors
  * Travel
  * Tech
  * Dear Deidre
  * Puzzles
  * Vouchers
  * Topics A-Z

All Football

  * All News
  * UK News
  * World News
  * Brexit
  * Politics
  * Opinion
  * Health News

CHILD DEALERS

# Kids as young as 11 arrested for selling cannabis as dealers use ‘child

mules’ to peddle drugs

The prosecutions of under-18s for possession with intent to supply increased
5.5 per cent in the past five years

  * By Alahna Kindred

  * 12 Sep 2018, 0:20

  * Updated: 12 Sep 2018, 2:44

KIDS as young as 11 are being arrested for selling cannabis as drug dealers
are using them as “child mules”.

More under-18s are being prosecuted for selling the drugs as the number of
adult dealers being taken to court is falling.

![ More under-18s are being prosecuted for selling cannabis than over-18s

\(stock image\)](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"

viewBox="0 0 1.5 1"%3E%3C/svg%3E)

1

More under-18s are being prosecuted for selling cannabis than over-18s (stock
image)Credit: Getty - Contributor

The Times asked police forces for the ages of children that had been arrested
or cautioned for possessing cannabis with intent to supply in the last six
years.

Hampshire said it had taken action against an 11-year-old and two 12-year-
olds, and Avon and Somerset had dealt with an 11-year-old.

Furthermore, West Midlands and South Wales both arrested three 12-year-olds.

In a separate report published by a drugs think tank, it shows that the
prosecutions of under-18s for possession with intent to supply increased by
5.5 per cent over five years.

Furthermore, in the same report by Volteface it shows that the number of
over-18s prosecuted fell by 22 per cent.

Volteface said this could “indicate that more young people are being exploited
by adults to deal cannabis on their behalf”.

The report recognises that adults are the most likely suppliers of cannabis to
young people because they have the money and ability to grow large amounts
themselves.

However, they are increasingly evading being caught by police whereas young
people are more visible “congregating on the streets or dealing cannabis on
their bikes”.

It adds: “More adults are getting away with dealing cannabis, while young
people are increasingly being criminalised for it”.

### MOST READ IN NEWS

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Exclusive

### IT COULD BE SUE

Boozy £4m Lotto winners 'sue' Camelot as they refuse to pay confirmed win

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

### FACE THE MUSIC

Speedboat killer Jack Shepherd to spend 10 YEARS in jail after barman attack

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Warning

### TORN OFF

Tiger rips off man's right arm and left hand as he gave beast BATH at Vietnam
zoo

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

### EMPTY LOTT

£148m EuroMillions winner's farm lies deserted as he struggles to sell it

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

### 'WORST OF THE WORST'

Lee Rigby killers 'beaten up by gangster in jail over all night chats'

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

### PERV SIR

Teacher started affair with teen pupil just FOUR WEEKS into his career

For teenagers, selling cannabis is “a viable option to make money and obtain
status among their peers”.

A national Survation poll of young people aged 16 or 17 shows that cannabis
was more accessible to school-aged children than alcohol.

The poll was commissioned by Volteface and found that more than two fifths of
young cannabis users said it was easy to get the drug.

* * *

**We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team?
Email us attips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on
07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.**

* * *

  *     * 

__

### Most Popular

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Exclusive

## IT COULD BE SUE

Boozy £4m Lotto winners 'sue' Camelot as they refuse to pay confirmed win

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## ‘UNTHINKABLE’

Country star Granger Smith’s heartbreak after son, 3, dies in tragic accident

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## HOUSE ABOUT IT

Martin Lewis urges first-time buyers to open a Help to Buy Isa NOW

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## GOLLY, MOLLY

Love Island fans mock Lucie's face of thunder as Tommy lands date with Molly

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## strapped up

Love Island 2019's Lucie Donlan sizzles in VERY sexy bondage-inspired shoot

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## ROASTED TO DEATH

Baby dies after being left in 35C car on drive for 16 hours by her parents

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## FACE THE MUSIC

Speedboat killer Jack Shepherd to spend 10 YEARS in jail after barman attack

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## EMPTY LOTT

£148m EuroMillions winner's farm lies deserted as he struggles to sell it

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

## NOT QUITE, NIGE

Labour wins Peterborough by-election as Farage's Brexit Party falls short

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Exclusive

## THE FINAL STRAW

Sex with world's fattest man was great — but a loaf of bread split us up

### Follow The Sun

### Services

  * Sign Up To The Sun
  * About Us
  * Editorial Complaints
  * Clarifications and Corrections
  * News Licensing
  * Advertising
  * Contact Us
  * Commissioning Terms
  * Help Hub
  * Topic A-Z
  * Sell Your Story
  * Cookie Settings

(C)News Group Newspapers Limited in England No. 679215 Registered office: 1
London Bridge Street, London, SE1 9GF. "The Sun", "Sun", "Sun Online" are
registered trademarks or trade names of News Group Newspapers Limited. This
service is provided on News Group Newspapers' Limited's Standard Terms and
Conditions in accordance with our Privacy & Cookie Policy. To inquire about a
licence to reproduce material, visit our Syndication site. View our online
Press Pack. For other inquiries, Contact Us. To see all content on The Sun,
please use the Site Map. The Sun website is regulated by the Independent Press
Standards Organisation (IPSO)

Our journalists strive for accuracy but on occasion we make mistakes. For
further details of our complaints policy and to make a complaint please click
here.

![](//www.facebook.com/tr?id=752905198150451&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

