

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods Blog About Follow DONATE

Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

About

Follow

My Account __

Log in View Account Log out

Donate

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-standard.svg)

__

__

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-white-alt.svg)

__

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods

  * Publications
  * Topics
  * Datasets
  * Interactives
  * Fact Tank
  * Experts

__

  * Main

More __

FactTank-logos

### NEWS IN THE NUMBERS

May 2, 2018

__

* * *

# America’s incarceration rate is at a two-decade low

By John Gramlich

The U.S. incarceration rate fell in 2016 to its lowest level in 20 years,
according to new data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), the
statistical arm of the Department of Justice. Despite the decline, the United
States incarcerates a larger share of its population than any other country.

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/FT_18.04.27_IncarcerationRate-1.png)At the end of
2016, there were about 2.2 million people behind bars in the U.S., including
1.5 million under the jurisdiction of federal and state prisons and roughly
741,000 in the custody of locally run jails. That amounts to a nationwide
incarceration rate of 860 prison or jail inmates for every 100,000 adults ages
18 and older.

The nation’s incarceration rate peaked at 1,000 inmates per 100,000 adults
during the three-year period between 2006 and 2008. It has declined every year
since then and is now at its lowest point since 1996, when there were 830
inmates per 100,000 adults.

The _number_ of inmates in the U.S. has also gone down in recent years, though
not as sharply as the incarceration rate (which takes population change into
account). The estimated 2,162,400 inmates who were in prison or jail at the
end of 2016 were the fewest since 2004, when there were 2,136,600 inmates. The
prison and jail population peaked in 2008 at 2,310,300.

A variety of factors help explain why U.S. incarceration trends have been on a
downward trajectory. Crime rates have declined sharply in recent decades
despite an uptick in the violent crime rate between 2014 and 2016, according
to FBI data. As crime has declined, so have arrests: The nationwide arrest
rate has fallen steadily in recent years and is well below where it was in the
1990s, according to BJS.

Changes in prosecution and judicial sentencing patterns, as well as criminal
laws, also may play a role in the declining number and share of people behind
bars. Recent reductions in prison sentences for thousands of inmates who were
serving time for drug-related crimes, for example, have driven a substantial
decline in the federal prison population. That, in turn, has contributed to
the broader decline in the overall incarcerated population.

Despite these downward trends, the U.S. has the highest incarceration rate in
the world, according to the World Prison Brief, a database maintained by the
Institute for Criminal Policy Research at Birkbeck, University of London. The
database compares incarceration rates across more than 200 countries and
territories using publicly available data for each jurisdiction. (It’s
important to note that the World Prison Brief’s U.S. data differ in some ways
from the BJS data above. While BJS emphasizes the number of inmates per
100,000 adults ages 18 and older, for example, the World Prison Brief measures
each country’s incarceration rate as the number of inmates per 100,000 people
_of any age_. It also counts jail inmates in a slightly different way.)

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/FT_18.04.27_IncarcerationRate_map.png) The World
Prison Brief’s data put the U.S. incarceration rate at 655 inmates per 100,000
people, which is nearly 7% higher than the rate of the next-closest country,
El Salvador (614 inmates per 100,000 people), and far higher than the rates of
other heavily populated nations, including Russia (415 inmates per 100,000
people) and Brazil (324 per 100,000). Incarceration rates in Western Europe
are less than a quarter of the U.S. rate: In England and Wales, there are 142
inmates for every 100,000 people, while France and Germany incarcerate 102 and
77 people, respectively, for every 100,000 residents.

In addition to its high rate of incarceration, the U.S. also has the largest
overall number of people behind bars. The more than 2 million jail and prison
inmates in the U.S. are far more than are reported in China (approximately 1.6
million inmates) and Brazil (about 673,000 inmates). In China and some other
countries, however, data limitations make direct comparisons with the U.S.
tricky. The World Prison Brief notes, for instance, that China’s total
excludes inmates being held in “administrative detention” – a type of
confinement that may house more than 650,000 additional people. Adding an
additional 650,000 inmates to China’s total would place it ahead of the U.S.
in terms of total incarcerated population.

Topic:

Criminal Justice

Share this link:

__

* * *

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/Gramlich_John.jpg?w=200)

John Gramlich _is a a writer/editor at Pew Research Center._

POSTS BIO TWITTER EMAIL

donate-icon

### MAKE A FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO SUPPORT OUR WORK

DONATE

##### About Fact Tank

Real-time analysis and news about data from Pew Research Center writers and
social scientists.

Twitter RSS Archive

##### Related

Pew Research CenterApril 30, 2019

The gap between the number of blacks and whites in prison is shrinking

Fact TankSeptember 6, 2013

Incarceration gap widens between whites and blacks

Fact TankJune 21, 2013

Sesame Street reaches out to 2.7 million American children with an
incarcerated parent

Fact TankAugust 2, 2013

Chart of the week: The problem of prison overcrowding

Social TrendsApril 11, 2017

U.S. private prison population has declined in recent years

##### Popular on Fact Tank

Fact TankJanuary 17, 2019

Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins

Fact TankSeptember 6, 2018

Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator

Fact TankNovember 28, 2018

5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

Fact TankNovember 30, 2018

Key findings about U.S. immigrants

Fact TankApril 5, 2017

Christians remain world’s largest religious group, but they are declining in
Europe

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-alt.svg)  
1615 L St. NW, Suite 800  
Washington, DC 20036  
USA  
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main  
(+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax  
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries

##### Research Areas

U.S. Politics & Policy Journalism & Media Internet & Technology Science &
Society Religion & Public Life Hispanic Trends Global Attitudes & Trends
Social & Demographic Trends Methods

##### Follow Us

__Email Newsletters __Facebook __Twitter __Tumblr __YouTube __RSS

**About Pew Research Center** Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank
that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the
world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content
analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does
not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.

Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy
Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers

We need to confirm your email address

To complete the subscription process, please click the link in the email we
just sent you.

Cancel

OK

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

