

  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to "About this site"
  * Skip to section menu

  * Canada.ca

  * Services
  * Departments
  * ## Language selection

    * Fran√ßais

## Search and menus

  * Search and menus

Department of Justice

## Search

Search website Search

### Notice to readers:

There have been recent reports of fraudulent phone calls that appear to be
from the Department of Justice. Learn more.

## Topics menu

  * Family Law
  * Criminal Justice
  * Funding
  * Canada's System of Justice
  * Laws

## Breadcrumb trail

  1. Home
  2. Criminal Justice
  3. Cannabis Laws and Regulations

# Cannabis Legalization and Regulation

**Cannabis is now legal.**

The _Cannabis Act_ creates a strict legal framework for controlling the
production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across Canada. The
Act aims to accomplish 3 goals:

  * keep cannabis out of the hands of youth
  * keep profits out of the pockets of criminals
  * protect public health and safety by allowing adults access to legal cannabis

## What is legal as of October 17, 2018

Subject to provincial or territorial restrictions, adults who are 18 years of
age or older are legally able to:

  * possess up to 30 grams of legal cannabis, **dried or equivalent** in non-dried form in public
  * share up to 30 grams of legal cannabis with other adults
  * buy dried or fresh cannabis and cannabis oil from a provincially-licensed retailer 
    * in provinces and territories without a regulated retail framework, individuals are able to purchase cannabis online from federally-licensed producers
  * grow, from licensed seed or seedlings, up to 4 cannabis plants per residence for personal use 
  * make cannabis products, such as food and drinks, at home as long as organic solvents are not used to create concentrated products

Cannabis edible products and concentrates will be legal for sale approximately
one year after the _Cannabis Act_ came into force on October 17th, 2018.

### Possession limits for cannabis products

The possession limits in the _Cannabis Act_ are based on dried cannabis.
Equivalents were developed for other cannabis products to identify what their
possession limit would be.

One (1) gram of dried cannabis is equal to:

  * 5 grams of fresh cannabis
  * 15 grams of edible product 
  * 70 grams of liquid product 
  * 0.25 grams of concentrates (solid or liquid)
  * 1 cannabis plant seed

This means, for example, that an adult 18 years of age or older, can legally
possess 150 grams of **fresh cannabis**.

### Cannabis for medical purposes

The current regime for medical cannabis will continue to allow access to
cannabis for people who have the authorization of their healthcare provider.

## Protecting youth

The _Cannabis Act_ has several measures that help prevent youth from accessing
cannabis. These include both age restrictions and restricting promotion of
cannabis.

### Age restrictions

No person may sell or provide cannabis to any person under the age of 18.
There are 2 criminal offences related to providing cannabis to youth, with
maximum penalties of 14 years in jail:

  * giving or selling cannabis to youth
  * using a youth to commit a cannabis-related offence

### Restricting promotion and enticement

The _Cannabis Act_ helps discourage youth cannabis use by prohibiting:

  * products that are appealing to youth
  * packaging or labelling cannabis in a way that makes it appealing to youth
  * selling cannabis through self-service displays or vending machines
  * promoting cannabis, except in narrow circumstances where young people could not see the promotion

Penalties for violating these prohibitions include a fine of up to $5 million
or 3 years in jail.

## Protecting public health

The Act protects public health through creating strict safety and quality
regulations. In addition, public education efforts are currently underway to
raise awareness about safety measures and any potential health risks.

### Strict regulation

Federal, provincial and territorial governments share responsibility for
overseeing the cannabis regulation system.

The Federal government's responsibilities are to set:

  * strict requirements for producers who grow and manufacture cannabis
  * industry-wide rules and standards, including: 
    * types of cannabis products available for sale
    * packaging and labelling requirements for products
    * standardized serving sizes and potency
    * prohibitions on the use of certain ingredients
    * good production practices
    * tracking requirements of cannabis from seed to sale to keep it out of the illegal market
    * restrictions on promotional activities

Provinces and territories are responsible for developing, implementing,
maintaining and enforcing systems to oversee the distribution and sale of
cannabis. They are also able to add their own safety measures, such as:

  * increasing the minimum age in their province or territory (but not lowering it)
  * lowering the personal possession limit in their jurisdiction
  * creating additional rules for growing cannabis at home, such as lowering the number of plants per residence
  * restricting where adults can consume cannabis, such as in public or in vehicles

Be sure to check local laws in your province.

### Public education

The Government of Canada has committed close to $46 million over the next five
years for cannabis public education and awareness activities. These are to
inform Canadians, especially youth, of the health and safety risks of cannabis
consumption.

## Reducing criminal activity

Statistics Canada reports that in 2017, almost 48,000 cannabis-related drug
offences were reported to police. The majority of these (80%) were possession
offences. A criminal record resulting from a cannabis offence, even a minor
possession charge, can have serious and lifelong implications for the person
charged. In allowing the production and possession of legal cannabis for
adults, the Act helps keep Canadians who consume cannabis out of the criminal
justice system, reducing the burden on the courts.

### Criminal penalties

Cannabis offences target those acting outside of the legal framework, such as
organized crime. Penalties are set in proportion to the seriousness of the
offence. Sanctions range from warnings and tickets for minor offences to
criminal prosecution and imprisonment for more serious offences. Some offences
specifically target people who make cannabis available to youth.

Offence | Penalties  
---|---  
Possession over the limit |

  * tickets for small amounts
  * up to 5 years in jail

Illegal distribution or sale |

  * tickets for small amounts
  * up to 14 years in jail

Producing cannabis beyond personal cultivation limits or with combustible
solvents |

  * tickets for small amounts
  * up to 14 years in jail

Taking cannabis across Canada's borders |

  * up to 14 years in jail

Giving or selling cannabis to a person under 18 |

  * up to 14 years in jail

Using a youth to commit a cannabis-related offence |

  * up to 14 years in jail

Further penalties related to cannabis-impaired driving are also included in
Canada's impaired driving legislation, along with impairment rules for other
drugs such as:

  * LSD
  * heroin
  * cocaine
  * psilocybin (magic mushrooms)

### More information

Please visit Cannabis in Canada for more information on cannabis:

  * safety risks
  * health effects
  * transportation
  * licensed production

Date modified:

    
    
     2018-10-17
    

## Section menu

### Criminal Justice

  * Transforming the Criminal Justice System
  * State of the Criminal Justice System
  * Restorative Justice
  * Youth Justice
  * Victims
  * Family Violence
  * Criminal Conviction Review
  * Human Trafficking
  * War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity
  * Cannabis Laws and Regulations
  * Impaired Driving Laws
  * Medical Assistance in Dying
  * National Security
  * Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance

## About this site

  * Terms and conditions
  * Transparency

### Contact us

  * Policy on Legal Assistance
  * Service on the Crown 
  * Guide to Canadian Legal Information
  * Help
  * Helpful Links

### About us

  * The Minister and Attorney General
  * Organization
  * Acts and Regulations
  * Careers and Articling 
  * Reports and Publications
  * Sustainable Development

### News

  * News Releases
  * Backgrounders
  * Judicial Appointments
  * Statements
  * Speeches
  * Media Advisories
  * Video and Photo Gallery

### Stay connected

  * Facebook
  * RSS
  * Twitter
  * YouTube
  * LinkedIn
  * Public Consultations

## Government of Canada footer

  * Health
  * Travel
  * Service Canada
  * Jobs
  * Economy
  * Canada.ca

![DCSIMG](//j1.justice.gc.ca/dcscyn5rz4ihvq3a2tocskysr_9e8e/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=9.4.0&dcssip=www.justice.gc.ca)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

