

  * Billionaires 

    * All Billionaires 
    * World's Billionaires 
    * Forbes 400 
    * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
    * China's Richest 
    * India's Richest 
    * Indonesia's Richest 
    * Korea's Richest 
    * Thailand's Richest 
    * Japan's Richest 
    * Australia's Richest 
    * Taiwan's Richest 
    * Singapore's Richest 
    * Philippines' Richest 
    * Hong Kong's Richest 
    * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation 

    * All Innovation 

    * AI & Big Data 
    * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
    * Cloud 100 2018 
    * Consumer Tech 
    * Cybersecurity 
    * Enterprise & Cloud 
    * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
    * Games 
    * Green Tech 
    * Healthcare 
    * Oracle BrandVoice 
    * SAP BrandVoice 
    * Science 
    * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
    * Sharing Economy 
    * Social Media 
    * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership 

    * All Leadership 

    * Careers 
    * CMO Network 
    * Crowe BrandVoice 
    * Deloitte BrandVoice 
    * Diversity & Inclusion 
    * Education 
    * Entrepreneurs 
    * ForbesWomen 
    * Franchises 
    * Leadership Strategy 
    * Small Business 
    * Under 30 
    * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money 

    * All Money 

    * Banking & Insurance 
    * Crypto & Blockchain 
    * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
    * Fintech 
    * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
    * Investing 
    * Markets 
    * Personal Finance 
    * Retirement 
    * Taxes 
    * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
    * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer 

    * All Consumer 

    * Food & Drink 
    * Hollywood & Entertainment 
    * Media 
    * Real Estate 
    * Retail 
    * SportsMoney 
    * Industry 

    * All Industry 

    * Aerospace & Defense 
    * Energy 
    * Flexport BrandVoice 
    * Manufacturing 
    * Policy 
    * Transportation 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle 

    * All Lifestyle 

    * Arts 
    * Boats & Planes 
    * Capital One BrandVoice 
    * Cars & Bikes 
    * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
    * Dining & Drinking 
    * Forbes Travel Guide 
    * ForbesLife 
    * Watches & Jewelry 
    * Travel 
    * Vices 
    * BrandVoice 

    * AppDynamics 

    * Capital One 
    * Cole Haan 
    * Crowe 
    * Deloitte 
    * ExtraHop 
    * Flexport 
    * Impact Partners 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
    * Oracle 
    * SAP 
    * ServiceNow 
    * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor 

    * All Advisor 

    * Credit Cards 
    * Personal Loans 
    * Brokerage 
    * Checking Accounts 
    * Savings Accounts 
    * More 

    * 30 Under 30 2019 

    * Daily Dozen Briefing 
    * Forbes8 
    * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
    * Forbes Editors' Picks 
    * Forbes Finds 
    * Forbes Insights: AI 
    * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
    * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
    * Forbes Video 
    * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
    * Newsletters 
    * Tech MD 
    * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work 

# Violent Crime Has Dropped In Border States With Legal Cannabis: Study

![Janet

Burns](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7003ff5e42373da2aedebfee8323de2a?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Janet Burns

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

I cover AI, cybersecurity, culture, drugs, and more.

  * Share to facebook __
  * Share to twitter __
  * Share to linkedin __

Mexican soldiers burn marijuana plants found amid a field of blue agave, the
plant used for the production of tequila, in El Llano, Hostotipaquillo,
Jalisco State, Mexico on September 27, 2012. (Credit: HECTOR
GUERRERO/AFP/GettyImages)

A new study suggests that legalized cannabis may already be reducing violence
in states that border Mexico, where U.S.-bound drug trafficking has caused
countless deaths and raised trillions for cartels.

Published this month in _The Economic Journal,_ the study "Is Legal Pot
Crippling Mexican Drug Trafficking Organizations? The Effect of Medical
Marijuana Laws on US Crime" examined the crime rates of states along the
Mexican border in relation to states' decisions to legalize cannabis for
production and consumption.

According to the study, violent crime in such states has fallen by an average
of 13% since legal cannabis was put on the books, and at even higher rates
regarding homicide. Researchers suggest that the drop can be attributed to
cannabis users no longer having to rely on black-market products from Mexico,
which has been providing the bulk of cannabis products consumed in the U.S.
for decades.

**See also: Will New York Finally Consider Legalizing Cannabis This Week?**

Economist Evelina Gavrilova, one of the study’s authors, explained to _The
Guardian _ that cannabis laws in these states have allowed local farmers and
dispensaries to provide users with the products they need in a legal way,
putting a direct dent in cartels' U.S. business.

“These growers are in direct competition with Mexican drug cartels that are
smuggling the marijuana into the U.S. As a result, the cartels get much less
business," Gavrilova told _The Guardian_. In turn, less violent crime seems to
result from that smuggling — on our side of the border, at least, but
hopefully both.

“[Cartels] compete for territory, but it’s also easy to steal product from the
other cartels and sell it themselves, so they fight for the product ... and
ensure there are no bystanders, no witnesses to the activities of the cartel,"
she said. “Whenever there is a medical marijuana law we observe that crime at
the border decreases because suddenly there is a lot less smuggling and a lot
less violence associated with that.”

**See also: WHO Report Finds No Public Health Risks Or Abuse Potential For
CBD**

Activists march along Reforma Avenue in Mexico City on May 6, 2017 demanding
the decriminalization and depenalization of marijuana. (Credit: YURI
CORTEZ/AFP/Getty Images)

To investigate whether violent crime rates had dwindled in border states in
recent years, researchers Floris Zoutman, Takuma Kamada and Gavrilova looked
at FBI uniform crime reports and supplementary homicide data from between 1994
and 2012.

Among U.S. states bordering Mexico that have medical marijuana laws (MMLs),
they found that California saw the highest overall reduction in violent crime,
at 15%, and Arizona the lowest, with a 7% drop.

Overall, robberies fell by 19% in border states with MMLs, murder dropped by
10%, and homicides related to the drug trade fell by an impressive 41%.

**See also: Mexico Casually One-Ups U.S. By Legalizing Medicinal Marijuana**

In recent years, numerous studies have sought to quantify the impacts of MMLs
in the growing number of U.S. states that have created them. Among other
things, researchers have probed potential changes in teenage use, driving
under the influence, and hospitalization for cannabis use.

The long-term effects of cannabis legalization have yet to be shown, but data
suggest that Mexican cartels have already been feeling the pressure.

As _The Guardian _reported, experts believe that some cartels may be trying to
open their own legal operations in California, and speculate that others are
working to "shore up their falling profits" through human trafficking,
kidnapping, and cultivating more poppy plants for a heroin supply that's
closer to home.

**See also: Vast Review Of Cannabis Research Finds Medical, Legal Answers --
And Lack Thereof**

The study's authors also noted, "The reduction in crime is strongest for
counties close to the border (less than 350 km) and for crimes that relate to
drug trafficking. In addition, we find that MMLs in inland states lead to a
reduction in crime in the nearest border state."

"Our results are consistent with the theory that decriminalization of the
production and distribution of marijuana leads to a reduction in violent crime
in markets that are traditionally controlled by Mexican drug trafficking
organizations," the researchers wrote.

**See also: Bipartisan REFER Act Targets Sessions' War On Cannabis In High
Style**

_Janet Burns covers tech, culture, and other fun stuff from Brooklyn, NY. She
also hosts_ _ the cannabis news podcast The Toke._

![Janet

Burns](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7003ff5e42373da2aedebfee8323de2a?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Janet Burns

Contributor

I'm a freelance writer covering tech, media, science, and culture. My
background includes the areas of writing, editing, and education, and I
received Bachelor and Maste...

Read More

  * Print
  * Site Feedback
  * Tips
  * Corrections
  * Reprints & Permissions
  * Terms
  * Privacy

  * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.

  * AdChoices

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

