

Call It Reefer Magic? FDA-Approved Cannabis-Based Drug Epidiolex Now for Sale
in All 50 States

  * Subscribe

  * Home

  * Subscribe

![Subscribe](http://subscription-

assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

Close

  * 40 Under 40 
  * 100 Best Companies to Work For 
  * Fortune 500 
  * Global 500 
  * Most Powerful Women 
  * World's 50 Greatest Leaders 
  * World's Most Admired Companies 
  * All Rankings 

  * Automotive 

  * Careers 
  * Commentary 
  * Design 
  * Energy 
  * Entertainment 
  * Finance 
  * Health 
  * Humor 
  * International 
  * Leadership 
  * Luxury 
  * Most Powerful Women 
  * Real Estate 
  * Retail 
  * Sports 
  * Technology 
  * The Ledger 
  * Travel 
  * Venture 
  * FORTUNE Communications 
  * Fortune Knowledge Group 
  * FORTUNE Membership 
  * Conferences 
  * Data Store 
  * Infographics 
  * Magazine 
  * Newsletters 
  * Photography 
  * Radio 

  * The 21st Century Corporation 

  * Brainstorm Reinvent 
  * Digital Health 
  * Discovering Luxury 
  * Innovation By Design 
  * Looking Forward 
  * Mastering the Market 
  * MPW Mentorship 
  * MPW Next Gen 
  * State of the Market 

  * About Us 

  * Subscribe 
  * Give a Gift 
  * Customer Service 
  * EU Customer Service 
  * Work at Fortune 

Stay Connected

  1. Briefing
  2. cannabis

# Call It Reefer Magic? FDA-Approved Cannabis-Based Drug Epidiolex Now for

Sale in All 50 States

By Brittany Shoot

November 1, 2018

Epidiolex, the first marijuana-based medication approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), officially became available for sale in
all 50 states Thursday. The cannabis-derived drug got the green light in June.

Manufactured by U.K.-based GW Pharmaceuticals, the cannabis drug is derived
from a plant that has been bred to have a high cannabidiol, or CBD, content.
It does not contain tetrahydrocannibinol, the THC part of weed that gets
people high.

Epidiolex can be prescribed to treat and reduce seizures associated with two
types of rare epileptic syndromes, Lennox-Gastaut and Dravet. These are most
commonly seen in children, beginning when they are between ages 3 and 5, and
the drug was developed after other treatments were not effective for all
patients. Most patients with these conditions have daily seizures and
sometimes have several every day. Epidiolex will be available for prescription
for kids ages 2 and up in an effort to curb the long-lasting effects of these
seizure disorders, which can cause children with either condition to
experience intellectual and developmental disabilities, and can also lead to a
child's death.

The FDA has previously approved pharmaceuticals made from synthetic
cannabinoids. GW Pharmaceuticals also makes another cannabis-derived drug,
Sativex, which contains both CBD and THC and is marketed to treat spasticity
(i.e. muscle stiffness and spasms) associated with multiple sclerosis.

### SPONSORED FINANCIAL CONTENT

![](http://assets.time.com/images/dianomi-logo.png)

### You May Like

### Read More

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much more.

SUBSCRIBE

EDIT POST

![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top2_205_thumb.jpg)

![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

### Subscribe & Save

Subscribe today and save 79% off the cover price.

SUBSCRIBE NOW

![](https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/fortune-newsletter-tout-

footer.png)

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much more.

SUBSCRIBE

  * 40 Under 40
  * 100 Best Companies to Work For
  * Fortune 500
  * Global 500
  * Most Powerful Women in Business
  * World's 50 Greatest Leaders
  * World's Most Admired Companies
  * Brainstorm Reinvent
  * All Rankings

  * Home

  * Automotive
  * Careers
  * Design
  * Energy & Environment
  * Executive Travel
  * Finance
  * Commentary

  * Health

  * International
  * Leadership
  * Luxury
  * Markets
  * Most Powerful Women
  * Retail
  * Sports

  * Technology

  * The Ledger
  * Venture
  * Photography
  * Podcasts
  * Videos
  * Newsletters
  * Magazine

  * Fortune Knowledge Group

  * Fortune Data Store
  * Fortune Conferences
  * Customer Service
  * EU Customer Service
  * Site Map
  * Privacy Policy
  * Advertising

  * About Us

  * Subscribe
  * Give a Gift
  * Ad Choices
  * Terms of Use
  * Your California Privacy Rights

(C) 2018 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site
constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy (Your California
Privacy Rights).  
Fortune may receive compensation for some links to products and services on
this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.  
Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Interactive Data.
ETF and Mutual Fund data provided by Morningstar, Inc. Dow Jones Terms &
Conditions: http://www.djindexes.com/mdsidx/html/tandc/indexestandcs.html.  
S&P; Index data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its
licensors. All rights reserved. Terms & Conditions. Powered and implemented by
Interactive Data Managed Solutions. | EU Data Subject Requests

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

