

This content does not have an English version.

This content does not have an Arabic version.

![Mayo

Clinic](https://www.mayoclinic.org/~/media/386AC346D62D46A4944E0923CAF00D28.svg)

Menu

Search

Search

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now

  * Log in to Patient Account

  * English

    * Español
    * Português
    * العربية
    * 中文
  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

  * Patient Care & Health Info

    * Patient Care & Health Info
    * Healthy Lifestyle
    * Symptoms A-Z
    * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
    * Tests & Procedures A-Z
    * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
    * Appointments
    * Patient & Visitor Guide
    * Billing & Insurance
    * Patient Online Services

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

patientcare.jpg) **Quality Care** _Find out why Mayo Clinic is the right place
for your health care._ Make an appointment.

  * Departments & Centers

    * Departments & Centers
    * Doctors & Medical Staff
    * Medical Departments & Centers
    * International Services
    * Research Centers & Programs
    * About Mayo Clinic
    * Contact Us

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

docsdepts.jpg) **Meet the Staff** _Find a directory of doctors and departments
at all Mayo Clinic campuses._ Visit now.

  * Research

    * Research
    * Explore Research Labs
    * Find Clinical Trials
    * Research Faculty
    * Postdoctoral Fellowships
    * Discovery's Edge Magazine
    * Search Publications
    * Training Grant Programs

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-research.jpg)
**Research and Clinical Trials** _See how Mayo Clinic research and clinical
trials advance the science of medicine and improve patient care._ Explore now.

  * Education

    * Education
    * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
    * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
    * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
    * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
    * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
    * Alumni Center

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-meded.jpg)
**Visit Our Schools** _Educators at Mayo Clinic train tomorrow’s leaders to
deliver compassionate, high-value, safe patient care._ Choose a degree.

  * For Medical Professionals

    * For Medical Professionals
    * Provider Relations
    * Referring Physician Portal
    * AskMayoExpert
    * Video Center
    * Publications
    * Continuing Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-medprofs.jpg)
**Professional Services** _Explore Mayo Clinic's many resources and see jobs
available for medical professionals._ Get updates.

  * Products & Services

    * Products & Services
    * Health Books
    * Healthy Living Program
    * International Advisory Services
    * Sports Medicine
    * Licensable Content
    * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
    * Medical Products and Stores
  * Giving to Mayo Clinic

    * Giving to Mayo Clinic
    * Give Now
    * Philanthropy in Action
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Contact Us to Give

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2018/04/25/20/54/globalnav-

transform-3col.jpg) **Philanthropy at Mayo Clinic** _Your support accelerates
powerful innovations in patient care, research and education._ Give today.

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now
  * Log in to Patient Account
  *     * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Pinterest
    * YouTube

Request an Appointment

  * Patient Care & Health Information
  * Diseases & Conditions

# Narcolepsy

  * Sections
  * Symptoms & causes
  * Diagnosis & treatment
  * Doctors & departments
  * Care at Mayo Clinic

Print

## Diagnosis

Your doctor may make a preliminary diagnosis of narcolepsy based on your
excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden loss of muscle tone (cataplexy). After
an initial diagnosis, your doctor may refer you to a sleep specialist for
further evaluation.

Formal diagnosis requires staying overnight at a sleep center for an in-depth
sleep analysis by sleep specialists. Methods of diagnosing narcolepsy and
determining its severity include:

  * **Sleep history.** Your doctor will ask you for a detailed sleep history. A part of the history involves filling out the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, which uses a series of short questions to gauge your degree of sleepiness. For instance, you indicate on a numbered scale how likely it is that you would doze off in certain situations, such as sitting down after lunch.
  * **Sleep records.** You may be asked to keep a detailed diary of your sleep pattern for a week or two, so your doctor can compare how your sleep pattern and alertness are related.

Often, in addition to this sleep log, the doctor will ask you to wear an
actigraph. This device has the look and feel of a wristwatch. It measures
periods of activity and rest and provides an indirect measure of how and when
you sleep.

  * **Polysomnography.** This test measures a variety of signals during sleep using electrodes placed on your scalp. For this test, you must spend a night at a medical facility. The test measures the electrical activity of your brain (electroencephalogram) and heart (electrocardiogram) and the movement of your muscles (electromyogram) and eyes (electro-oculogram). It also monitors your breathing.
  * **Multiple sleep latency test.** This examination measures how long it takes you to fall asleep during the day. You'll be asked to take four or five naps, each nap two hours apart. Specialists will observe your sleep patterns. People who have narcolepsy fall asleep easily and enter into rapid eye movement (REM) sleep quickly.

These tests can also help doctors rule out other possible causes of your signs
and symptoms. Other sleep disorders, such as chronic sleep deprivation, the
use of sedating medications and sleep apnea, can cause excessive daytime
sleepiness.

## Treatment

There is no cure for narcolepsy, but medications and lifestyle modifications
can help you manage the symptoms.

### Medications

Medications for narcolepsy include:

  * **Stimulants.** Drugs that stimulate the central nervous system are the primary treatment to help people with narcolepsy stay awake during the day. Doctors often try modafinil (Provigil) or armodafinil (Nuvigil) first for narcolepsy. Modafinil and armodafinil aren't as addictive as older stimulants and don't produce the highs and lows often associated with older stimulants. Side effects are uncommon, but may include headache, nausea or anxiety.

Some people need treatment with methylphenidate (Aptensio XR, Concerta,
Ritalin, others) or various amphetamines. These medications are very effective
but can be addictive. They may cause side effects such as nervousness and
heart palpitations.

  * **Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs).** Doctors often prescribe these medications, which suppress REM sleep, to help alleviate the symptoms of cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations and sleep paralysis. They include fluoxetine (Prozac, Sarafem, Selfemra) and venlafaxine (Effexor XR). Side effects can include weight gain, insomnia and digestive problems.
  * **Tricyclic antidepressants.** These older antidepressants, such as protriptyline (Vivactil), imipramine (Tofranil) and clomipramine (Anafranil), are effective for cataplexy, but many people complain of side effects, such as dry mouth and lightheadedness.
  * **Sodium oxybate (Xyrem).** This medication is highly effective for cataplexy. Sodium oxybate helps to improve nighttime sleep, which is often poor in narcolepsy. In high doses it may also help control daytime sleepiness. It must be taken in two doses, one at bedtime and one up to four hours later.

Xyrem can have side effects, such as nausea, bed-wetting and worsening of
sleepwalking. Taking sodium oxybate together with other sleeping medications,
narcotic pain relievers or alcohol can lead to difficulty breathing, coma and
death.

If you have other health problems, such as high blood pressure or diabetes,
ask your doctor how the medications you take for your other conditions may
interact with those taken for narcolepsy.

Certain over-the-counter drugs, such as allergy and cold medications, can
cause drowsiness. If you have narcolepsy, your doctor will likely recommend
that you avoid taking these medications.

Emerging treatments being investigated for narcolepsy include drugs acting on
the histamine chemical system, hypocretin replacement, hypocretin gene therapy
and immunotherapy, but further research is needed before any may be available
in your doctor's office.

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

## Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as
a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this disease.

## Lifestyle and home remedies

Lifestyle modifications are important in managing the symptoms of narcolepsy.
You may benefit from these steps:

  * **Stick to a schedule.** Go to sleep and wake up at the same time every day, including weekends.
  * **Take naps.** Schedule short naps at regular intervals during the day. Naps of 20 minutes at strategic times during the day may be refreshing and reduce sleepiness for one to three hours. Some people may need longer naps.
  * **Avoid nicotine and alcohol.** Using these substances, especially at night, can worsen your signs and symptoms.
  * **Get regular exercise.** Moderate, regular exercise at least four to five hours before bedtime may help you feel more awake during the day and sleep better at night.

## Coping and support

Dealing with narcolepsy can be challenging. Making adjustments in your daily
schedule may help. Consider these tips:

  * **Talk about it.** Tell your employer or teachers about your condition and work with them to find ways to accommodate your needs. This may include taking naps during the day, breaking up monotonous tasks, recording meetings or classes, standing during meetings or lectures, and taking brisk walks at various times throughout the day.

The Americans with Disabilities Act prohibits discrimination against workers
with narcolepsy and requires employers to provide reasonable accommodation to
qualified employees.

  * **Be safe.** If you must drive a long distance, work with your doctor to establish a medication schedule that ensures the greatest likelihood of wakefulness during your drive. Stop for naps and exercise breaks whenever you feel drowsy. Don't drive if you feel too sleepy.

Support groups and counseling can help you and your loved ones cope with
narcolepsy. Ask your doctor to help you locate a group or qualified counselor
in your area.

## Preparing for your appointment

You're likely to start by seeing your family doctor or a general practitioner.
However, in some cases when you call to set up an appointment, you may be
referred to a sleep specialist.

Here's some information to help you prepare for your appointment.

### What you can do

  * **Be aware of any pre-appointment restrictions.** At the time you make the appointment, be sure to ask if there's anything you need to do in advance.
  * **Write down any symptoms you're experiencing,** including any that may seem unrelated to the reason for which you scheduled the appointment.
  * **Write down key personal information,** including any major stresses or recent life changes.
  * **Make a list of all medications,** vitamins or supplements you're taking.
  * **Ask a family member or friend to go with you.** Sometimes it can be difficult to recall all the information you get during an appointment. Someone who accompanies you may remember something that you missed or forgot.
  * **Write down questions to ask** your doctor.

Preparing a list of questions for your doctor will help you make the most of
your time together. List your questions from most important to least
important. For narcolepsy, some basic questions to ask your doctor include:

  * What's the most likely cause of my symptoms?
  * Are there other possible causes?
  * What kinds of tests do I need?
  * Do I need a sleep study?
  * Is my condition likely temporary or long lasting?
  * What treatment do you recommend?
  * What are the alternatives to the primary approach you're suggesting?
  * I have these other health conditions. How can I best manage these conditions together?
  * Is there a generic alternative to the medicine you're prescribing?
  * Are there any brochures or other printed material that I can take home with me? What websites do you recommend?

Don't hesitate to ask other questions anytime during your appointment.

### What to expect from your doctor

Your doctor is likely to ask you a number of questions, including:

  * When did you begin experiencing symptoms?
  * Have your symptoms been continuous or occasional?
  * How often do you fall asleep during the day?
  * How severe are your symptoms?
  * Does anything improve your symptoms?
  * What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms?
  * Does anyone in your family have similar symptoms?

By Mayo Clinic Staff

Narcolepsy care at Mayo Clinic

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

Symptoms & causesDoctors & departments

Jan. 12, 2019

Print

Share on: FacebookTwitter

References

  1. AskMayoExpert. Narcolepsy. Rochester, Minn.: Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; 2018.
  2. Scammell TE. Narcolepsy. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;373:2654.
  3. Ferri FF. Narcolepsy. In: Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2019. Philadelphia, Pa.: Mosby Elsevier; 2019. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Aug. 18, 2018.
  4. Ropper AH, et al. Sleep and its abnormalities: Introduction. In: Adams and Victor's Principles of Neurology. 10th ed. New York, N.Y.: McGraw-Hill Education; 2014. https://www.accessmedicine.com. Accessed Aug. 31, 2018.
  5. Narcolepsy fact sheet. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/Patient-Caregiver-Education/Fact-Sheets/Narcolepsy-Fact-Sheet. Accessed Aug. 18, 2018.
  6. Scammell TE. Clinical features and diagnosis of narcolepsy. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Aug. 31, 2018.
  7. Brown AY. Allscripts EPSi. Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn. Aug. 8, 2018.
  8. Silber MH (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn. Sept. 23, 2018.

## Narcolepsy

  * Symptoms & causes
  * Diagnosis & treatment
  * Doctors & departments
  * Care at Mayo Clinic

## Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue
supports our not-for-profit mission.

**Advertising & Sponsorship**

  * Policy
  * Opportunities
  * Ad Choices

### Mayo Clinic Marketplace

Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic.

  * Live stronger, longer and healthier
  * 4 simple steps to a joy-filled life
  * Mayo Clinic on Arthritis
  * Stop osteoporosis in its tracks
  * The Mayo Clinic Diet

CON-20375479

  * Patient Care & Health Information
  * Diseases & Conditions
  * Narcolepsy

![Mayo Clinic](/styles/img/logo-mayoclinic.png)

  * Request Appointment
  * Contact Us
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Employees
  * Find a Job
  * Site Map
  * About This Site

  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit organization. Make a donation.

## Patient Care & Health Info

  * Healthy Lifestyle
  * Symptoms A-Z
  * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
  * Tests & Procedures A-Z
  * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
  * Appointments
  * Patient & Visitor Guide
  * Billing & Insurance
  * Patient Online Services

## Departments & Centers

  * Doctors & Medical Staff
  * Medical Departments & Centers
  * International Services
  * Research Centers & Programs
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Contact Us

## Research

  * Explore Research Labs
  * Find Clinical Trials
  * Research Faculty
  * Postdoctoral Fellowships
  * Discovery's Edge Magazine
  * Search Publications
  * Training Grant Programs

## Education

  * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
  * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
  * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
  * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
  * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
  * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
  * Alumni Center

## For Medical Professionals

  * Provider Relations
  * Referring Physician Portal
  * AskMayoExpert
  * Video Center
  * Publications
  * Continuing Medical Education
  * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

## Products & Services

  * Health Books
  * Healthy Living Program
  * International Advisory Services
  * Sports Medicine
  * Licensable Content
  * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
  * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
  * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
  * Medical Products and Stores

Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions
and Privacy Policy linked below.

  * Terms and Conditions
  * **Privacy Policy**
  * **Notice of Privacy Practices**
  * Notice of Nondiscrimination
  * Manage Cookies

A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal
use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy
Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct636199_hr1.gif) This
site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:  
verify here.

© 1998-2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All
rights reserved.

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

