

![Drugabuse.com Logo](https://drugabuse.com/wp-

content/themes/drugabuse-v2/img/da-white-logo-tagline.svg)

  * GENERAL INFORMATION 
    * Facts and Information 
    * Browse by Drug 
    * Media 
    * Infographics, Videos, and More 
    * Featured Media 
    * Expert Guides 
    * Frequently Asked Questions 
    * Substance Abuse FAQs 
    * Intervention FAQs 
    * Painkiller FAQs 
    * Detox FAQs 
    * Finding Help FAQs 
    * Why Are Drugs So Addictive? 
    * Alcohol 
    * Amphetamine 
    * Cocaine 
    * Crack 
    * Heroin 
    * Methamphetamine 
    * Opiates 
    * Painkillers 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * Tramadol 
    * Xanax 
    * Addiction Stigma 
    * Are You an Enabler? 
    * Famous Drug Abusers 
    * Workplace Drug Abuse 
    * Teen Drug Abuse 
  * DRUG EFFECTS 
    * Effects of Drugs 
    * Drug Withdrawal 
    * Overdose 
    * Drugs and Pregnancy 
    * Cocaine and Pregnancy 
    * Drinking while Pregnant 
    * Heroin and Pregnancy 
    * Marijuana and Pregnancy 
    * MDMA and Pregnancy 
    * Meth and Pregnancy 
    * Painkillers and Pregnancy 
    * Smoking while Pregnant 
  * GET HELP 
    * Find Help Now 
    * Screening: Are You Addicted? 
    * Hotlines 
    * Treatment Types 
    * Inpatient Treatment 
    * Outpatient Treatment 
    * Aftercare 
    * Addiction Therapies 
    * 5 Signs You Need Rehab Now 
    * Help a Loved One 
  * SIGNS OF DRUG ABUSE 
    * Signs and Symptoms 
    * Mixing Drugs and Alcohol 
  * ABOUT AAC 
  *     * Sections 
  * General Information 

    * Facts and Information 
    * Browse by Drug 
    * Media 
    * Infographics, Videos, and More 
    * Featured Media 
    * Expert Guides 
    * Frequently Asked Questions 
    * Substance Abuse FAQs 
    * Intervention FAQs 
    * Painkiller FAQs 
    * Detox FAQs 
    * Finding Help FAQs 
    * Why Are Drugs So Addictive? 
    * Alcohol 
    * Amphetamine 
    * Cocaine 
    * Crack 
    * Heroin 
    * Methamphetamine 
    * Opiates 
    * Painkillers 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * Tramadol 
    * Xanax 
    * Addiction Stigma 
    * Are You an Enabler? 
    * Famous Drug Abusers 
    * Workplace Drug Abuse 
    * Teen Drug Abuse 
  * Drug Effects 
    * Effects of Drugs 
    * Drug Withdrawal 
    * Overdose 
    * Drugs and Pregnancy 
    * Cocaine and Pregnancy 
    * Drinking while Pregnant 
    * Heroin and Pregnancy 
    * Marijuana and Pregnancy 
    * MDMA and Pregnancy 
    * Meth and Pregnancy 
    * Painkillers and Pregnancy 
    * Smoking while Pregnant 
  * Get Help 
    * Find Help Now 
    * Screening: Are You Addicted? 
    * Hotlines 
    * Treatment Types 
    * Inpatient Treatment 
    * Outpatient Treatment 
    * Aftercare 
    * Addiction Therapies 
    * 5 Signs You Need Rehab Now 
    * Help a Loved One 
  * Signs of Drug Abuse 
    * Signs and Symptoms 
    * Mixing Drugs and Alcohol 
  * About AAC 
  * Blog 
  * Forums 
  * Directory 

Overcome Your Addition Get Help Now.

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

# 4 Long-Term Effects of Smoking Marijuana

Authored By Lauren Villa, MPH

Leave a Comment :: Posted to: Drug Abuse, Drugs and Society

![person smoking a joint](https://drugabuse-

com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Effects-of-marijuana-1024x535-620x260.jpg)

Using marijuana may have serious long-term effects.

4 states—Alaska, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington—and Washington D.C. have
legalized marijuana. With these changes in policy, a big question on
everyone’s mind is, what are the long term effects of marijuana use? How does
marijuana use affect the body and mind over time? Is it safe?

Unfortunately, there isn’t a lot of research into the long-term effects of
marijuana. This makes it difficult to make conclusions about marijuana’s long-
term impact. However, we can look at research on animals and humans for more
information on how marijuana affects the mind and body.

Read on to learn more about the 4 Potential Long-Term Effects of Smoking
Marijuana.

## #1: Changes in Brain Function

It’s quite possible that **smoking marijuana could cause long-term changes in
your brain**.

The strongest chemical in marijuana, which comes from the cannabis plant, is
delta-9-tetrahdrocannabinol (THC). When you smoke marijuana, THC binds to
cannabinoid receptors in your brain.

In animal studies, when young rats were exposed to THC they had problems with
memory and learning later in their life (NIDA, 2016).

Another study found that when young rats were repeatedly exposed to marijuana
they had trouble forming new memories as they transitioned into adulthood. The
rats in this study also had more anxiety and less desire to interact socially
(O’Shea, Singh, McGregor, & Mallet, 2004).

What can we gather from studies like these? When your developing brain is
exposed to marijuana it could possibly cause long-term and permanent changes
to your cognitive functioning and behavior.

## #2: Lung Damage

As you may have guessed, **smoking marijuana can damage the lungs**. Although
some studies suggest that long-term marijuana use can have similar effects on
the lungs as cigarette smoking, we cannot make conclusions based on current
research.

A study conducted by researchers at the University of California, San
Francisco found that marijuana is not as damaging to the lungs as tobacco. In
their study, occasional marijuana use was not linked with damage to the lungs.
However, their study did suggest that heavier marijuana use may increase the
risk for lung damage, but they did not have enough heavy marijuana smokers in
their study to make that conclusion (Pletcher et al. 2012). Limitations in
studies such as this are pretty common in the marijuana research community.

While their research doesn’t prove that smoking marijuana can lead to lung
cancer or serious lung damage, you’re still exposing your lungs to smoke,
which can lead to lung problems, such as chronic bronchitis.

## #3: Damage to the Reproductive System

**Marijuana may also affect your reproductive system, regardless of whether
you’re a male or female.**

With male infertility on the rise and 15% of couples unable to get pregnant
(Eisenberg, 2015), researchers are beginning to ask whether marijuana use
could be contributing factor (du Plessis et al., 2015). However due to a lack
of research into the topic, this remains unclear. (Noticing a trend yet?)

In animal studies, males exposed to marijuana produce less testosterone. And
in human studies, researchers have also found that THC negatively affects the
production of testosterone. THC has been found to reduce sperm motility, or a
sperm’s ability to swim properly, which also contributes to male infertility
(Fronczak, Kim, & Barqawi, 2012).

Researchers have found that marijuana has affects on female rats too. When
they were exposed to marijuana, the rats produced less female sex hormones,
like progesterone and estrogen. **If you’re a woman, producing less sex
hormones may lead to sexual dysfunction and your ovulation cycle may also be
affected.**

These studies of the effects of marijuana on female fertility have also been
inconclusive, and the research community does not known how much disruption of
the reproductive hormones is needed to result in changes in fertility and
sexual function.

Here’s another thing to remember if you’re female— **if you’re pregnant, heavy
marijuana use can be risky as THC can negatively affect fetal growth and
development** (Smith  & Asch, 1984).

## #4: Anxiety and Depression

If you’re an adolescent, you should be extra careful when smoking marijuana,
as you may be **prone to developing anxiety and depression**.

Human studies have found, to varying degrees, that early marijuana use is
associated with risk for anxiety and depression. However, the relationship is
complex and poorly understood.

Some studies suggest that if you carry certain genes you may be at increased
risk for developing a psychiatric disorder, like schizophrenia if you use
marijuana. Some studies also found that there are certain genes that make you
more prone to developing psychosis if you smoke marijuana. Not surprisingly,
the amount you smoke will increase your risk of psychosis. In fact, **the risk
for psychosis was 7 times higher for daily marijuana users** than less
frequent or non-users among these specific gene carriers (NIDA, 2016; Caspi et
al. 2005).

## Conclusion

More and more people, especially teens, are using marijuana. With an estimated
22.2 million current marijuana users aged 12 or older in the United States, it
is a concern that we have relatively limited information about how marijuana
affects the brain and a person’s susceptibility to psychiatric disorders.

According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) is funding a major longitudinal study that will
track a large cohort of young people and their marijuana use through adulthood
(NIDA, 2016). Not only will this study examine the long-term effects of
marijuana and THC, but it will provide insight on how the drug affects an
adolescent’s brain development.

### Sources

National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). (2016). _What are marijuana's long-
term effects on the brain?_

O’Shea, M., Singh, M. E., McGregor, I. S., & Mallet, P. E. (2004). Chronic
cannabinoid exposure produces lasting memory impairment and increased anxiety
in adolescent but not adult rats. _Journal of Psychopharmacology, 18_ (4),
502-508.

Pletcher, M. J., Vittinghoff, E., Kalhan, R., Richman, J., Safford, M.,
Sidney, S., … & Kertesz, S. (2012). _Association between marijuana exposure
and pulmonary function over 20 years. Jama, 307_ (2), 173-181.

Eisenberg, M. L. (2015). Invited Commentary: The Association Between Marijuana
Use and Male Reproductive Health. _American journal of epidemiology, 182_ (6),
482-484.

Jackson, N. J., Isen, J. D., Khoddam, R., Irons, D., Tuvblad, C., Iacono, W.
G., … & Baker, L. A. (2016). Impact of adolescent marijuana use on
intelligence: Results from two longitudinal twin studies. _Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences_ , 201516648.

Ford, K. A., Wammes, M., Neufeld, R. W., Mitchell, D., Théberge, J.,
Williamson, P., & Osuch, E. A. (2014). Unique functional abnormalities in
youth with combined marijuana use and depression: an fMRI study. _Frontiers in
psychiatry, 5_.

Fronczak, C. M., Kim, E. D., & Barqawi, A. B. (2012). The insults of illicit
drug use on male fertility. _Journal of andrology, 33_ (4), 515-528.

Okereke, C., & Onuoha, S. (2015). Effect of Ethanolic Extract of Cannabis
sativa on Progesterone and Estrogen Hormones in Female Wistar Rats.
_Reproductive System & Sexual Disorders_, 2015.

Smith, C. G., & Asch, R. H. (1984). Acute, short-term, and chronic effects of
marijuana on the female primate reproductive function. _NIDA Res Monogr,_ 44,
82-96.

Evins, A. E., Green, A. I., Kane, J. M., & Murray, R. M. (2013). Does using
marijuana increase the risk for developing schizophrenia. _J Clin Psychiatry,
74_ (4), e08.

Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Cannon, M., McClay, J., Murray, R., Harrington, H.,
… & Poulton, R. (2005). Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset cannabis
use on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O-
methyltransferase gene: longitudinal evidence of a gene X environment
interaction. _Biological psychiatry, 57_ (10), 1117-1127.

du Plessis, S. S., Agarwal, A., & Syriac, A. (2015). Marijuana,
phytocannabinoids, the endocannabinoid system, and male fertility. _Journal of
assisted reproduction and genetics, 32_ (11), 1575-1588.

### Related Posts:

  * ![Let’s Clear the Air About Secondhand Marijuana Smoke](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Copy-of-iStock_000009278592_Medium-150x150.jpg) Let's Clear the Air About Secondhand Marijuana Smoke
  * ![Can’t Sleep? Try Putting Down the Marijuana \(Seriously\)](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock79929303-Pot-Chases-the-Zs-Away-1-150x150.jpg)Can't Sleep? Try Putting Down the Marijuana…
  * ![New Bone Loss Study Points the Finger at Marijuana](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock5909599-Cannabis-Brittle-Bones-150x150.jpg)New Bone Loss Study Points the Finger at Marijuana
  * ![Wait…Marijuana Can Increase My Risk of Alzheimer’s??](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock489345462-marijuana-Alzheimer’s--150x150.jpg)Wait…Marijuana Can Increase My Risk of Alzheimer’s??
  * ![Guess What’s in Your Marijuana?](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock15958339-Spice-Aint-So-Nice1-150x150.jpg)Guess What's in Your Marijuana?
  * ![Hitting the Grass Ceiling: 6 Surprising Ways Weed is Sexist](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Is-Weed-Sexist-150x150.jpg)Hitting the Grass Ceiling: 6 Surprising Ways Weed is Sexist

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

  *     * Addicted? Get Help Today 
  * Find Treatment Programs To Help 

  * Forums Join The Conversation 

  * Blog Recent Articles 

Categories

  * Blog Mainpage 
  * Addiction in the News
  * Addiction Research
  * Alcoholism
  * Detox and Withdrawal
  * Drug Abuse
  * Drugs and Society
  * Drugs and the Law
  * Infographics
  * Prescription Drugs
  * Quizzes
  * Strange
  * Understanding Addiction

Substance Abuse Organizations

![SAMHSA, NIDA, NIAA, WADA](/wp-content/themes/drugabuse-v2/build/img/sao-

logos-2x.png)

Substance Abuse Stats

  * 23.1 Million people need treatment for illicit substance or alcohol abuse -- 9.1% of all Americans*. 

*aged 12 or older. Data accurate as of 2010. * 9% of Americans needing treatment for substance abuse are receiving it, leaving 20.5 million people still in need. 

  * 17.9 Million people in the U.S. have alcohol dependence or abuse problems -- 7% of the population.* 

*aged 12 or older. Data accurate as of 2010. 

What's Popular

  * Before & After: Physical Effects of Drugs Leave a comment
  * Big Pharma: Are They Advertising Addiction? Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse_shutter184172777_prescription_with_drugs-320x200.jpg)
  * What Are Bath Salts and Why Are They So Dangerous Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse-shutter292395617-bath-salts-320x275.jpg)
  * The Five Most Famous Drug Cartels Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse-shutter265783499-drug-cartels-320x275.jpg)
  * Chronic Disease Treatment Success Rates Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse-shutter128569904-illustration-of-HIV-in-bloodstream-320x275.jpg)

Use Our New Directory To Find Treatment Today

Search

Need Help Overcoming Addiction?

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

Search By State

Select a State

  * Alabama 
  * Alaska 
  * Arizona 
  * Arkansas 
  * California 
  * Colorado 
  * Connecticut 
  * Delaware 
  * District Of Columbia 
  * Florida 
  * Georgia 
  * Hawaii 
  * Idaho 
  * Illinois 
  * Indiana 
  * Iowa 
  * Kansas 
  * Kentucky 
  * Louisiana 
  * Maine 
  * Maryland 
  * Massachusetts 
  * Michigan 
  * Minnesota 
  * Mississippi 
  * Missouri 
  * Montana 
  * Nebraska 
  * Nevada 
  * New Hampshire 
  * New Jersey 
  * New Mexico 
  * New York 
  * North Carolina 
  * North Dakota 
  * Ohio 
  * Oklahoma 
  * Oregon 
  * Pennsylvania 
  * Rhode Island 
  * South Carolina 
  * South Dakota 
  * Tennessee 
  * Texas 
  * Utah 
  * Vermont 
  * Virginia 
  * Washington 
  * West Virginia 
  * Wisconsin 
  * Wyoming 

(C) DrugAbuse.com 2019. All Rights Reserved

Privacy Policy Terms of Use

Drugabuse.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc.

You're Ready to Escape Addiction

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

GENERAL DISCLAIMER: Drugabuse.com is designed for educational purposes only
and is not engaged in rendering medical advice. The information provided
through Drugabuse.com should not be used for diagnosing or treating a health
problem or disease. It is not a substitute for professional care. If you have
or suspect you may have a health problem, you should consult your health care
provider. The authors, editors, producers, and contributors shall have no
liability, obligation, or responsibility to any person or entity for any loss,
damage, or adverse consequences alleged to have happened directly or
indirectly as a consequence of material on this website. If you believe you
have a medical emergency, you should immediately call 911.

Drugabuse.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc. Learn more about what this means here.

Ready for Drug or Alcohol Rehab?

Discuss Treatment Options Call Toll Free 24 Hours A Day

Call Us Today! 1-888-744-0069

Who Answers?

Name:

Email:

Phone Number:

I Am:

--- The Addicted Person A Family Member A Friend A Co-Worker A Doctor/Therapist Other

Ability to Finance:

--- There is Ample Money or Private Insurance There is Some Money or Private Insurance There is No Money or Private Insurance I Am Interested in Financing I Am Not Sure

Addiction(s):

--- Alcohol Illicit (Street) Drugs Prescription Drugs A Combination of Substances Other Addiction

Any Other Important Details:

I have read and agree to the conditions outlined in the Terms of Use and
Privacy Policy.

SEND

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Ratione ipsa
excepturi quae cum magnam quibusdam quos quam pariatur, libero veritatis aut
harum, laborum similique optio natus, nulla possimus necessitatibus soluta!

## How Our Helpline Works

For those seeking addiction treatment for themselves or a loved one, the
DrugAbuse.com helpline is a private and convenient solution.

**Calls to any general helpline (non-facility specific 1-8XX numbers) for your
visit will be answered by American Addiction Centers (AAC).**

We are standing by 24/7 to discuss your treatment options. Our representatives
work solely for AAC and will discuss whether an AAC facility may be an option
for you.

Our helpline is offered at no cost to you and with no obligation to enter into
treatment. Neither DrugAbuse.com nor AAC receives any commission or other fee
that is dependent upon which treatment provider a visitor may ultimately
choose.

For more information on AAC’s commitment to ethical marketing and treatment
practices, or to learn more about how to select a treatment provider, visit
our About AAC page.

If you wish to explore additional treatment options or connect with a specific
rehab center, you can visit our directory or SAMHSA’s treatment services
locator.

Ready for Drug or Alcohol Rehab?

Discuss Treatment Options Call Toll Free 24 Hours A Day

Call Us Today! 1-888-744-0069

Who Answers?

Select your state and then choose Alcohol Treatment or Drug Treatment

Please choose a state Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado
Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas
Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi
Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York
North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island
South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Drug Treatment Alcohol Treatment

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

