

Skip to main content

![Home](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/logo.svg)
![Home](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/logo/logo_blue2.svg)

Toggle navigation

## Main navigation

  * Sleep Topics
  * Sleep Disorders
    * Excessive Sleepiness
    * Excessive Sleepiness associated with Obstructive Sleep Apnea
    * Insomnia
    * Narcolepsy
    * Non-24-Hour Sleep Wake Disorder
    * Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS)
    * Shift Work Disorder
  * Sleep Solutions
    * Sleep Show
    * The Bedroom Environment
    * Sleep Tools & Tips
    * SleepLife
    * Take Our Quizzes
  * For Professionals
    * Continuing Medical Education
    * Drowsy Driving
    * Sleep Disorder eBook
    * Sleep Health Index®
    * Sleep Health Journal
    * Sleep In America® Polls
    * Sleep Satisfaction Study
    * SleepTech®
    * Whitepapers and Position Statements

![search](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/icons/Search.svg)

![search](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/Search-dark.svg)

Select
LanguageEnglishAfrikaansAlbanianArabicArmenianAzerbaijaniBasqueBelarusianBengaliBosnianBulgarianCatalanCebuanoChinese
(Simplified)Chinese
(Traditional)CroatianCzechDanishDutchEsperantoEstonianFilipinoFinnishFrenchGalicianGeorgianGermanGreekGujaratiHaitian
CreoleHausaHebrewHindiHmongHungarianIcelandicIgboIndonesianIrishItalianJapaneseJavaneseKannadaKhmerKoreanLaoLatinLatvianLithuanianMacedonianMalayMalteseMaoriMarathiMongolianNepaliNorwegianPersianPolishPortuguesePunjabiRomanianRussianSerbianSlovakSlovenianSomaliSpanishSwahiliSwedishTamilTeluguThaiTurkishUkrainianUrduVietnameseWelshYiddishYorubaZulu

#

Sleep & Travel

Sleep Deprivation

Sleep Problems

Sleep Tools & Tips

## Drowsy Driving vs. Drunk Driving: How Similar Are They?

Image

![Drowsy Driving vs. Drunk Driving: How Similar Are They?

](/sites/default/files/styles/hero_medium/public/2018-10/NSF-2-D-461600_0.jpg?itok=yoCE2JUv)

  1. Home
  2. Sleep Topics
  3. Drowsy Driving vs. Drunk Driving: How Similar Are They? 

If you’ve ever gotten behind the wheel while feeling drowsy, you’re not alone.
Sixty percent of adults in the U.S. have done it and around one-third of
people have actually fallen asleep at the wheel. Though driving while
exhausted may seem relatively harmless, it has serious consequences. You could
get into a car accident and possibly harm yourself or someone else.

Drowsy driving is dangerous because sleep deprivation can have similar effects
on your body as drinking alcohol. Being awake for 18 hours straight makes you
drive like you have a blood alcohol level of .05 (for reference, .08 is
considered drunk). If you’ve been awake for a full 24 hours and drive—say,
after a night where you just couldn’t fall asleep—it’s like you have a blood
alcohol level of .10.

Both drowsy driving and drunk driving make it hard to pay attention to the
road, and negatively impact how well you can make fast decisions. But as
similar as they are, drowsy driving and drunk driving don’t always look the
same on the road. A drunk driver can often drive slowly and try to react, but
a drowsy driver can nod off while still going fast. So, drowsy drivers don't
always brake or swerve if something happens in front of them.

Whenever you're a driver or a passenger, you can help keep yourself and others
safe by looking out for red flags. Signs of drowsy driving are trouble
focusing, heavy eyelids, an inability to remember the last stretch of road
that you just drove, yawning constantly, bobbing your head, and drifting from
your lane. If this starts to happen while you're driving, pull over if you can
do so safely and take a 20-minute nap or buy a cup of caffeinated coffee to
help keep you alert. If you have someone else in the car, switch drivers.
Also, driving during your most alert period of the day (like in the morning,
instead of late at night) is a good idea. Taking these simple precautions will
help lower your risk and stress level during a road trip.

Popular Articles

Do Dreams Affect How Well You Sleep?

How Sleep Is Different for Men and Women

Is Your Thyroid to Blame for Your Sleep Issues?

How Sleep Affects Your Immunity

3 Signs Your Mood May Be Affecting Your Sleep

## Featured Article

Image

![NSF](/sites/default/files/styles/article_featured/public/2019-02/NSF-HC-

HP-20_Photo_2880x1200_0.jpg?itok=aWP5REY1)

Sleep Tools & Tips

Sleep Topics

The Bedroom Environment

## How to Pick the Right Pillow for You

The right head support can greatly improve how comfortable you feel in bed.

Image

![NSF](/sites/default/files/styles/article_featured/public/2019-01/17-microsite-

header-image-for-Non24_2880x1400.jpg?itok=PH9j1kYD)

Ask the Expert

Shift Work Disorder

## How Atypical Work Schedules Affect Performance

Nearly one-quarter of all workers have shifts that are not during the daytime,
and more than two-thirds of these workers have problem sleepiness and/or
difficulty sleeping. (NHLBI, 2005) One-third of shift workers state that they
sleep less than six hours per night on workdays, and 30 percent report that
they only get a good night’s sleep a few night’s per...

Children, Teens & Sleep

Sleep Health

Image

![NSF](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2019-02/64-adult%2C-child-

on-electronics-iStock-528922090_2880x1400.jpg?itok=NGsti4Ap)

### Infographic: Electronics and Sleep in the Modern Family

The Electronics and Sleep infographic highlights how technology affects the
modern family and how parents can help design a sleep...

Sleep Health

Sleep Problems

Image

![NSF](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2019-02/26-NSF-9-I_neurons_2880x1400.jpg?itok=K1faaWKp)

### What is Orexin?

Orexin receptor antagonists: A new class of sleeping pill Find out more about
orexin, and a new type of sleep...

Sleep & Your Lifestyle

Sleep Tools & Tips

Image

![NSF](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2019-02/32-NSF-11-G_bicycling_2880x1400.jpg?itok=Le5QFISN)

### What Makes A Good Night's Sleep

Great news: more than three-fourths (76%) of those surveyed say that they had
a good night’s sleep at least a...

Sleep & Disease

Sleep Problems

Image

![older

couple](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2018-11/NSF-12-K-577104_900x560.jpg?itok=Gz6Lcis4)

### What Your Sleep Habits Reveal About Your Dementia Risk

The term “anti-aging” may conjure up images of expensive wrinkle creams and
nutritional supplements, but one of the most impactful...

Sleep & Disease

Sleep Problems

Image

![sitting on

bed](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2018-11/NSF-12-G-576811_900x560.jpg?itok=01kQ_OAG)

### 3 Signs Your Mood May Be Affecting Your Sleep

Though it may come as no surprise that people find it harder to fall asleep
when they’re emotionally wound up,...

Sleep & Disease

Sleep Problems

Image

![](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2018-10/NSF-12-E-639668490_900x560.jpg?itok=-fCoR14N)

### Is Your Thyroid to Blame for Your Sleep Issues?

Sleep problems like insomnia can be caused by many different factors,
including chronic pain, acid reflux, and depression. But did...

Children, Teens & Sleep

Sleep Problems

Image

![hands

up](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2018-10/NSF-11-G_1146232_900x560.jpg?itok=y5UUCINb)

### How to Help a Child with School Anxiety Sleep Well

Sleep problems are common among kids who are anxious or who are making a
transition to a new school. They...

Children, Teens & Sleep

Sleep Problems

Image

![Children playing with

ball](/sites/default/files/styles/article_teaser/public/2018-11/NSF-8-L_Sleepfoundation_StrategiesForChildrenWhoStruggleWithSleep_Purchased_900x560.jpg?itok=5AnNS3vk)

### Sleep Strategies for Kids

After safety and nutrition, how much sleep a child gets is uppermost in a
parent’s mind. The amount your child...

#### Pagination

  * Load more

The National Sleep Foundation holds federal trademark registrations for
“National Sleep Foundation” and other marks as noted in this website.

  * ![facebook](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/icons/Facebook_White.svg)
  * ![twitter](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/icons/Twitter_White.svg)
  * ![linkedin](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/icons/Linkedin_White.svg)
  * ![instagram](/themes/custom/sleepfoundation/images/icons/Instagram.svg)

## Sleep

  * Sleep Topics
  * Sleep Disorders
  * Sleep Solutions
  * For Professionals

## National Sleep Foundation

  * Media Center
  * Careers
  * About Us

## Other NSF Sites

Drowsy Driving

Sleep.org

Sleep for Kids

Sleep Health Journal

Sleep Shop

©2019 NATIONAL SLEEP FOUNDATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

Privacy Policy

Terms of Use

Copyright Notice

CREDITS

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

