

×

Link has been copied to clipboard!

![GreenState](https://www.greenstate.com/wp-

content/themes/greenstate/img/logo.svg)

![GreenState](https://www.greenstate.com/wp-

content/themes/greenstate/img/logo-g.svg)

  * News
    * Money
  * Cannabis FAQ
    * Law
    * Gardening
    * Etiquette
    * Glossary
  * Food+Travel
    * Recipes
    * Travel
  * POV
  * Health
    * Sex
    * Beauty
    * Indications
  * Reviews

    * Products
    * Hardware
    * Dispensaries
  * Cannabis Explained

  * News
  * Lifestyle
  * Food
  * Travel
  * Law
  * Health
  * Money

Type keyword(s) to search

Health

# Cancer: Can cannabis really cure it?

November 26, 2017 Emily Earlenbaugh

  * SHARE
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

![Cancer researchers in Israel. JACK GUEZ/AFP/Getty

Images](https://hips.hearstapps.com/hnp-prod-media.s3.amazonaws.com/hnp-

prod/550392177.jpg?crop=1.00xw:0.846xh;0,0.0636xh&resize=625:*)

Cancer researchers in Israel. JACK GUEZ/AFP/Getty Images

Cancer is a disease that looms large. It is one of the leading causes of death
and one in three of us will be diagnosed with it during our lifetimes.
Unfortunately, the cancer rates are only rising. The National Institute of
Cancer estimates that by 2030, its death toll will have increased by 60%. Some
are looking to cannabis to cure this deadly disease. But is cannabis a cure -
or is this just wishful thinking?

## Cancer Patient Success Stories With Medical Pot

Anecdotal accounts abound of patients curing their own cancer using high-
potency edible cannabis extracts. Take Dennis Hill, a prostate cancer patient
who decided to forgo chemotherapy and try cannabis instead. His story of
complete recovery after six months of cannabis use is available online - along
with his medical record and journal of his progress. Or Kelly Hauf - who
decided to try cannabis oil in the months leading up to a scheduled surgery to
remove a brain tumor. After eight months of treatment, there was nothing left
of her tumor to remove. These stories are hard to ignore - but many doctors
advise patients not to assume that cannabis was the cause of these incredible
recoveries.

## Doctors Cautious About Weed for Cancer

Dr. Abrams, a leading oncologist at the UCSF Osher Center for Integrative
Medicine says he has seen cannabis help many with the side effects of cancer
but cautions against assuming cannabis is a cure. He says given his high
proportion of cannabis using patients, ‘if cannabis definitively cured cancer,
I would have expected that I would have a lot more survivors.’

Cannabis is well-established as a treatment for the side effects of cancer and
chemotherapy, like nausea, vomiting, pain, anxiety, insomnia, and lack of
appetite. But in a comprehensive review of the cannabis literature,
researchers from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine
found there to be insufficient evidence to say that cannabis can treat cancer
directly. Without large-scale, placebo controlled clinical trials, doctors and
researchers don’t have the solid evidence they’d need to recommend cannabis
for cancer treatment.

## Science Shows Cannabis Has Anti-Cancer Properties

Still other scientists are more hopeful about cannabis’ potential efficacy,
and point to laboratory and animal studies that show cannabinoids like CBD and
THC kill cancer cells in laboratory conditions — without harming the healthy
cells nearby. While clinical trials on human subjects is still a ways off —
given cannabis’ status as a controlled substance - the preclinical data gives
reason to hope that patients stories of success aren’t just flukes.

“There is a large body of scientific data which indicates that cannabinoids
specifically inhibit cancer cell growth and promote cancer cell death”
explains Dr. David Meiri, the lead researcher on an Israeli project studying
50 varieties of cannabis and its effects on 200 different cancer cells. Meiri
and his team have successfully killed brain and breast cancer cells through
exposure to cannabis and they are hopeful they can find more varieties of
cancer cells that respond to this treatment.

Still, experts caution against forgoing traditional treatment options. Dr.
Meiri’s research suggests that not all cancer cells respond to cannabinoids in
the same way. Even if cannabis can help with some cancers, it might not work
the same for all. Additional research, specifically placebo-controlled
clinical trials, are needed to fully understand how to handle each type of
cancer individually.

With a condition as deadly as cancer, it is crucial to know whether a high
cannabinoid regimen would work for any particular case, before foregoing
alternatives that might help. Still while clinical research on cannabis
continues to stall, patients must decide whether to wait indefinitely or
follow in the footsteps of patients before them - experimenting with cannabis
on their own.

  * SHARE
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/05/GettyImages-139801182-600x400.jpg)

**trending**

  1. ### Is cannabis safe for dogs? Pet marijuana poisoning is rising exponentially as more edibles are available

June 4, 2019 Amanda Bartlett

  1. ### Connecticut could be at forefront of recreational pot, social justice mix

May 21, 2019 GreenState Contributor

  1. ### Smoke screen: First ever marijuana-themed film festival lights up theaters across the country

May 22, 2019 Amanda Bartlett

  1. ### NFL announces plans to study marijuana for pain treatment

May 20, 2019 Oscar Pascual

#### Related Articles

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/05/Screen-

Shot-2019-05-14-at-2.19.54-PM-e1557877286730-300x189.jpg)

Do different cannabis strains affect you in different ways? A DNA expert
reveals the science.

![AbsoluteXtracts makes a popular line of marijuana vape carts in

California.](https://s3-us-west-1.amazonaws.com/sfc-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2018/01/absolutextracts-vape-cart.jpg)

What is a marijuana vape cart, or cartridge?

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/05/GettyImages-954251256-600x397.jpg)

CBD could be effective in treating heroin addiction, study finds

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/06/GettyImages-611780758-600x400.jpg)

CBD toothpaste sounds like a good idea but lacks conclusive studies proving it
is

![Psychatrist and pain specialist Dr. Michael H Moskowitz, MD \(right\), uses

sound therapy on his patient , Bobby Ocean \(left\), on Thursday, February 22,

2018, in San Rafael, Calif.](https://s3-us-west-1.amazonaws.com/sfc-

wordpress/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2018/03/sleep3.jpg)

The new chill pill — why cannabis is coming for sleeping pill poppers

![Vaping creates no smoke, but is not risk-free. SOURCE: Spencer Platt |

Getty](https://s3-us-west-1.amazonaws.com/sfc-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2017/11/696675002.jpg)

Challenging assumptions around marijuana addiction

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/05/GettyImages-1028834406-600x399.jpg)

CBD: The next weapon in the war against opioid addiction?

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/04/GettyImages-162330047-600x398.jpg)

Marijuana users less likely to gain weight than non-users, study finds

![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sfc-datebook-wordpress/wp-

content/uploads/sites/4/2019/05/GettyImages-139801182-600x400.jpg)

**trending**

  1. ### Is cannabis safe for dogs? Pet marijuana poisoning is rising exponentially as more edibles are available

June 4, 2019 Amanda Bartlett

  1. ### Connecticut could be at forefront of recreational pot, social justice mix

May 21, 2019 GreenState Contributor

  1. ### Smoke screen: First ever marijuana-themed film festival lights up theaters across the country

May 22, 2019 Amanda Bartlett

  1. ### NFL announces plans to study marijuana for pain treatment

May 20, 2019 Oscar Pascual

**Follow Us**

  *     *       * 

![GreenState](https://www.greenstate.com/wp-

content/themes/greenstate/img/logo-gs.svg)

  * About GreenState
  * Advertise With Us
  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Notice

(C) 2019 Hearst Corporation

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

