

Sections

SEARCH

Skip to contentSkip to site index

SubscribeLog In

Sunday Review|How to Win a War on Drugs

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/09/24/opinion/sunday/24kristof1/24kristof1-articleLarge-v4.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

Miguel Fonseca, 39, smoking cocaine in Lisbon, where possession of small
amounts of drugs is a minor offense. He also at times smokes
heroin.CreditCreditDaniel Rodrigues for The New York Times

Opinion

# How to Win a War on Drugs

Portugal treats addiction as a disease, not a crime.

Miguel Fonseca, 39, smoking cocaine in Lisbon, where possession of small
amounts of drugs is a minor offense. He also at times smokes
heroin.CreditCreditDaniel Rodrigues for The New York Times

Supported by

![Nicholas

Kristof](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2014/11/01/opinion/kristof-

circular/kristof-circular-thumbLarge-v7.jpg)

By Nicholas Kristof

  * Sept. 22, 2017
  *     *       *         *           *             *               * 

Leer en español

LISBON — On a broken-down set of steps, a 37-year-old fisherman named Mario
mixed heroin and cocaine and carefully prepared a hypodermic needle. “It’s
hard to find a vein,” he said, but he finally found one in his forearm and
injected himself with the brown liquid. Blood trickled from his arm and pooled
on the step, but he was oblivious.

“Are you O.K.?” Rita Lopes, a psychologist working for an outreach program
called Crescer, asked him. “You’re not taking too much?” Lopes monitors
Portuguese heroin users like Mario, gently encourages them to try to quit and
gives them clean hypodermics to prevent the spread of AIDS.

Decades ago, the United States and Portugal both struggled with illicit drugs
and took decisive action — in diametrically opposite directions. The U.S.
cracked down vigorously, spending billions of dollars incarcerating drug
users. In contrast, Portugal undertook a monumental experiment: It
decriminalized the use of all drugs in 2001, even heroin and cocaine, and
unleashed a major public health campaign to tackle addiction. Ever since in
Portugal, drug addiction has been treated more as a medical challenge than as
a criminal justice issue.

After more than 15 years, it’s clear which approach worked better. The United
States drug policy failed spectacularly, with about as many Americans dying
last year of overdoses — around 64,000 — as were killed in the Vietnam,
Afghanistan and Iraq Wars combined.

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/09/24/opinion/sunday/24kristof3/24kristof3-articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

A fisherman named Mario preparing an injection.CreditDaniel Rodrigues for The
New York Times

In contrast, Portugal may be winning the war on drugs — by ending it. Today,
the Health Ministry estimates that only about 25,000 Portuguese use heroin,
down from 100,000 when the policy began.

The number of Portuguese dying from overdoses plunged more than 85 percent
before rising a bit in the aftermath of the European economic crisis of recent
years. Even so, Portugal’s drug mortality rate is the lowest in Western Europe
— one-tenth the rate of Britain or Denmark — and about one-fiftieth the latest
number for the U.S.

I came to Portugal to talk with drug dealers, users and public health experts
because this nation has become a model for a drug policy that is not only
compassionate but also effective.

It’s not a miracle or perfect solution. But if the U.S. could achieve
Portugal’s death rate from drugs, we would save one life every 10 minutes. We
would save almost as many lives as are now lost to guns and car accidents
combined.

Image

Outreach workers, like here in the Casal Ventoso neighborhood, try to persuade
drug users to quit or at least to minimize risks.CreditDaniel Rodrigues for
The New York Times

This issue is personal to me, because my hometown in rural Oregon has been
devastated by methamphetamines and, more recently, by opioids. Classmates have
died or had their lives destroyed; my seventh-grade crush is now homeless
because of her addictions.

Many people are also coming to Portugal to explore what a smarter, health-
driven approach might look like. Delegations from around the world are flying
to Lisbon to study what is now referred to as the “Portuguese model.”

“This is the best thing to happen to this country,” Mario Oliveira, 53, a
former typesetter who became hooked on heroin 30 years ago, told me as he
sipped from a paper cup of methadone supplied by a mobile van. The vans, a
crucial link in Portugal’s public health efforts, cruise Lisbon’s streets
every day of the year and supply users with free methadone, an opioid
substitute, to stabilize their lives and enable them to hold jobs.

Methadone and other drug treatment programs also exist in the U.S., but are
often expensive or difficult to access. The result is that only 10 percent of
Americans struggling with addiction get treatment; in Portugal, treatment is
standard.

Image

A van distributing methadone, an opioid substitute, in the Lumiar
neighborhood. CreditDaniel Rodrigues for The New York Times

“If I couldn’t come here, I don’t know if I’d still be alive,” Oliveira told
me. He said that he used to steal to support his habit but is now getting his
life under control. Two weeks ago, he began reducing his dose of methadone,
and he hopes to wean himself off opioids completely.

Yet Portugal’s approach is no magic wand.

“I’m homeless and jobless and addicted again,” Miguel Fonseca, a 39-year-old
electrical mechanic, said as he held a lighter under a sheet of tin foil to
turn a pinch of heroin powder into fumes that he smoked to get high. He spends
about $100 a day on his habit, and in the past sometimes has turned to theft
to support it.

Less than 100 feet away, Mario, the fisherman I began this story with, was
injecting himself with heroin and cocaine, and showing little interest in
Lopes’s health outreach. He assured her that he wasn’t overdosing, and he
scoffed at the idea of methadone as an alternative to heroin.

Mario told me that he had started with heroin at age 14 (another man I met had
started at age 11), and used it during the two years he worked as a fisherman
in Massachusetts. “Portuguese heroin isn’t as high quality as American
heroin,” he complained. He then reached for a pipe and began to smoke cocaine.

Public health workers like Lopes may never be able to get Mario to give up
drugs, but she can help keep him alive. Seeing Mario, his blood spattered on
the steps from his constant injections, tottering off to get more drugs, it
was clear that the Portuguese model isn’t as effective as we might hope — but
it occurred to me that in America, Mario might well be dead.

Portugal switched to its health focus under the leadership of a socialist
prime minister named António Guterres — and if the name sounds familiar, it’s
because he’s now the United Nations secretary general. The new approach was a
gamble. “We were facing a devastating situation, so we had nothing to lose,”
recalled João Castel-Branco Goulão, a public health expert and the architect
of the policy (“our national hero,” as one Portuguese cabinet minister told
me).

So let’s be clear on what Portugal did and didn’t do. First, it didn’t change
laws on drug trafficking: Dealers still go to prison. And it didn’t quite
legalize drug use, but rather made the purchase or possession of small
quantities (up to a 10-day supply) not a crime but an administrative offense,
like a traffic ticket.

Offenders are summoned to a “Dissuasion Commission” hearing — an informal
meeting at a conference table with social workers who try to prevent a casual
user from becoming addicted.

Image

Hypodermic kits are distributed by outreach workers and used syringes are
collected for safe disposal and to prevent sharing.CreditDaniel Rodrigues for
The New York Times

“How long have you been using?” Nuno Capaz, a sociologist and member of the
Dissuasion Commission in Lisbon, asked a 26-year-old factory worker caught
with hashish. They chatted, with Capaz trying to figure out if the young man
was in danger of taking up harder drugs. The dissuasion board can fine
offenders, but that’s rare. Mostly the strategy is to intervene with
counseling or other assistance before an offender becomes addicted.

“My main concern is the health of the person,” Capaz explained afterward. “Our
approach is much closer to that of a medical doctor than to a court of law.”

The public health approach arises from an increasingly common view worldwide
that addiction is a chronic disease, perhaps comparable to diabetes, and thus
requires medical care rather than punishment. After all, we don’t just tell
diabetics, Get over it.

My sense from observing the hearings and talking to users is that the
Dissuasion Commission isn’t terribly effective at dissuading. How successful
could a 15-minute session be? Then again, criminal sanctions also seem
ineffective at discouraging drug use: When scholars look at the impact of
crackdowns, they find there’s typically little impact.

In the first year or so of decriminalization in Portugal, there did seem to be
the increase in drug use that critics had predicted. But although the
Portuguese model is often described simply as decriminalization, perhaps the
more important part is a public health initiative to treat addiction and
discourage narcotics use. My take is that decriminalization on its own might
have led to a modest increase in the use of hard drugs, but that this was
swamped by public health efforts that led to an overall decline.

Portugal introduced targeted messaging to particular groups — prostitutes,
Ukrainians, high school dropouts, and so on. The Health Ministry dispatched
workers into the most drug-infested neighborhoods to pass out needles and urge
users to try methadone. At big concerts or similar gatherings, the Health
Ministry sometimes authorizes the testing of users’ drugs to advise them if
they are safe, and then the return of the stash. Decriminalization makes all
this easier, because people no longer fear arrest.

So how effective are the methadone vans and prevention campaigns? I thought
I’d ask some real experts: drug dealers.

“There are fewer customers now,” complained one heroin dealer in the gritty
Lumiar neighborhood. Another, Joaquim Farinha, 55, was skeptical that
methadone was costing him much business. “Business is still pretty good,” he
said, interrupting the interview to make a sale to a middle-aged woman.

(Portugal’s drug market is relatively nonviolent and relaxed partly because of
another factor: Handguns are tightly controlled.)

On balance, the evidence is that drug use stabilized or declined since
Portugal changed approaches, particularly for heroin. In polls, the proportion
of 15- to 24-year-olds who say that they have used illicit drugs in the last
month dropped by almost half since decriminalization.

Decriminalization also made it easier to fight infectious diseases and treat
overdoses. In the U.S., people are sometimes reluctant to call 911 after a
friend overdoses for fear of an arrest; that’s not a risk in Portugal. In
1999, Portugal had the highest rate of drug-related AIDS in the European
Union; since then, H.I.V. diagnoses attributed to injections have fallen by
more than 90 percent and Portugal is no longer at the high end in Europe.

One crucial mistake that Portugal did not make was to follow the United States
in adopting prescription opioid painkillers for routine use. Adalberto Campos
Fernandes, the health minister, said that Portuguese doctors resisted
overprescribing and that regulators also stood in the way.

Image

Recovering drug users receive daily doses of methadone from vans that cruise
Lisbon streets.CreditDaniel Rodrigues for The New York Times

Another factor that has benefited Portugal: The economy has grown and there is
a robust social fabric and safety net, so fewer people self-medicate with
drugs. Anne Case and Angus Deaton of Princeton University have chronicled the
rise of “deaths of despair” and argue that opioid use in America in part
reflects a long-term decline in well-paying jobs for those with a high school
education or less.

Portugal initially was scolded around the world for its experiment, as a weak
link in the war on drugs, but today it’s hailed as a model. The World Health
Organization and American Public Health Association have both praised
decriminalization and a public health focus, as has the Global Commission on
Drug Policy.

One attraction of the Portuguese approach is that it’s incomparably cheaper to
treat people than to jail them. The Health Ministry spends less than $10 per
citizen per year on its successful drug policy. Meanwhile, the U.S. has spent
some $10,000 per household (more than $1 trillion) over the decades on a
failed drug policy that results in more than 1,000 deaths each week.

I’ve been apprehensive of decriminalizing hard drugs for fear of increasing
addiction. Portugal changed my mind, and its policy seems fundamentally humane
and lifesaving. Yet let’s also be realistic about what is possible: Portugal’s
approach works better than America’s, but nothing succeeds as well as we might
hope.

The hilly Casal Ventoso neighborhood of Lisbon was ground zero for heroin in
Lisbon 15 years ago, “a wall of death,” remembered Paulo Brito, 55, who has
been using heroin since he was 15.

Brito weaned himself off drugs with the help of health workers and remained
“clean” for 10 years — but relapsed a year ago, and I met him in today’s Casal
Ventoso. There are fewer overdoses now, but it is still littered with
hypodermic packages and other detritus of narcotics, as well as a pall of
sadness.

“I’ve hit rock bottom,” Brito told me despairingly. “I’m losing the person I
most love in the world.”

His girlfriend, Teresa, is begging him to give up heroin. He wants to choose
her; he fervently wants to quit. But he doesn’t know if he can, and he teared
up as he said, “It’s like entering a boxing ring and facing Mike Tyson.”

Yet for all his suffering, Brito lives, because he’s Portuguese. The lesson
that Portugal offers the world is that while we can’t eradicate heroin, it’s
possible to save the lives of drug users — if we’re willing to treat them not
as criminals but as sick, suffering human beings who need helping hands, not
handcuffs.

_Enter myTrump poetry contest! In addition, invite you to sign up for my free,
twice-weekly email newsletter. Please also join me on Facebook and Google+,
watch my YouTube videos and follow me on Twitter (@NickKristof)._

A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR1 of the New York
edition with the headline: How to Win A War on Drugs. Order Reprints | Today’s
Paper | Subscribe

  *     *       *         * 

Advertisement

## Site Index

Go to Home Page »

news

  * home page
  * world
  * U.S.
  * politics
  * New York
  * business
  * tech
  * science
  * climate
  * sports
  * obituaries
  * the upshot
  * today's paper
  * corrections

opinion

  * today's opinion
  * op-ed columnists
  * editorials
  * op-ed Contributors
  * letters
  * sunday review
  * video: opinion

arts

  * today's arts
  * art & design
  * books
  * dance
  * movies
  * music
  * Pop Culture
  * television
  * theater
  * watching
  * video: arts

living

  * automobiles
  * Cooking
  * crossword
  * education
  * food
  * health
  * jobs
  * magazine
  * parenting
  * real estate
  * style
  * t magazine
  * travel
  * weddings

listings & more

  * Reader Center
  * Wirecutter
  * Live Events
  * The Learning Network
  * tools & services
  * N.Y.C. events guide
  * multimedia
  * photography
  * video
  * Newsletters
  * NYT store
  * times journeys
  * manage my account

### news

  * home page
  * world
  * U.S.
  * politics
  * New York
  * business
  * tech
  * science
  * climate
  * sports
  * obituaries
  * the upshot
  * today's paper
  * corrections

### opinion

  * today's opinion
  * op-ed columnists
  * editorials
  * op-ed Contributors
  * letters
  * sunday review
  * video: opinion

### arts

  * today's arts
  * art & design
  * books
  * dance
  * movies
  * music
  * Pop Culture
  * television
  * theater
  * watching
  * video: arts

### living

  * automobiles
  * Cooking
  * crossword
  * education
  * food
  * health
  * jobs
  * magazine
  * parenting
  * real estate
  * style
  * t magazine
  * travel
  * weddings

### more

  * Reader Center
  * Wirecutter
  * Live Events
  * The Learning Network
  * tools & services
  * N.Y.C. events guide
  * multimedia
  * photography
  * video
  * Newsletters
  * NYT store
  * times journeys
  * manage my account

### Subscribe

  * home delivery
  * digital subscriptions
  * Crossword
  * Cooking

  * email newsletters

  * corporate subscriptions
  * education rate

  * mobile applications

  * replica edition

## Site Information Navigation

  * © 2019 The New York Times Company

  * Contact Us

  * Work with us
  * Advertise
  * Your Ad Choices
  * Privacy
  * Terms of Service
  * Terms of Sale
  * Site Map
  * Help
  * Help
  * Subscriptions

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

