

  * Skip to content The Atlantic
  * Popular
  * Latest
  * Sections

**Sections**

    
    
    * Politics
    * Culture
    * Technology
    * Ideas
    * Science
    * Books
    * Family
    * Business
    * Global
    * Health
    * Education
    * Letters
    * The Masthead
    * Our Towns
    * Photo
    * Podcasts
    * The Atlantic Crossword
    * Video
    * Events
    * Writers
    * Projects
    

  * Magazine

**Magazine**

    
    
    * Current issue 
    * All issues 
    * Manage subscription 
    * Give a Gift 
    * Subscribe
    

  * More Categories

**More**

    
    
    * Create account Your account
    * Sign in Sign out
    * Newsletters
    * The Atlantic Crossword
    * iOS App
    * Life Timeline
    * Events
    * Books
    * Shop
    * Help Center
    

View all

  * Subscribe
  * Search

**Search** **Quick Links**

    
    
    * Dear Therapist 
    * Crossword Puzzle 
    * Manage Subscription
    

Search The Atlantic

**Quick Links**

    
    
    * Dear Therapist 
    * Crossword Puzzle 
    * Manage Subscription
    

Health

# Nobody Declared Brain Dead Ever Wakes Up Feeling Pretty Good

Richard Senelick Feb 27, 2012

_There's a difference between being in a coma and a vegetative state. The
stories confusing the two are hindering organ donor education._

A day rarely goes by that I don't read a few sensational headlines: "Man
Declared Dead Feels 'Pretty Good'" or "Husband Celebrates Miracle as 'Brain
Dead' Wife Wakes Up in Hospital." I recently read an article that seemed to
describe a man on death row in Huntsville, Texas. It attempted to shock its
readers with the claim that a college student had been declared brain dead and
"just hours before he was slated to be killed and his organs given to another
patient," he miraculously recovered. That's right, they said "killed."

As a neurologist who specializes in brain injury, I have cared for many brain-
injured patients and there were times when they did better than I anticipated,
but sensational articles like these only confuse the public. During the health
care legislation debates, the mere mention of insurance coverage for
consultation on end-of-life decisions brought forth hysterical cries of "death
panels" from people like Sarah Palin who exhorted that "my parents or my baby
with Down's Syndrome will have to stand in front of Obama's 'death panel'...."
But if the headlines are fiction, what is the truth?

**HOW OUR BRAIN ACTUALLY WORKS**

Brains are far more complex machines than even the most sophisticated
computer. We turn on our computer with a simple switch. The screen entertains
us as it boots up and we start to check our email, linger on Facebook to catch
up with friends, or read the latest headlines. Have you ever wondered what
your brain is doing in the early morning as you awaken to your automatic
coffeemaker brewing that first cup of joe?

The main part of our brain, the cerebrum, sits inside our skull and is
attached to our spinal cord by the small, but critical, brain stem. Inside the
brain stem is a small, but critical, group of nerve cells known as the
Reticular Activating System (RAS) that send messages up into the brain, not
only to wake us up, but also to keep us alert. We call this process arousal --
no, not that tingling that you get when you kiss the man or woman of your
dreams, but stimulation that keeps you awake. But just being awake isn't
enough.

We need an intact upper brain to be aware of ourselves and our surrounding
environment. Awareness is a higher-level function that requires areas of the
cerebrum to process the information we see and hear. A patient may have their
eyes open and look like they're awake, but if the brain is severely damaged
they may have no awareness of their surroundings. We call this a vegetative
state.

On the other hand, people who are in a coma are not awake and have no
awareness of themselves or their environment. You can talk to them, pinch
them, show them pictures of their family -- they will not respond. However,
these patients are not brain dead. This is the source of the confusion that
leads to the sensational headlines and stories.

In 1976, Karen Ann Quinlan was in a vegetative state, but lived for nine more
years after her ventilator was discontinued. Theresa Schiavo had been in a
vegetative state for 15 years. After a protracted legal battle her husband was
granted permission to withdraw her nutritional support and she died. Both
young women, like the people in the headlines, were not brain dead. People in
a vegetative state usually have extensive brain damage, but may blink their
eyes and look around, breathe on their own, yawn, chew, and even withdraw
their arms or legs to painful stimulation. They are not brain dead, and no one
is going to take their organs.

**WHAT, EXACTLY, IS BRAIN DEATH?**

What is the difference between someone in a coma, who may or may not improve,
and someone who is truly brain dead and may be a candidate to donate their
organs? Brain death is the irreversible cessation of all functions of the
entire brain, including the all-important brain stem that houses the RAS and
the mechanism that controls our breathing. Dead is dead. Brain death isn't a
different type of death, and patients who meet the criteria of brain death are
legally dead.

There are strict criteria for brain death and these criteria (PDF) are
carefully followed before a patient becomes an organ donor or their ventilator
is unplugged. They must be in a coma with no brain stem or pupillary reflexes.
They do not breathe on their own when taken off their ventilator, and an
electroencephalogram (EEG) records a complete absence of brain activity.
Although most states only require the diagnosis of one physician, the
patient's family can always ask for a second opinion.

**NO CAUSE FOR CONCERN**

The sensational headlines hinder our efforts as physicians to educate the
public about organ donation and cause unnecessary anxiety for families who are
considering donating their loved one's organs. No one who has met the criteria
for brain death has ever survived -- no one. It can be difficult to predict a
person's outcome after a severe brain injury, but it can be said with
certainty that a brain dead individual is dead, the same as if their heart was
not beating.

In most hopeless situations, our society's current default is to continue all
medical measures unless otherwise clearly stated. At the same time, there is a
move afoot in state capitols to pass legislation that would make the
withdrawal of nutrition and hydration impossible unless it is specifically
stated prior to injury. As of 2007, only 41 percent of people had a living
will and both living wills and advanced directives tend to be very general.
Now is the time to sit down with your family and discuss what you want done if
you were in a hopeless situation or brain dead. There is still a critical
shortage of organs available for donation. If the concept of brain death is
keeping you from becoming a donor, you can check that off your list and sign
up now.

_Image: RealCG/Shutterstock._

We want to hear what you think about this article. Submit a letter to the
editor or write to letters@theatlantic.com.

Richard C. Senelick, MD, is a neurologist who serves as medical director of
the Rehabilitation Institute of San Antonio. He is also editor in chief of
HealthSouth Press.

  * About

    * Our History
    * Staff
    * Careers
    * Shop
  * Contact

    * Help Center
    * Contact Us
    * Send a News Tip
    * Advertise
    * Press
  * Podcasts

    * Radio Atlantic
    * Crazy/Genius
    * The Atlantic Interview
    * Audio Articles
  * Subscription

    * Purchase
    * Give a Gift
    * Manage Subscription
    * Download iOS App
    * Newsletters
  * Follow

    *       *         *           *             *               *                 *   * Privacy Policy

  * Advertising Guidelines
  * Terms Conditions
  * Responsible Disclosure
  * U.S. Edition
  * World Edition
  * Site Map

TheAtlantic.com Copyright (c) 2019 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights
Reserved.

The Atlantic

![](https://atlanticmedia.122.2o7.net/b/ss/atlanticprod/1/H.22--NS/0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

