

Homepage

## Accessibility links

  * Skip to content
  * Accessibility Help

BBC Account

Notifications

  * Home
  * News
  * Sport
  * Weather
  * iPlayer
  * Sounds
  * CBBC
  * CBeebies
  * Food
  * Bitesize
  * Arts
  * Taster
  * Local
  * TV
  * Radio
  * Three
  * Menu

Search

Search the BBCSearch the BBC

News

## BBC News Navigation

Sections

  * Home
  * Video
  * World
  * Asia
  * UK
  * Business
  * Tech
  * Science
  * Stories
  * Entertainment & Arts
  * Health selected
  * World News TV
  * In Pictures
  * Reality Check
  * Newsbeat
  * Special Reports
  * Explainers
  * The Reporters
  * Have Your Say

Health

Health

# Why anything can be addictive

By Dr Mark Griffiths Gambling studies expert, Nottingham Trent University

  * 25 November 2011

  * comments

  * Share this with Facebook

  * Share this with Messenger
  * Share this with Twitter
  * Share this with Email
  * Share this with Facebook
  * Share this with WhatsApp
  * Share this with Messenger
  * Share this with Twitter
  * Share

Share this with

These are external links and will open in a new window

    
    
    * Email
    

Share this with Email

    
    
    * Facebook
    

Share this with Facebook

    
    
    * Messenger
    

Share this with Messenger

    
    
    * Messenger
    

Share this with Messenger

    
    
    * Twitter
    

Share this with Twitter

    
    
    * Pinterest
    

Share this with Pinterest

    
    
    * WhatsApp
    

Share this with WhatsApp

    
    
    * LinkedIn
    

Share this with LinkedIn

Copy this link

https://www.bbc.com/news/health-15723834

Read more about sharing.

These are external links and will open in a new window

Close share panel

Image caption Even work can be addictive, according to Dr Griffiths

For many people the concept of addiction involves taking drugs such as
alcohol, nicotine, cocaine and heroin.

But in this week's Scrubbing Up, gambling studies expert Mark Griffiths warns
that if the rewards are there people can become addicted to almost anything.

For the past 25 years I have been studying gambling and I passionately believe
that gambling at its most extreme is just as addictive as any drug.

The social and health costs of problem gambling are large and have many things
in common with more traditional addictions, including moodiness, relationship
problems, absenteeism from work, domestic violence, and bankruptcy.

Health effects - for gamblers and their partners - include anxiety and
depression, insomnia, intestinal disorders, migraine, stress related
disorders, stomach problems, and suicidal thoughts.

If behaviours like gambling can become a genuine addiction, there is no
theoretical reason why some people might not become genuinely addicted to
activities like video games, work or exercise.

Research on pathological gamblers has reported at least one physical side
effect when they undergo withdrawal, including insomnia, headaches, loss of
appetite, physical weakness, heart palpitations, muscle aches, breathing
difficulty, and chills.

In fact, pathological gamblers appear to experience more physical withdrawal
effects when attempting to stop their behaviour when compared directly with
drug addicts.

## 'Most important thing'

But when does an excessive healthy enthusiasm become an addiction?

> Behavioural addictions can be just as serious as drug addictionsDr Mark
Griffiths

Excessive behaviour on its own does not mean someone is addicted.

I can think of lots of people who engage in excessive activities but I
wouldn't class them as addicts as they don't appear to experience any
detrimental effects from engaging in the behaviour.

In a nutshell, the fundamental difference between excessive enthusiasm and
addiction is that healthy enthusiasms add to life whereas addiction takes away
from it.

For any behaviour to be defined as addictive, there have to be specific
consequences such as it becoming the most important activity in the person's
life or being the way they improve their mood.

They may also begin to need to do more and more of the activity over time to
feel the effects, and experience physical and psychological withdrawal
symptoms if they can't do it.

This may lead to conflict with work and personal responsibilities, and people
may even experience "relapses" if they try to give up.

The way addictions develop - whether chemical or behavioural - is complex.

Addictive behaviour develops from a combination of a person's
biological/genetic predisposition, the social environment they were brought up
in, their psychological constitution - such as personality factors, attitudes,
expectations and beliefs, and the activity itself.

Many behavioural addictions are "hidden" addictions. Unlike, say, alcoholism,
there is no slurred speech and no stumbling into work.

However, behavioural addiction is a health issue that needs to be taken
seriously by all those in the health and medical profession.

If the main aim of practitioners is to ensure the health of their patients,
then an awareness of behavioural addiction and the issues surrounding it
should be an important part of basic knowledge and training.

Behavioural addictions can be just as serious as drug addictions.

View comments

## Share this story About sharing

  * Email
  * Facebook
  * Messenger
  * Messenger
  * Twitter
  * Pinterest
  * WhatsApp
  * LinkedIn

## SCRUBBING UP

## Related Internet links

  * Nottingham Trent University

The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites

## Top Stories

**'State actor' behind UAE tanker attacks**

A "state actor" is blamed by a United Arab Emirates report for attacks on oil
tankers in the Gulf.

7 June 2019

**Mexico to deploy forces on Guatemala border**

7 June 2019

**Putin shrugs off D-Day anniversary snub**

6 June 2019

## Features

### How fish and shrimps could be recruited as underwater spies

Video

### Inside the city liberated from militants

Video

### Women's World Cup in numbers

### ABC police raids highlight risks of whistleblowing

### The Indian army veteran detained as a foreigner in India

### EU game-plans as waits for new UK prime minister

### The rare protests in a country that bans dissent

### Should Parkland school shooting cop be jailed?

### BBC Reel: How thinking positively can have a negative effect

## Elsewhere on the BBC

### Lyrics quiz

Have you been getting these songs wrong?

Full article Lyrics quiz

### Feeling hot

What happens to your body in extreme heat?

Full article Feeling hot

Why you can trust BBC News

## BBC News Navigation

Sections

  * Home
  * Video
  * World

    * World Home
    * Africa
    * Australia
    * Europe
    * Latin America
    * Middle East
    * US & Canada
  * Asia

    * Asia Home
    * China
    * India
  * UK

    * UK Home
    * England
    * N. Ireland
    * Scotland
    * Wales
    * Politics
  * Business

    * Business Home
    * Market Data
    * Global Trade
    * Companies
    * Entrepreneurship
    * Technology of Business
    * Connected World
    * Global Education
    * Economy
  * Tech

  * Science
  * Stories
  * Entertainment & Arts
  * Health selected
  * World News TV
  * In Pictures
  * Reality Check
  * Newsbeat
  * Special Reports
  * Explainers
  * The Reporters
  * Have Your Say

## BBC News Services

  * On your mobile
  * On your connected tv
  * Get news alerts
  * Contact BBC News

## Explore the BBC

  * Home
  * News
  * Sport
  * Weather
  * iPlayer
  * Sounds
  * CBBC
  * CBeebies
  * Food
  * Bitesize
  * Arts
  * Taster
  * Local
  * TV
  * Radio
  * Three

  * Terms of Use

  * About the BBC
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookies
  * Accessibility Help
  * Parental Guidance
  * Contact the BBC
  * Get Personalised Newsletters

_Copyright (C) 2019 BBC._ The BBC is not responsible for the content of
external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

![](//ssc.api.bbc.com/?c1=2&c2=19293874&ns_site=bbc&name=)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

