

# Psychology Today

  * Find a Therapist 

# Find a Therapist

Therapists v

    
    
    * Therapists
    * Treatment Centers
    * Psychiatrists
    * Support Groups
    

x

Therapists: Log In | Sign Up

  * Get Help 

#### Mental Health

    
    
    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

#### Do I Need Help?

    
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

  * Magazine 

#### Current

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe

#### Recent

    
    
    *     *     *     * Issue Archive
    

  * Today 

#### News

    
    
    * New Research Finds Evidence That Mindfulness Helps ADHD
    * Elephants Smell Out Differences in Quantity
    * There's No "I" in Love
    * Deep Impact: Asserting Authority with a Low-Pitched Voice
    

#### Essential Reads

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_446567287-144x144-168_0-668_667.jpg?itok=ldjr8QEG)
    

When Collaborators Turn Into Competitors

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/sleepless2_0-144x144-178_0-900_900.jpg?itok=HH1lmZUH)
    

Problems Sleeping? Look to Your Gut

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_552389755-144x144-126_0-668_667_0.jpg?itok=bJ6pfIig)
    

Healthier College Students Through Texting

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2017-06/screen_shot_2017-06-27_at_9-144x144-300_0-762_763.44.01_am.png?itok=0GOSFErQ)
    

The Dangers of Reading Micro Expressions

#### Trending Topics

    
    
    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All
    

us

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

# Search

Search

Back

Psychology Today

  * Home
  * Find a Therapist
  * Get Help
  * Magazine
  * Today

Back

### Find a Therapist

#### Get Help

  *     * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
  * #### Members

    * Login
    * Sign Up
    * 

Back

### Get Help

#### Mental Health

  *     * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

    
    
    * #### Do I Need Help?
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

Back

### Magazine

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe Issue Archive

Back

### Today

#### News

  *     * New Research Finds Evidence That Mindfulness Helps ADHD
    * Elephants Smell Out Differences in Quantity
    * There's No "I" in Love
    * Deep Impact: Asserting Authority with a Low-Pitched Voice
  * #### Essential Reads

    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_446567287-144x144-168_0-668_667.jpg?itok=ldjr8QEG)

When Collaborators Turn Into Competitors

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/sleepless2_0-144x144-178_0-900_900.jpg?itok=HH1lmZUH)
    

Problems Sleeping? Look to Your Gut

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_552389755-144x144-126_0-668_667_0.jpg?itok=bJ6pfIig)
    

Healthier College Students Through Texting

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2017-06/screen_shot_2017-06-27_at_9-144x144-300_0-762_763.44.01_am.png?itok=0GOSFErQ)
    

The Dangers of Reading Micro Expressions

  * #### Trending Topics

    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All

Go

![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/icons/icon-check-circle-gray.svg)
Verified by Psychology Today

![Tyger Latham,

Psy.D.](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile/public/tyger-

latham.jpg?itok=oMY_Ok3J)

### Tyger Latham Psy.D.

Therapy Matters

# Can You Really Become Addicted to the Internet?

## New study finds many college students are addicted to the Internet

Posted Jul 26, 2011

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/article-inline-

half/public/blogs/58146/2011/07/70237-60775.jpg?itok=DjGUzkY0)

Imagine what it would be like not to have access to the Internet or your cell
phone for 24 hours. To me the idea sounds wonderful; for many college
students, however, such an idea sounds perverse.

According to a University of Maryland study released last year, many college
students are addicted to the Internet. Researchers asked 200 college students
to give up all forms of media for 24 hour and what they discovered were that
many students showed symptoms associated with addiction, including withdrawal,
cravings and elevated anxiety.

One student who participated in the study even commented: "I am clearly
addicted... between having a Blackberry, a laptop, a television, and an iPod,
people have become unable to shed their media skin." According to Susan
Moeller, the study's project director and a journalism director at the
university, student participants had difficulty disconnecting from the
Internet. "Going without media meant," for these students, "going without
their friends and family," according to Moeller.

On the surface, the idea a person could become so dependent to the Internet
sounds a bit far fetched. We often associate addiction with things like
alcohol, drugs, and gambling, activities that are known to cause serious
impairment, both physiological and psychological in the person who is
addicted. Although the _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual_ does not recognize
addiction as a diagnostic category, it does make reference to substance abuse
and dependence. For example, according to the current DSM-IV-TR, substance
dependence is defined as:

_"When an individual persists in use of alcohol or other drugs despite
problems, related to use of the substance, substance dependence may be
diagnosed. Compulsive and repetitive use may result in tolerance to the effect
of the drug and withdrawal symptoms when use is reduced or stopped."_

Whether or not "Internet addiction" qualifies as a valid addiction will
require further research. In the meantime, there is little question many
college students have developed an unhealthy relationship with technology.
Like other potentially compulsive behaviors such as gambling, exercising, and
eating, people who engage in addictive behaviors initially derive pleasure
from them, only later to develop a dependence that can become all consuming
and potentially self-destructive.

For more on this topic, visit "A Day Without Social Media," a research study
conducted by the International Center for Media and the Public Agenda (ICMPA)
at the University of Maryland.

* * *

Tyger Latham, Psy.D. is a licensed clinical psychologist practicing in
Washington, DC. He counsels individuals and couples and has a particular
interest in sexual trauma, gender development, and LGBT concerns. His blog,
_Therapy Matters_ , explores the art and science of psychotherapy.

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg) SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

advertisement

### More Posts

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/blogs/58146/2012/05/95273-91748-144x144-0_0-144_144.jpg?itok=ZcEn-

LgN)

## The Case for Same-Sex Marriage

Marriage equality leads to stronger and healthier families.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/blogs/58146/2012/05/94639-91096_1_0_0_0_0.jpg?itok=_7VPXSuu)

## Does Porn Contribute to ED?

Growing evidence suggests that too much porn can diminish sexual performance.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/blogs/58146/2012/04/93791-90245-144x144-0_0-144_144.jpg?itok=5sNLvWPu)

## Response to Jonathan Alpert

Enough already with the shameless self-promotion.

Continue Reading

advertisement

## Most Popular

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/caleb-george-144975-unsplash-144x144-0_274-3024_3024_0.jpg?itok=pZQjXA94)

Four Ways to Cope with Stress You Likely Haven't Thought Of

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-03/hydrologic_cycle_by_sixth-grade_daughter_of_christopher_bergland-144x144-1032_0-936_937.jpg?itok=YjAdwcni)

Arts-Integrated Pedagogy May Enhance Academic Learning

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-05/sebastian_kaulitzk_medically_accurate_illustration_of_vagus_nerve_gut-brain_axis-144x144-0_0-750_750_0.jpg?itok=Fqgj60gq)

Longer Exhalations Are an Easy Way to Hack Your Vagus Nerve

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/bite_risk_tease-144x144-173_63-588_588.jpg?itok=-BCzrVTM)

Dog Breeds That Pose the Highest Risk of Hurting Children

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pixnio-212127-725x483-144x144-45_0-484_483.jpg?itok=NiBddQqW)

There's No "I" in Love

advertisement

## More Like This

  * Internet Addiction: Real or Really Techno-Hysteria?- Part 3
  * Do You Trust the Internet?
  * China To Stop Shock Therapy On Internet Addicts
  * Can You Really Become Addicted to Potato Chips?
  * The Kids Can't Stop: Is Internet Addiction Real?

## Find a Therapist

Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from Psychology
Today.

### Cities:

  * Atlanta, GA
  * Austin, TX
  * Baltimore, MD
  * Boston, MA
  * Brooklyn, NY
  * Charlotte, NC
  * Chicago, IL
  * Columbus, OH
  * Dallas, TX
  * Denver, CO
  * Detroit, MI
  * Houston, TX
  * Indianapolis, IN
  * Jacksonville, FL
  * Las Vegas, NV
  * Los Angeles, CA
  * Louisville, KY
  * Memphis, TN
  * Miami, FL
  * Milwaukee, WI
  * Minneapolis, MN
  * Nashville, TN
  * New York, NY
  * Oakland, CA
  * Omaha, NE
  * Philadelphia, PA
  * Phoenix, AZ
  * Pittsburgh, PA
  * Portland, OR
  * Raleigh, NC
  * Sacramento, CA
  * Saint Louis, MO
  * San Antonio, TX
  * San Diego, CA
  * San Francisco, CA
  * San Jose, CA
  * Seattle, WA
  * Tucson, AZ
  * Washington, DC

Are you a Therapist?

Get Listed Today

Psychology Today

![Facebook](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-facebook.svg)

![Twitter](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-twitter.svg)

![Instagram](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-instagram.svg)

## Recent Issues

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Subscribe Today!

  * About
  * Privacy
  * Terms

United States ![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/actions/country-switcher-

body.svg) v

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Psychology Today (C) 2019 Sussex Publishers, LLC

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

