

Open main menu

![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Search

# Incarceration in the United States

  * Read in another language 
  * Watch this page 
  * Edit 

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/US_incarceration_timeline-

clean.svg/350px-US_incarceration_timeline-clean.svg.png)

Total U.S. incarceration by year

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/U.S._incarceration_rates_1925_onwards.png/350px-U.S._incarceration_rates_1925_onwards.png)

A graph showing the incarceration rate under state and federal jurisdiction
per 100,000 population 1925–2013. Does not include unsentenced inmates, nor
inmates in local jails.[1][2]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b6/Adult_incarceration_statistics_for_the_USA._Timeline.gif/350px-

Adult_incarceration_statistics_for_the_USA._Timeline.gif)

Inmates held in custody in state or federal prisons or in local jails. From
U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics.[2]

**Incarceration in the United States** is one of the main forms of punishment
and rehabilitation for the commission of felony and other offenses. The United
States has the largest prison population in the world, and the highest per-
capita incarceration rate.[3][4][5] In 2016 in the US, there were 655 people
incarcerated per 100,000 population. This is the US incarceration rate for
adults or people tried as adults.[6][3] In 2016, 2.2 million Americans have
been incarcerated, which means for every 100,000 there are 655 that are
currently inmates. This costs the United States government $80 billion dollars
a year.

Additionally, 4,751,400 adults in 2013 (1 in 51) were on probation or on
parole.[2] In total, 6,899,000 adults were under correctional supervision
(probation, parole, jail, or prison) in 2013 – about 2.8% of adults (1 in 35)
in the U.S. resident population.[2] In 2014, the total number of persons in
the adult correctional systems had fallen to 6,851,000 persons, approximately
52,200 fewer offenders than at the year-end of 2013 as reported by the BJS.
About 1 in 36 adults (or 2.8% of adults in the US) were under some form of
correctional supervision – the lowest rate since 1996. On average, the
correctional population has declined by 1.0% since 2007; while this continued
to stay true in 2014 the number of incarcerated adults slightly increased in
2014.[7] In 2016, the total number of persons in U.S. adult correctional
systems was an estimated 6,613,500. From 2007 to 2016, the correctional
population decreased by an average of 1.2% annually. By the end of 2016,
approximately 1 in 38 persons in the United States were under correctional
supervision.[8]

In addition, there were 54,148 juveniles in juvenile detention in 2013.[9]

Although debtor's prisons no longer exist in the United States, residents of
some U.S. states can still be incarcerated for debt as of
2016[update].[10][11][12][13] The Vera Institute of Justice reported in 2015
that majority of those incarcerated in local and county jails are there for
minor violations, and have been jailed for longer periods of time over the
past 30 years because they are unable to pay court-imposed costs.[14]

According to a 2014 Human Rights Watch report, "tough-on-crime" laws adopted
since the 1980s, have filled U.S. prisons with mostly nonviolent
offenders.[15] However, the Bureau of Justice Statistics reported that, as of
the end of 2015, 54% of state prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year were
serving time for a violent offense. Fifteen percent of state prisoners at
year-end 2015 had been convicted of a drug offense as their most serious. In
comparison, 47% of federal prisoners serving time in September 2016 (the most
recent date for which data are available) were convicted of a drug
offense.[16] This policy failed to rehabilitate prisoners and many were worse
on release than before incarceration. Rehabilitation programs for offenders
can be more cost effective than prison.[17] According to a 2015 study by the
Brennan Center for Justice, falling crime rates cannot be ascribed to mass
incarceration.[18] Conversely, Steven Levitt asserted in a 2004 paper that,
among other factors that also affected the crime rate, approximately one third
of the observed crime drop in the 1990s was due to incarceration.[19][ _not in
citation given (See discussion.)_ ]

## Contents

##

HistoryEdit

Main article: History of United States prison systems

This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( July 2014)_

* * *

Throughout the 1500s, the people of England considered idleness to be the
cause of many crimes, and therefore found the solution to be creating
workhouses as a system to rehabilitate criminals. Though many of the first
people, especially in the foundation of these "houses of correction" were
actually vagrants without homes. Later, in the 1700s, English philanthropists
began to focus on the reform of convicted criminals in prisons, which they
believed needed a chance to become morally pure in order to stop or slow
crime. Since at least 1740, some of these philosophers began thinking of
solitary confinement as a way to create and maintain spiritually clean people
in prisons. As English people immigrated to North America, so did these
theories of penology.[20]

Spanish colonizers also brought ideas on confinement.[ _clarification needed_
] Spanish soldiers in St. Augustine, Florida built the first substantial
prison.[ _when?_ ][21]

Some of the first structures built in English-settled America were jails, and
by the 18th century, every English North American county had a jail. These
jails served a variety of functions such as a holding place for debtors,
prisoners-of-war, and political prisoners, those bound in the penal
transportation and slavery systems, and of those accused-of but not tried for
crimes.[20][21] Sentences for those convicted of crimes were rarely longer
than three months, and often lasted only a day. Poor citizens were often
imprisoned for longer than their richer neighbors, as bail was rarely not
accepted.[20]

In 1841, Dorothea Dix discovered that prison conditions in the US were, in her
opinion, inhumane. Prisoners were chained naked, whipped with rods. Others,
criminally insane, were caged, or placed in cellars, or closets. She insisted
on changes throughout the rest of her life. While focusing on the insane, her
comments also resulted in changes for other inmates.[22]

##

Prison systemsEdit

In the United States criminal law is a concurrent power. Individuals who
violate state laws and/or territorial laws generally are placed in state or
territorial prisons, while those who violate United States federal law are
generally placed in federal prisons operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons
(BOP), an agency of the United States Department of Justice (USDOJ). The BOP
also houses adult felons convicted of violating District of Columbia laws due
to the National Capital Revitalization and Self-Government Improvement Act of
1997.

As of 2004, state prisons proportionately house more violent felons, so state
prisons in general gained a more negative reputation compared to federal
prisons.[23]

In 2016, almost 90% of prisoners were in state prisons; 10% were in federal
prisons.[24]

At sentencing in federal court, judges use a point system to determine which
inmate goes into which housing branch. This helps federal law employees to
determine who goes to which facility and to which punishing housing unit to
send them. Another method to determine housing is the admission committees. In
prisons, multiple people come together to determine to which housing unit an
inmate belongs. People like the case manager, psychologist, and social worker
have a voice in what is appropriate for the inmate.[25]

##

Prison populationsEdit

Main article: List of U.S. states by incarceration and correctional
supervision rate

This article's **tone or style may not reflect theencyclopedic tone used on
Wikipedia**. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.
_( November 2018)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

* * *

US and territories.[26]  
Incarcerated population.  
Adult and juvenile inmates. | Number of  
inmates  
in 2008  
\---|---  
**Total** | **2,418,352**  
Federal and state prisons | 1,518,559  
Local jails | 785,556  
Juvenile facilities (2007)[9] | 86,927  
Territorial prisons | 13,576  
ICE facilities | 9,957  
Jails in tribal territories | 2,135  
Military facilities | 1,651

As of 2016, 2.3 million people were incarcerated in the United States, at a
rate of 698 people per 100,000.[27] Total US incarceration peaked in 2008.
Total correctional population (prison, jail, probation, parole) peaked in
2007.[2] In 2008 the US had around 24.7% of the world's 9.8 million
prisoners.[9][26][28]

In 2016, almost 7 million people were under some type of control by the
correction industry (incarcerated, on probation or parole, etc).[27] 3.6
million of those people were on probation and 840,000 were on parole.[29] In
recent decades the U.S. has experienced a surge in its prison population,
quadrupling since 1980, partially as a result of mandatory sentencing that
came about during the "War on Drugs."

Nearly 53,000 youth were incarcerated in 2015.[30] 4,656 of those were held in
adult facilities, while the rest were in juvenile facilities. Of those in
juvenile facilities, 69% are 16 or older, while over 500 are 12 or
younger.[30] The Prison Policy Initiative broke down those numbers, finding
that "black and American Indian youth are overrepresented in juvenile
facilities while white youth are underrepresented."[30] Black youth comprise
14% of the national youth population, but "43% of boys and 34% of girls in
juvenile facilities are Black. And even excluding youth held in Indian country
facilities, American Indians make up 3% of girls and 1.5% of boys in juvenile
facilities, despite comprising less than 1% of all youth nationally."[30]

As of 2009, the three states with the lowest ratios of imprisoned people per
100,000 population are Maine (150 per 100,000), Minnesota (189 per 100,000),
and New Hampshire (206 per 100,000). The three states with the highest ratio
are Louisiana (881 per 100,000), Mississippi (702 per 100,000) and Oklahoma
(657 per 100,000).[31] A 2018 study by the Prison Policy Initiative placed
Oklahoma's incarceration rate as 1,079, supplanting Louisiana (with a rate of
1,052) as "the world's prison capital."[32][33]

A 2005 report estimated that 27% of federal prison inmates are noncitizens,
convicted of crimes while in the country legally or illegally.[34] However,
federal prison inmates account for six percent of the total incarcerated
population; noncitizen populations in state and local prisons are more
difficult to establish.

### DurationEdit

Main article: Criminal sentencing in the United States

Many legislatures continually have reduced discretion of judges in both the
sentencing process and the determination of when the conditions of a sentence
have been satisfied. Determinate sentencing, use of mandatory minimums, and
guidelines-based sentencing continue to remove the human element from
sentencing, such as the prerogative of the judge to consider the mitigating or
extenuating circumstances of a crime to determine the appropriate length of
the incarceration. As the consequence of "three strikes laws," the increase in
the duration of incarceration in the last decade was most pronounced in the
case of life prison sentences, which increased by 83% between 1992 and 2003
while violent crimes fell in the same period.[35]

### Violent and nonviolent crimeEdit

In 2016, there were an estimated 1.2 million violent crimes committed in the
United States.[36] Over the course of that year, U.S. law enforcement agencies
made approximately 10.7 million arrests, excluding arrests for traffic
violations.[36] In that year, approximately 2.3 million people were
incarcerated in jail or prison.[37]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d3/Felony_Sentences_in_State_Courts.pdf/page1-220px-

Felony_Sentences_in_State_Courts.pdf.jpg)

_Felony Sentences in State Courts_ , study by the United States Department of
Justice

As of September 30, 2009 in federal prisons, 7.9% of sentenced prisoners were
incarcerated for violent crimes,[31] while at year end 2008 of sentenced
prisoners in state prisons, 52.4% had been jailed for violent crimes.[31] In
2002 (latest available data by type of offense), 21.6% of convicted inmates in
jails were in prison for violent crimes. Among unconvicted inmates in jails in
2002, 34% had a violent offense as the most serious charge. 41% percent of
convicted and unconvicted jail inmates in 2002 had a current or prior violent
offense; 46% were nonviolent recidivists.[38]

From 2000 to 2008, the state prison population increased by 159,200 prisoners,
and violent offenders accounted for 60% of this increase. The number of drug
offenders in state prisons declined by 12,400 over this period. Furthermore,
while the number of sentenced violent offenders in state prison increased from
2000 through 2008, the expected length of stays for these offenders declined
slightly during this period.[31]

In 2016, about 200,000, under 16%, of the 1.3 million people in state jails,
were serving time for drug offenses. 700,000 were incarcerated for violent
offenses.[24]

Violent crime was not responsible for the quadrupling of the incarcerated
population in the United States from 1980 to 2003. Violent crime rates had
been relatively constant or declining over those decades. The prison
population was increased primarily by public policy changes causing more
prison sentences and lengthening time served, for example through mandatory
minimum sentencing, "three strikes" laws, and reductions in the availability
of parole or early release. 49% of sentenced state inmates were held for
violent offenses.

Main article: War on Drugs

Perhaps the single greatest force behind the growth of the prison population
has been the national "War on Drugs". The War on Drugs initiative expanded
during the presidency of Ronald Reagan. During Regan's term, a bi-partisan
Congress established the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, galvanized by the death
of Len Bias. According to the Human Rights Watch, legislation like this led to
the extreme increase in drug offense imprisonment and "increasing racial
disproportions among the arrestees".[39] The number of incarcerated drug
offenders has increased twelvefold since 1980. In 2000, 22 percent of those in
federal and state prisons were convicted on drug charges.[40][41] In 2011,
55.6% of the 1,131,210 sentenced prisoners in state prisons were being held
for violent crimes (this number excludes the 200,966 prisoners being held due
parole violations, of which 39.6% were re-incarcerated for a subsequent
violent crime).[42] Also in 2011, 3.7% of the state prison population
consisted of prisoners whose highest conviction was for drug possession (again
excluding those incarcerated for parole violations of which 6.0% were re-
incarcerated for a subsequent act of drug possession).[42]

### RecidivismEdit

Main article: Recidivism in the United States

A 2002 study survey, showed that among nearly 275,000 prisoners released in
1994, 67.5% were rearrested within 3 years, and 51.8% were back in prison.[43]
However, the study found no evidence that spending more time in prison raises
the recidivism rate, and found that those serving the longest time, 61 months
or more, had a slightly lower re-arrest rate (54.2%) than every other category
of prisoners. This is most likely explained by the older average age of those
released with the longest sentences, and the study shows a strong negative
correlation between recidivism and age upon release. According to the Bureau
of Justice Statistics, a study was conducted that tracked 404,638 prisoners in
30 states after their release from prison in 2005. From the examination it was
found that within three years after their release 67.8% of the released
prisoners were rearrested; within five years, 76.6% of the released prisoners
were rearrested, and of the prisoners that were rearrested 56.7% of them were
rearrested by the end of their first year of release.[44]

### Comparison with other countriesEdit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ec/Prisoners_world_map_png2.png/350px-

Prisoners_world_map_png2.png)

A map of incarceration rates by country[3]

Main article: Comparison of United States incarceration rate with other
countries

See also: List of countries by incarceration rate

With around 100 prisoners per 100,000, the United States had an average prison
and jail population until 1980. Afterwards it drifted apart considerably. The
United States has the highest prison and jail population (2,121,600 in adult
facilities in 2016), and the highest incarceration rate in the world (655 per
100,000 population in 2016),.[3][45][46] According to the World Prison
Population List (11th edition) there were around 10.35 million people in penal
institutions worldwide in 2015.[47] The US had 2,173,800 prisoners in adult
facilities in 2015.[48] That means the US held 21.0% of the world's prisoners
in 2015, even though the US represented only around 4.4 percent of the world's
population in 2015,[49][50]

Comparing other English-speaking developed countries, whereas the
incarceration rate of the US is 655 per 100,000 population of all ages,[3] the
incarceration rate of Canada is 114 per 100,000 (as of 2015),[51] England and
Wales is 146 per 100,000 (as of 2016),[52] and Australia is 160 per 100,000
(as of 2016).[53] Comparing other developed countries, the rate of Spain is
133 per 100,000 (as of 2016),[54] Greece is 89 per 100,000 (as of 2016),[55]
Norway is 73 per 100,000 (as of 2016),[56] Netherlands is 69 per 100,000 (as
of 2014),[57] and Japan is 48 per 100,000 (as of 2014).[58]

A 2008 _New York Times_ article,[46] said that "it is the length of sentences
that truly distinguishes American prison policy. Indeed, the mere number of
sentences imposed here would not place the United States at the top of the
incarceration lists. If lists were compiled based on annual admissions to
prison per capita, several European countries would outpace the United States.
But American prison stays are much longer, so the total incarceration rate is
higher."

The U.S. incarceration rate peaked in 2008 when about 1 in 100 US adults was
behind bars.[59] This incarceration rate exceeded the average incarceration
levels in the Soviet Union during the existence of the Gulag system, when the
Soviet Union's population reached 168 million, and 1.2 to 1.5 million people
were in the Gulag prison camps and colonies (i.e. about 0.8 imprisoned per 100
USSR residents, according to numbers from Anne Applebaum and Steven
Rosefielde).[60][61] In _The New Yorker_ article _The Caging of America_
(2012), Adam Gopnik writes: "Over all, there are now more people under
'correctional supervision' in America—more than six million—than were in the
Gulag Archipelago under Stalin at its height."[62]

### EthnicityEdit

See also: Race and crime in the United States and Racial inequality in the
American criminal justice system

**2010\. Inmates in adult facilities, by race and ethnicity. Jails, and state
and federal prisons.** [63]

* * *

**Race, ethnicity** | **% of US population** | **% of U.S.**  
**incarcerated population** | **National incarceration rate**  
**(per 100,000 of all ages)**  
**White (non-Hispanic)** | 64 | 39 | 450 per 100,000  
**Hispanic** | 16 | 19 | 831 per 100,000  
**Black** | 13 | 40 | 2,306 per 100,000

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3a/US_Prisoner_Demographics.svg/350px-

US_Prisoner_Demographics.svg.png)

The 2015 US prison population by race, ethnicity, and gender. Does not include
jails.[64]

According to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) in 2013 black males
accounted for 37% of the total male prison population, white males 32%, and
Hispanic males 22%. White females comprised 49% of the prison population in
comparison to black females who accounted for 22% of the female population.
The imprisonment rate for black females (113 per 100,000) was 2x the rate for
white females (51 per 100,000.[65] Out of all ethnic groups, African
Americans, Puerto Rican Americans, and Native Americans have some of the
highest rates of incarceration.[66][67][68][69][70][71][72][73][74] Though, of
these groups, the black population is the largest, and therefore make up a
large portion of those incarcerated in US prisons and jails.[ _clarification
needed_ ][75]

Hispanics (of all races) were 20.6% of the total jail and prison population in
2009.[76] Hispanics comprised 16.3% of the US population according to the 2010
US census.[77][78] The Northeast has the highest incarceration rates of
Hispanics in the nation.[79] Connecticut has the highest Hispanic-to-White
incarceration ratio with 6.6 Hispanic males for every white male. The National
Average Hispanic-to-White incarceration ratio is 1.8. Other states with high
Hispanic-to-White incarcerations include Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and New
York.[80][81]

In 2010, adult black non-Hispanic males were incarcerated at the rate of 4,347
inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents. Adult white males were incarcerated at the
rate of 678 inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents. Adult Hispanic males were
incarcerated at the rate of 1,755 inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents.[1] (For
female rates see the table below.) Asian Americans have lower incarceration
rates than any other racial group, including whites.[82]

There is general agreement in the literature that blacks are more likely to be
arrested for violent crimes than whites in the United States. Whether this is
the case for less serious crimes is less clear.[83] Black majority cities have
similar crime statistics for blacks as do cities where majority of population
is white. For example, white-plurality San Diego has a slightly lower crime
rate for blacks than does Atlanta, a city which has black majority in
population and city government.[84]

In 2013, by age 18, 30% of black males, 26% of Hispanic males, and 22% of
white males have been arrested. By age 23, 49% of black males, 44% of Hispanic
males, and 38% of white males have been arrested.[85] According to Attorney
Antonio Moore in his Huffington Post article, "there are more African American
men incarcerated in the U.S. than the total prison populations in India,
Argentina, Canada, Lebanon, Japan, Germany, Finland, Israel and England
combined." There are only 19 million African American males in the United
States, but collectively these countries represent over 1.6 billion
people.[86] Moore has also shown using data from the World Prison Brief [87]&
United States Department of Justice[88] that there are more black males
incarcerated in the United States than all women imprisoned globally. To give
perspective there are just about 4 billion woman in total globally, there are
only 19 million black males of all ages in the United States.[ _citation
needed_ ]

### GenderEdit

2010 adult incarceration rates  
by race, ethnicity, and sex  
per 100,000 adult US residents[1]

* * *

Race or  
ethnicity | Male | Female

| |  
White | 678 | 91  
Black | 4,347 | 260  
Hispanic | 1,775 | 133

See also: Incarceration of women in the United States

In 2013, there were 102,400 adult females in local jails in the United States,
and 111,300 adult females in state and federal prisons.[2] Within the US, the
rate of female incarceration increased fivefold in a two decade span ending in
2001; the increase occurred because of increased prosecutions and convictions
of offenses related to recreational drugs, increases in the severities of
offenses, and a lack of community sanctions and treatment for women who
violate laws.[89] In the United States, authorities began housing women in
correctional facilities separate from men in the 1870s.[90]

In 2013, there were 628,900 adult males in local jails in the United States,
and 1,463,500 adult males in state and federal prisons.[2] In a study of
sentencing in the United States in 1984, David B. Mustard found that males
received 12 percent longer prison terms than females after "controlling for
the offense level, criminal history, district, and offense type," and noted
that "females receive even shorter sentences relative to men than whites
relative to blacks."[91] A later study by Sonja B. Starr found sentences for
men to be up to 60% higher when controlling for more variables.[92] Several
explanations for this disparity have been offered, including that women have
more to lose from incarceration, and that men are the targets of
discrimination in sentencing.[93]

### YouthEdit

Main article: Youth incarceration in the United States

Juveniles in residential  
placement, 1997–2015. US[9]

* * *

Year | Male | Female | Total

| | |  
1997 | 90,771 | 14,284 | 105,055  
1999 | 92,985 | 14,508 | 107,493  
2001 | 89,115 | 15,104 | 104,219  
2003 | 81,975 | 14,556 | 96,531  
2006 | 78,998 | 13,723 | 92,721  
2007 | 75,017 | 11,797 | 86,814  
2010 | 61,359 | 9,434 | 70,793  
2011 | 53,079 | 8,344 | 61,423  
2013 | 46,421 | 7,727 | 54,148  
2015 | 40,750 | 7,293 | 48,043

Through the juvenile courts and the adult criminal justice system, the United
States incarcerates more of its youth than any other country in the world, a
reflection of the larger trends in incarceration practices in the United
States. This has been a source of controversy for a number of reasons,
including the overcrowding and violence in youth detention facilities, the
prosecution of youths as adults and the long term consequences of
incarceration on the individual's chances for success in adulthood. In 2014,
the United Nations Human Rights Committee criticized the United States for
about ten judicial abuses, including the mistreatment of juvenile inmates.[94]
A UN report published in 2015 criticized the US for being the only nation in
the world to sentence juveniles to life imprisonment without parole.[95]

According to federal data from 2011, around 40% of the nation's juvenile
inmates are housed in private facilities.[96]

The incarceration of youths has been linked to the effects of family and
neighborhood influences. One study found that the "behaviors of family members
and neighborhood peers appear to substantially affect the behavior and
outcomes of disadvantaged youths".[97]

### AgedEdit

The percentage of prisoners in federal and state prisons aged 55 and older
increased by 33% from 2000 to 2005 while the prison population grew by 8%. The
Southern Legislative Conference found that in 16 southern states, the elderly
prisoner population increased on average by 145% between 1997 and 2007. The
growth in the elderly population brought along higher health care costs, most
notably seen in the 10% average increase in state prison budgets from 2005 to
2006.

The SLC expects the percentage of elderly prisoners relative to the overall
prison population to continue to rise. Ronald Aday, a professor of aging
studies at Middle Tennessee State University and author of _Aging Prisoners:
Crisis in American Corrections_ , concurs. One out of six prisoners in
California is serving a life sentence. Aday predicts that by 2020 16% percent
of those serving life sentences will be elderly.[98][99]

State governments pay all of their inmates' housing costs which significantly
increase as prisoners age. Inmates are unable to apply for Medicare and
Medicaid. Most Departments of Correction report spending more than 10 percent
of the annual budget on elderly care.[98][99]

The American Civil Liberties Union published a report in 2012 which asserts
that the elderly prison population has climbed 1300% since the 1980s, with
125,000 inmates aged 55 or older now incarcerated.[100]

### LGBT peopleEdit

LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender) youth are disproportionately
more likely than the general population to come into contact with the criminal
justice system. According to the National Center for Transgender Equality, 16
percent of transgender adults have been in prison and/or jail, compared to 2.7
percent of all adults.[101] It has also been found that 13–15 percent of youth
in detention identify as LGBT, whereas an estimated 4-8 percent of the general
youth population identify as such.[102]

The reasons behind these disproportionate numbers are multi-faceted and
complex.[ _citation needed_ ] Poverty, homelessness, profiling[ _citation
needed_ ] by law enforcement, and imprisonment are disproportionately
experienced by transgender and gender non-conforming people.[102] LGBT youth
not only experience these same challenges, but many also live in homes
unwelcoming to their identities.[103] This often results in LGBT youth running
away and/or engaging in criminal activities, such as the drug trade, sex work,
and/or theft, which places them at higher risk for arrest. Because of
discriminatory practices and limited access to resources, transgender adults
are also more likely to engage in criminal activities to be able to pay for
housing, health care, and other basic needs.[103]

LGBT people in jail and prison are particularly vulnerable to mistreatment by
other inmates and staff. This mistreatment includes solitary confinement
(which may be described as "protective custody"), physical and sexual
violence, verbal abuse, and denial of medical care and other
services.[101][104] According to the National Inmate Survey, in 2011–12, 40
percent of transgender inmates reported sexual victimization compared to 4
percent of all inmates.[105]

### Mental illnessEdit

Main article: Mentally ill people in United States jails and prisons

In the United States, the percentage of inmates with mental illness has been
steadily increasing, with rates more than quadrupling from 1998 to 2006.[106]
Many have attributed this trend to the deinstitutionalization of mentally ill
persons beginning in the 1960s, when mental hospitals across the country began
closing their doors.[107][108] However, other researchers indicate that "there
is no evidence for the basic criminalization premise that decreased
psychiatric services explain the disproportionate risk of incarceration for
individuals with mental illness".[109]

According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, over half of all prisoners in
2005 had experienced mental illness as identified by "a recent history or
symptoms of a mental health problem"; of this population, jail inmates
experienced the highest rates of symptoms of mental illness at 60 percent,
followed by 49 percent of state prisoners and 40 percent of federal
prisoners.[110] Not only do people with recent histories of mental illness end
up incarcerated, but many who have no history of mental illness end up
developing symptoms while in prison. In 2006, the Bureau of Justice Statistics
found that a quarter of state prisoners had a history of mental illness,
whereas 3 in 10 state prisoners had developed symptoms of mental illness since
becoming incarcerated with no recent history of mental illness.[110]

According to Human Rights Watch, one of the contributing factors to the
disproportionate rates of mental illness in prisons and jails is the increased
use of solitary confinement, for which "socially and psychologically
meaningful contact is reduced to the absolute minimum, to a point that is
insufficient for most detainees to remain mentally well functioning".[111]
Another factor to be considered is that most inmates do not get the mental
health services that they need while incarcerated. Due to limited funding,
prisons are not able to provide a full range of mental health services and
thus are typically limited to inconsistent administration of psychotropic
medication, or no psychiatric services at all.[108][111] Human Rights Watch
also reports that corrections officers routinely use excessive violence
against mentally ill inmates for nonthreatening behaviors related to
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Inmates are often shocked, shackled and
pepper sprayed.[112]

Although many argue that prisons have become the facilities for the mentally
ill, very few crimes point directly to symptoms of mental illness as their
sole cause.[111][113] Despite the disproportionate representation of mentally
ill persons in prison, a study by American Psychological Association indicates
that only 7.5 percent of crimes committed were found to be directly related to
mental illness.[113] However, some advocates argue that many incarcerations of
mentally ill persons could have been avoided if they had been given proper
treatment,[106][107][114] which would be a much less costly alternative to
incarceration.[106]

Mental illness rarely stands alone when analyzing the risk factors associated
with incarceration and recidivism rates.[110][113] The American Psychological
Association recommends a holistic approach to reducing recidivism rates among
offenders by providing "cognitive–behavioral treatment focused on criminal
cognition" or "services that target variable risk factors for high-risk
offenders" due to the numerous intersecting risk factors experienced by
mentally ill and non-mentally ill offenders alike.[113]

To prevent the recidivism of individuals with mental illness, a variety of
programs are in place that are based on criminal justice or mental health
intervention models. Programs modeled after criminal justice strategies
include diversion programs, mental health courts, specialty mental health
probation or parole, and jail aftercare/prison re-entry. Programs modeled
after mental health interventions include forensic assertive community
treatment and forensic intensive case management. It has been argued that the
wide diversity of these program interventions points to a lack of clarity on
which specific program components are most effective in reducing recidivism
rates among individuals with mental illness.[109]

### StudentsEdit

Main article: School-to-prison-pipeline

The term "school-to-prison-pipeline", also known as the "schoolhouse-to-
jailhouse track", is a concept that was named in the 1980s. The school-to-
prison pipeline is the idea that a school's harsh punishments—which typically
push students out of the classroom—lead to the criminalization of students'
misbehaviors and result in increasing a student's probability of entering the
prison system.[115] Although the school-to-prison pipeline is aggravated by a
combination of ingredients, zero-tolerance policies are viewed as main
contributors.[116]

Zero-tolerance policies are regulations that mandate specific consequences in
response to outlined student misbehavior, typically without any consideration
for the unique circumstances surrounding a given incident.[117] Zero-tolerance
policies both implicitly and explicitly usher the student into the prison
track. Implicitly, when a student is extracted from the classroom, the more
likely that student is to drop out of school as a result of being in class
less. As a dropout, that child is then ill-prepared to obtain a job and become
a fruitful citizen.[118] Explicitly, schools sometimes do not funnel their
pupils to the prison systems inadvertently; rather, they send them
directly.[119] Once in juvenile court, even sympathetic judges are not likely
to evaluate whether the school's punishment was warranted or fair. For these
reasons, it is argued that zero-tolerance policies lead to an exponential
increase in the juvenile prison populations.[120]

The national suspension rate doubled from 3.7% to 7.4% from 1973 to 2010.[121]
The claim that Zero Tolerance Policies affect students of color at a
disproportionate rate is supported in the Code of Maryland Regulations study
that found black students were suspended at more than double the rate of white
students.[122] This trend can be seen throughout numerous studies of this type
of material and particularly in the south.[123][124] Furthermore, between 1985
and 1989, there was an increase in referrals of minority youth to juvenile
court, petitioned cases, adjudicated delinquency cases, and delinquency cases
placed outside the home.[125] During this time period, the number of African
American youth detained increased by 9% and the number of Hispanic youth
detained increased by 4%, yet the proportion of White youth declined by
13%.[124] Documentation of this phenomenon can be seen as early as 1975 with
the book _School Suspensions: Are they helping children?_ [126]

### Transfer treatyEdit

The BOP receives all prisoner transfer treaty inmates sent from foreign
countries, even if their crimes would have been, if committed in the United
States, tried in state, DC, or territorial courts.[127] Non-US citizens
incarcerated in federal and state prisons are eligible to be transferred to
their home countries if they qualify.[128]

##

OperationalEdit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/40/U.S._federal_prisoner_distribution_since_1950.png/220px-U.S._federal_prisoner_distribution_since_1950.png)

U.S. federal prisoner distribution since 1950

### Security levelsEdit

This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Incarceration in the United States" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( November 2012)_ _(Learn how and when
to remove this template message)_

* * *

In some, but not all, states' department of corrections, inmates reside in
different facilities that vary by security level, especially in security
measures, administration of inmates, type of housing, and weapons and tactics
used by corrections officers. The federal government's Bureau of Prisons uses
a numbered scale from one to five to represent the security level. Level five
is the most secure, while level one is the least. State prison systems operate
similar systems. California, for example, classifies its facilities from
Reception Center through Levels I to V (minimum to maximum security) to
specialized high security units (all considered Level V) including Security
Housing Unit (SHU)—California's version of supermax—and related units. As a
general rule, county jails, detention centers, and reception centers, where
new commitments are first held while either awaiting trial or before being
transferred to "mainline" institutions to serve out their sentences, operate
at a relatively high level of security, usually close security or higher.

**Supermax prison** facilities provide the highest level of prison security.
These units hold those considered the most dangerous inmates, as well as
inmates that have been deemed too high-profile or too great a national
security risk for a normal prison. These include inmates who have committed
assaults, murders, or other serious violations in less secure facilities, and
inmates known to be or accused of being prison gang members. Most states have
either a supermax section of a prison facility or an entire prison facility
designated as a supermax. The United States Federal Bureau of Prisons operates
a federal supermax, A.D.X. Florence, located in Florence, Colorado, also known
as the "Alcatraz of the Rockies" and widely considered to be perhaps the most
secure prison in the United States. A.D.X. Florence has a standard supermax
section where assaultive, violent, and gang-related inmates are kept under
normal supermax conditions of 23-hour confinement and abridged amenities.
A.D.X. Florence is considered to be of a security level above that of all
other prisons in the United States, at least in the "ideological" ultramax
part of it, which features permanent, 24-hour solitary confinement with rare
human contacts or opportunity to earn better conditions through good behavior.

In a **maximum security** prison or area (called **high security** in the
federal system), all prisoners have individual cells[129] with sliding doors
controlled from a secure remote control station. Prisoners are allowed out of
their cells one out of twenty four hours (one hour and 30 minutes for
prisoners in California). When out of their cells, prisoners remain in the
cell block or an exterior cage. Movement out of the cell block or "pod" is
tightly restricted using restraints and escorts by correctional officers.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1e/US_Incarceration_Rates_in_2016.svg/220px-

US_Incarceration_Rates_in_2016.svg.png)

U.S. state prisoner distribution in 2016; excludes jail inmates. Data Source:
https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6226

Under **close security** , prisoners usually have one- or two-person cells
operated from a remote control station. Each cell has its own toilet and sink.
Inmates may leave their cells for work assignments or correctional programs
and otherwise may be allowed in a common area in the cellblock or an exercise
yard. The fences are generally double fences with watchtowers housing armed
guards, plus often a third, lethal-current electric fence in the middle.

Prisoners that fall into the **medium security** group may sleep in cells, but
share them two and two, and use bunk beds[129] with lockers to store their
possessions. The cell may have showers, toilets and sinks, but it's not a
strictly enforced rule.[130] Cells are locked at night with one or more
correctional officers supervising. There is less supervision over the internal
movements of prisoners. The perimeter is generally double fenced and regularly
patrolled.

Prisoners in **minimum security** facilities are considered to pose little
physical risk to the public and are mainly non-violent "white collar
criminals". Minimum security prisoners live in less-secure dormitories,[129]
which are regularly patrolled by correctional officers. As in medium security
facilities, they have communal showers, toilets, and sinks. A minimum-security
facility generally has a single fence that is watched, but not patrolled, by
armed guards. At facilities in very remote and rural areas, there may be no
fence at all. Prisoners may often work on community projects, such as roadside
litter cleanup with the state department of transportation or wilderness
conservation. Many minimum security facilities are small camps located in or
near military bases, larger prisons (outside the security perimeter) or other
government institutions to provide a convenient supply of convict labor to the
institution. Many states allow persons in minimum-security facilities access
to the Internet.

### CorrespondenceEdit

Research indicates that inmates who maintain contact with family and friends
in the outside world are less likely to be convicted of further crimes and
usually have an easier reintegration period back into society.[131] Research
demonstrates that inmates benefit from corresponding with friends and family
members, especially when in-person visits are infrequent.[132] However,
guidelines exist as to what constitutes acceptable mail, and these policies
are strictly enforced.

Mail sent to inmates in violation of prison policies can result in sanctions
such as loss of imprisonment time reduced for good behavior. Most Department
of Corrections websites provide detailed information regarding mail policies.
These rules can even vary within a single prison depending on which part of
the prison an inmate is housed. For example, death row and maximum security
inmates are usually under stricter mail guidelines for security reasons.

There have been several notable challenges to prison corresponding services.
The Missouri Department of Corrections (DOC) stated that effective June 1,
2007, inmates would be prohibited from using pen pal websites, citing concerns
that inmates were using them to solicit money and defraud the public.[133]
Service providers such as WriteAPrisoner.com, together with the ACLU, plan to
challenge the ban in Federal Court. Similar bans on an inmate's rights or a
website's right to post such information has been ruled unconstitutional in
other courts, citing First Amendment freedoms.[134] Some faith-based
initiatives promote the positive effects of correspondence on inmates, and
some have made efforts to help ex-offenders reintegrate into society through
job placement assistance.[135] Inmates' ability to mail letters to other
inmates has been limited by the courts.[136]

### ConditionsEdit

Further information: Pregnancy and prenatal care in American women's prisons,
Prisoner abuse in the United States, and Prison rape in the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6f/Prison_crowded.jpg/400px-

Prison_crowded.jpg)

Living facilities in California State Prison (July 19, 2006)[137]

The non-governmental organization Human Rights Watch claims that prisoners and
detainees face "abusive, degrading and dangerous" conditions within local,
state and federal facilities, including those operated by for-profit
contractors.[138] The organization also raised concerns with prisoner rape and
medical care for inmates.[139] In a survey of 1,788 male inmates in Midwestern
prisons by _Prison Journal_ , about 21% responded they had been coerced or
pressured into sexual activity during their incarceration, and 7% that they
had been raped in their current facility.[140]

In August 2003, a _Harper's_ article by Wil S. Hylton estimated that
"somewhere between 20 and 40% of American prisoners are, at this very moment,
infected with hepatitis C".[141] Prisons may outsource medical care to private
companies such as Correctional Medical Services (now Corizon) that, according
to Hylton's research, try to minimize the amount of care given to prisoners in
order to maximize profits.[141][142] After the privatization of healthcare in
Arizona's prisons, medical spending fell by 30 million dollars and staffing
was greatly reduced. Some 50 prisoners died in custody in the first 8 months
of 2013, compared to 37 for the preceding two years combined.[143]

The poor quality of food provided to inmates has become an issue, as over the
last decade corrections officials looking to cut costs have been outsourcing
food services to private, for-profit corporations such as Aramark, A'Viands
Food & Services Management, and ABL Management.[144] A prison riot in Kentucky
has been blamed on the low quality of food Aramark provided to inmates.[145] A
2017 study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that
because of lapses in food safety, prison inmates are 6.4 times more likely to
contract a food-related illness than the general population.[146]

Also identified as an issue within the prison system is gang violence, because
many gang members retain their gang identity and affiliations when imprisoned.
Segregation of identified gang members from the general population of inmates,
with different gangs being housed in separate units often results in the
imprisonment of these gang members with their friends and criminal cohorts.
Some feel this has the effect of turning prisons into "institutions of higher
criminal learning."[147]

Many prisons in the United States are overcrowded. For example, California's
33 prisons have a total capacity of 100,000, but they hold 170,000
inmates.[148] Many prisons in California and around the country are forced to
turn old gymnasiums and classrooms into huge bunkhouses for inmates. They do
this by placing hundreds of bunk beds next to one another, in these gyms,
without any type of barriers to keep inmates separated. In California, the
inadequate security engendered by this situation, coupled with insufficient
staffing levels, have led to increased violence and a prison health system
that causes one death a week. This situation has led the courts to order
California to release 27% of the current prison population, citing the Eighth
Amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment.[149] The three-judge
court considering requests by the _Plata v. Schwarzenegger_ and _Coleman v.
Schwarzenegger_ courts found California's prisons have become criminogenic as
a result of prison overcrowding.[150]

In 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court case of _Cutter v. Wilkinson_ established that
prisons that received federal funds could not deny prisoners accommodations
necessary for religious practices.

According to a Supreme Court ruling issued on May 23, 2011, California — which
has the highest overcrowding rate of any prison system in the country — must
alleviate overcrowding in the state's prisons, reducing the prisoner
population by 30,000 over the next two years.[151][152][153][154]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/57/Inmates_Orleans_Parish_Prison.jpg/300px-

Inmates_Orleans_Parish_Prison.jpg)

Inmates in a Orleans Parish Prison yard

Solitary confinement is widely used in US prisons, yet it is underreported by
most states, while some don't report it at all. Isolation of prisoners has
been condemned by the UN in 2011 as a form of torture. At over 80,000 at any
given time, the US has more prisoners confined in isolation than any other
country in the world. In Louisiana, with 843 prisoners per 100,000 citizens,
there have been prisoners, such as the Angola Three, held for as long as forty
years in isolation.[155][156]

In 1999, the Supreme Court of Norway refused to extradite American hashish-
smuggler Henry Hendricksen, as they declared that US prisons do not meet their
minimum humanitarian standards.[157]

In 2011, some 885 people died while being held in local jails (not in prisons
after being convicted of a crime and sentenced) throughout the United
States.[158] According to federal statistics, roughly 4,400 inmates die in US
prisons and jails annually, excluding executions.[159]

As of September 2013, condoms for prisoners are only available in the U.S.
State of Vermont (on September 17, 2013, the California Senate approved a bill
for condom distribution inside the state's prisons, but the bill was not yet
law at the time of approval)[160] and in county jails in San Francisco.[161]

In September 2016, a group of corrections officers at Holman Correctional
Facility have gone on strike over safety concerns and overcrowding. Prisoners
refer to the facility as a "slaughterhouse" as stabbings are a routine
occurrence.[162]

### PrivatizationEdit

Main article: Private prisons in the United States

See also: Prison–industrial complex

Prior to the 1980s, private prisons did not exist in the U.S. During the
1980s, as a result of the War on Drugs by the Reagan Administration, the
number of people incarcerated rose. This created a demand for more prison
space. The result was the development of privatization and the for-profit
prison industry.[163][164][165]

A 1998 study was performed using three comparable Louisiana medium security
prisons, two of which were privately run by different corporations and one of
which was publicly run. The data from this study suggested that the privately
run prisons operated more cost-effectively without sacrificing the safety of
inmates and staff. The study concluded that both privately run prisons had a
lower cost per inmate, a lower rate of critical incidents, a safer environment
for employees and inmates, and a higher proportional rate of inmates who
completed basic education, literacy, and vocational training courses. However,
the publicly run prison outperformed the privately run prisons in areas such
as experiencing fewer escape attempts, controlling substance abuse through
testing, offering a wider range of educational and vocational courses, and
providing a broader range of treatment, recreation, social services, and
rehabilitative services.[166]

According to Marie Gottschalk, a professor of political science at the
University of Pennsylvania, studies that claim private prisons are cheaper to
run than public prisons fail to "take into account the fundamental differences
between private and public facilities," and that the prison industry "engages
in a lot of cherry-picking and cost-shifting to maintain the illusion that the
private sector does it better for less."[167] The American Civil Liberties
Union reported in 2013 that numerous studies indicate private jails are
actually filthier, more violent, less accountable, and possibly more costly
than their public counterparts. The ACLU stated that the for-profit prison
industry is "a major contributor to bloated state budgets and mass
incarceration – not a part of any viable solution to these urgent
problems."[168] The primary reason Louisiana is the prison capital of the
world is because of the for-profit prison industry.[169] According to _The
Times-Picayune_ , "a majority of Louisiana inmates are housed in for-profit
facilities, which must be supplied with a constant influx of human beings or a
$182 million industry will go bankrupt."[169]

In Mississippi, a 2013 _Bloomberg report_ stated that assault rates in private
facilities were three times higher on average than in their public
counterparts. In 2012, the for-profit Walnut Grove Youth Correctional Facility
was the most violent prison in the state with 27 assaults per 100
offenders.[170] A federal lawsuit filed by the ACLU and the Southern Poverty
Law Center on behalf of prisoners at the privately run East Mississippi
Correctional Facility in 2013 claims the conditions there are "hyper-violent,"
"barbaric" and "chaotic," with gangs routinely beating and exploiting mentally
ill inmates who are denied medical care by prison staff.[171][172] A May 2012
riot in the Corrections Corporation of America-run Adams County Correctional
Facility, also in Mississippi, left one corrections officer dead and dozens
injured. Similar riots have occurred in privatized facilities in Idaho,
Oklahoma, New Mexico, Florida, California and Texas.[173][174][175]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/TutwilerMSPrison.JPG/400px-

TutwilerMSPrison.JPG)

Tallahatchie County Correctional Facility in Mississippi, operated by
Corrections Corporation of America (CCA)

Sociologist John L. Campbell of Dartmouth College claims that private prisons
in the U.S. have become "a lucrative business."[176] Between 1990 and 2000,
the number of private facilities grew from five to 100, operated by nearly 20
private firms. Over the same time period the stock price of the industry
leader, Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), which rebranded as CoreCivic
in 2016 amid increased scrutiny of the private prison industry,[177] climbed
from $8 a share to $30.[176] According to journalist Matt Taibbi, major
investors in the prison industry include Wells Fargo, Bank of America,
Fidelity Investments, General Electric and The Vanguard Group.[178] The
aforementioned _Bloomberg report_ also notes that in the past decade the
number of inmates in for-profit prisons throughout the U.S. rose 44
percent.[170]

Controversy has surrounded the privatization of prisons with the exposure of
the genesis of the landmark Arizona SB 1070 law. This law was written by
Arizona State Congressman Russell Pearce and the CCA at a meeting of the
American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) in the Grand Hyatt in Washington,
D.C.[179][180] Both CCA and GEO Group, the two largest operators of private
facilities, have been contributors to ALEC, which lobbies for policies that
would increase incarceration, such as three-strike laws and "truth-in-
sentencing" legislation.[181][182][183][184][185] In fact, in the early 1990s,
when CCA was co-chair of ALEC, it co-sponsored (with the National Rifle
Association) the so-called "truth-in-sentencing" and "three-strikes-you're-
out" laws.[186] Truth-in-sentencing called for all violent offenders to serve
85 percent of their sentences before being eligible for release; three strikes
called for mandatory life imprisonment for a third felony conviction. Some
prison officers unions in publicly run facilities such as California
Correctional Peace Officers Association have, in the past, also supported
measures such as three-strike laws. Such laws increased the prison
population.[187][188]

In addition to CCA and GEO Group, companies operating in the private prison
business include Management and Training Corporation, and Community Education
Centers. The GEO Group was formerly known as the Wackenhut Corrections
division. It includes the former Correctional Services Corporation and Cornell
Companies, which were purchased by GEO in 2005 and 2010. Such companies often
sign contracts with states obliging them to fill prison beds or reimburse them
for those that go unused.[189]

Private companies which provide services to prisons combine in the American
Correctional Association, a 501(c)3 which advocates legislation favorable to
the industry. Such private companies comprise what has been termed the
prison–industrial complex.[164][190][191][192] An example of this phenomenon
would be the Kids for cash scandal, in which two judges in Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania, Mark Ciavarella and Michael Conahan, were receiving judicial
kickbacks for sending youths, convicted of minor crimes,[193] to a privatized,
for-profit juvenile facility run by the Mid Atlantic Youth Service
Corporation.[183]

The industry is aware of what reduced crime rates could mean to their bottom
line. This from the CCA's SEC report in 2010:

> Our growth … depends on a number of factors we cannot control, including
crime rates …[R]eductions in crime rates … could lead to reductions in
arrests, convictions and sentences requiring incarceration at correctional
facilities.[168]

Marie Gottschalk claims that while private prison companies and other economic
interests were not the primary drivers of mass incarceration originally, they
do much to sustain it today.[194] The private prison industry has successfully
lobbied for changes that increase the profit of their employers. They have
opposed measures that would bring reduced sentencing or shorter prison
terms.[195][196] The private prison industry has been accused of being at
least partly responsible for America's high rates of incarceration.[197]

According to The Corrections Yearbook, 2000, the average annual starting
salary for public corrections officers was $23,002, compared to $17,628 for
private prison guards. The poor pay is a likely factor in the high turnover
rate in private prisons, at 52.2 percent compared to 16 percent in public
facilities.[198]

In September 2015, Senator Bernie Sanders introduced the "Justice Is Not for
Sale" Act,[199] which would prohibit the United States government at federal,
state and local levels from contracting with private firms to provide and/or
operate detention facilities within two years.[200]

An August 2016 report by the U.S. Department of Justice asserts that privately
operated federal facilities are less safe, less secure and more punitive than
other federal prisons.[201] Shortly after this report was published, the DoJ
announced it will stop using private prisons.[202] On February 23, the DOJ
under Attorney General Jeff Sessions overturned the ban on using private
prisons. According to Sessions, "the (Obama administration) memorandum changed
long-standing policy and practice, and impaired the bureau's ability to meet
the future needs of the federal correctional system. Therefore, I direct the
bureau to return to its previous approach."[203] The private prison industry
has been booming under the Trump Administration.[204][205][206]

Additionally, both CCA and GEO Group have been expanding into the immigrant
detention market. Although the combined revenues of CCA and GEO Group were
about $4 billion in 2017 from private prison contracts, their number one
customer was ICE.[207]

### EmploymentEdit

See also: Penal labor in the United States

About 18% of eligible prisoners held in federal prisons are employed by UNICOR
and are paid less than $1.25 an hour.[208][209][210] Prisons have gradually
become a source of low-wage labor for corporations seeking to outsource work
to inmates.[176] Corporations that utilize prison labor include Walmart, Eddie
Bauer, Victoria's Secret, Microsoft, Starbucks, McDonald's, Nintendo, Chevron
Corporation, Bank of America, Koch Industries, Boeing and Costco
Wholesale.[211][212][213][214]

It is estimated that 1 in 9 state government employees works in
corrections.[59] As the overall U.S. prison population declined in 2010,
states are closing prisons. For instance, Virginia has removed 11 prisons
since 2009. Like other small towns, Boydton in Virginia has to contend with
unemployment woes resulting from the closure of the Mecklenburg Correctional
Center.[215]

In September 2016, large, coordinated prison strikes took place in 11 states,
with inmates claiming they are subjected to poor sanitary conditions and jobs
that amount to forced labor and modern day slavery.[216][217][218][219]
Organizers, which include the Industrial Workers of the World labor union,
assert it is the largest prison strike in U.S. history.[216]

Starting August 21, 2018, another prison strike, sponsored by Jailhouse
Lawyers Speak and the Incarcerated Workers Organizing Committee, took place in
17 states from coast to coast to protest what inmates regard as unfair
treatment by the criminal justice system. In particular, inmates objected to
being excluded from the 13th amendment which forces them to work for pennies a
day, a condition they assert is tantamount to "modern-day slavery." The strike
was the result of a call to action after a deadly riot occurred at Lee
Correctional Institution in April of that year, which was sparked by neglect
and inhumane living conditions.[220][221][222][223][224]

### CostEdit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/be/US_criminal_justice_cost_timeline.gif)

U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. Not adjusted for inflation. To view the
inflation-adjusted data, see chart.[225][226]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0a/Federal_prison_year_cost.png/410px-

Federal_prison_year_cost.png)

Federal prison yearly cost

Judicial, police, and corrections costs totaled $212 billion in 2011 according
to the U.S. Census Bureau.[227] In 2007, around $74 billion was spent on
corrections according to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics.[225][226]

In 2014, among facilities operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons, the
average cost of incarceration for federal inmates in fiscal year 2014 was
$30,619.85. The average annual cost to confine an inmate in a residential re-
entry center was $28,999.25.[228]

State prisons averaged $31,286 per inmate in 2010 according to a Vera
Institute of Justice study. It ranged from $14,603 in Kentucky to $60,076 in
New York.[229]

In California in 2008, it cost the state an average of $47,102 a year to
incarcerate an inmate in a state prison. From 2001 to 2009, the average annual
cost increased by about $19,500.[230]

Housing the approximately 500,000 people in jail in the US awaiting trial who
cannot afford bail costs $9 billion a year.[231] Most jail inmates are petty,
nonviolent offenders. Twenty years ago most nonviolent defendants were
released on their own recognizance (trusted to show up at trial). Now most are
given bail, and most pay a bail bondsman to afford it.[232] 62% of local jail
inmates are awaiting trial.[233]

> Bondsmen have lobbied to cut back local pretrial programs from Texas to
California, pushed for legislation in four states limiting pretrial's
resources, and lobbied Congress so that they won't have to pay the bond if the
defendant commits a new crime. Behind them, the bondsmen have powerful special
interest group and millions of dollars. Pretrial release agencies have a
smattering of public employees and the remnants of their once-thriving
programs.

>

> — National Public Radio, January 22, 2010.[234]

To ease jail overcrowding over 10 counties every year consider building new
jails. As an example Lubbock County, Texas has decided to build a $110 million
megajail to ease jail overcrowding. Jail costs an average of $60 a day
nationally.[232][235] In Broward County, Florida supervised pretrial release
costs about $7 a day per person while jail costs $115 a day. The jail system
costs a quarter of every county tax dollar in Broward County, and is the
single largest expense to the county taxpayer.[234]

The National Association of State Budget Officers reports: "In fiscal 2009,
corrections spending represented 3.4 percent of total state spending and 7.2
percent of general fund spending." They also report: "Some states exclude
certain items when reporting corrections expenditures. Twenty-one states
wholly or partially excluded juvenile delinquency counseling from their
corrections figures and fifteen states wholly or partially excluded spending
on juvenile institutions. Seventeen states wholly or partially excluded
spending on drug abuse rehabilitation centers and forty-one states wholly or
partially excluded spending on institutions for the criminally insane. Twenty-
two states wholly or partially excluded aid to local governments for jails.
For details, see Table 36."[236]

As of 2007[update], the cost of medical care for inmates was growing by 10
percent annually.[237][59]

According to a 2016 study by researchers at Washington University in St.
Louis, the true cost of incarceration exceeds $1 trillion, with half of that
falling on the families, children and communities of those incarcerated.[238]

According to a 2016 analysis of federal data by the U.S. Education Department,
state and local spending on incarceration has grown three times as much as
spending on public education since 1980.[239]

##

Effects of incarcerationEdit

See also: Collateral consequences of criminal charges

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/Property_Crime_Rates_in_the_United_States.svg/300px-

Property_Crime_Rates_in_the_United_States.svg.png)

Property crime rates in the United States per 100,000 population beginning in
1960 (Source: Bureau of Justice Statistics)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Violent_crime_rates_by_gender_1973-2003.png/300px-

Violent_crime_rates_by_gender_1973-2003.png)

Violent crime rates by gender 1973–2003[240]

### Effects on crime ratesEdit

Increasing incarceration has a negative effect on crime, but this effect
becomes smaller as the incarceration rate increases.[241][242] Higher rates of
prison admissions increase crime rates, whereas moderate rates of prison
admissions decrease crime. The rate of prisoner releases in a given year in a
community is also positively related to that community's crime rate the
following year.[243]

A 2010 study of panel data from 1978 to 2003 indicated that the crime-reducing
effects of increasing incarceration are totally offset by the crime-increasing
effects of prisoner re-entry.[244]

### Social effectsEdit

Within three years of being released, 67% of ex-prisoners re-offend and 52%
are re-incarcerated, according to a study published in 1994.[245][43] The rate
of recidivism is so high in the United States that most inmates who enter the
system are likely to reenter within a year of their release.[ _citation
needed_ ] Former inmate Wenona Thompson argues "I realized that I became part
of a cycle, a system, that looked forward to seeing me there. And I was aware
that...I would be one of those people who fill up their prisons".[246]

In 1995, the government allocated $5.1 billion for new prison space. Every
$100 million spent in construction costs $53 million per year in finance and
operational costs over the next three decades.[247] Taxpayers spend $60
billion a year for prisons. In 2005, it cost an average of $23,876 a year to
house a prisoner.[248] It takes about $30,000 per year per person to provide
drug rehabilitation treatment to inmates. By contrast, the cost of drug
rehabilitation treatment outside of a prison costs about $8,000 per year per
person.[246]

The effects of such high incarceration rates are also shown in other ways. For
example, a person who has been recently released from prison is ineligible for
welfare in most states. They are not eligible for subsidized housing, and for
Section 8 they have to wait two years before they can apply. In addition to
finding housing, they also have to find employment, but this can be difficult
as employers often check for a potential employees Criminal record.[249]
Essentially, a person who has been recently released from prison comes into a
society that is not prepared structurally or emotionally to welcome them
back.[246]

In _The New Jim Crow_ in 2011, legal scholar and advocate Michelle Alexander
contended that the U.S. incarceration system worked to bar black men from
voting. She wrote "there are more African Americans under correctional control
\-- in prison or jail, on probation or parole -- than were enslaved in 1850, a
decade before the Civil War began".[250] Alexander's work has drawn increased
attention through 2011 and into 2013.

Yale Law Professor, and opponent of mass incarceration James Forman Jr. has
countered that 1) African Americans, as represented by such cities as the
District of Columbia, have generally supported tough on crime policies. 2)
There appears to be a connection between drugs and violent crimes, the
discussion of which, he says, New Jim Crow theorists have avoided. 3) New
theorists have overlooked class as a factor in incarceration. Blacks with
advanced degrees have fewer convictions. Blacks without advanced education
have more.[251]

### Effects of parental incarceration on childrenEdit

Incarceration of an individual does not have a singular effect: it affects
those in the individual's tight-knit circle as well. For every mother that is
incarcerated in the United States there are about another ten people
(children, grandparents, community, etc.) that are directly affected.[252]
Moreover, more than 2.7 million children in the United States have an
incarcerated parent.[253] That translates to one out of every 27 children in
the United States having an incarcerated parent.[254] Approximately 80 percent
of women who go to jail each year are mothers.[255] This ripple effect on the
individual's family amplifies the debilitating effect that entails arresting
individuals. Given the general vulnerability and naivete of children, it is
important to understand how such a traumatic event adversely affects children.
The effects of a parent’s incarceration on their children have been found as
early as three years old.[256] Local and state governments in the United
States have recognized these harmful effects and have attempted to address
them through public policy solutions.

#### Health and behavioral effectsEdit

The effects of an early traumatic experience of a child can be categorized
into health effects and behavioral externalizations. Many studies have
searched for a correlation between witnessing a parent's arrest and a wide
variety of physiological issues. For example, Lee et al. showed significant
correlation between high cholesterol, Migraine, and HIV/AIDS diagnosis to
children with a parental incarceration.[257] Even while adjusting for various
socioeconomic and racial factors, children with an incarcerated parent have a
significantly higher chance of developing a wide variety of physical problems
such as Obesity, asthma, and developmental delays.[258] The current literature
acknowledges that there are a variety of poor health outcomes as a direct
result of being separated from a parent by law enforcement.[259] It is
hypothesized that the chronic stress that results directly from the
uncertainty of the parent's legal status is the primary influence for the
extensive list of acute and chronic conditions that could develop later in
life.[260] In addition to the chronic stress, the immediate instability in a
child's life deprives them of certain essentials e.g. money for food, parental
love that are compulsory for leading a healthy life. Though most of the
adverse effects that result from parental incarceration are regardless of
whether the mother or father was arrested, some differences have been
discovered. For example, males whose father have been incarcerated display
more behavioral issues than any other combination of parent/child.[256]

There has also been a substantial effort to understand how this traumatic
experience manifests in the child's mental health and to identify
externalizations that may be helpful for a diagnosis. The most prominent
mental health outcomes in these children are Anxiety disorder, Depression
(mood), and Posttraumatic stress disorder(PTSD).[261][262] These problems
worsen in a typical positive feedback loop without the presence of a parental
figure. Given the chronic nature of these diseases, they can be detected and
observed at distinct points in a child's development, allowing for ample
research. Murray et al. have been able to isolate the cause of the expression
of Anti-social behaviours specific to the parental incarceration.[263] In a
specific case study in Boston by Sack, within two months of the father being
arrested, the adolescent boy in the family developed severe aggressive and
antisocial behaviors.[264] This observation is not unique; Sack and other
researchers have noticed an immediate and strong reaction to sudden departures
from family structure norms. These behavioral externalizations are most
evident at school when the child interacts with peers and adults. This
behavior leads to punishment and less focus on education, which has obvious
consequences for future educational and career prospects.[265]

In addition to externalizing undesirable behaviors, children of incarcerated
parents are more likely to be incarcerated compared to those without
incarcerated parents.[266] More formally, transmission of severe emotional
strain on a parent negatively impacts the children by disrupting the home
environment. Societal stigma against individuals, specifically parents, who
are incarcerated is passed down to their children. The children find this
stigma to be overwhelming and it negatively impacts their short- and long-term
prospects.[267]

#### Policy solutionsEdit

There are four main phases that can be distinguished in the process of
arresting a parent: arrest, sentencing, incarceration, and re-entry. Re-entry
is not relevant if a parent is not arrested for other crimes. During each of
these phases, solutions can be implemented that mitigate the harm placed on
the children during the process. While their parents are away, children rely
on other caretakers (family or friends) to satisfy their basic need. Solutions
for the children of incarcerated parents have identified caretakers as a focal
point for successful intervention.

##### Arrest PhaseEdit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3c/Secret_Service_agent_trainees_practice_executing_a_search_warrant.jpg/220px-

Secret_Service_agent_trainees_practice_executing_a_search_warrant.jpg)

Forced home entry is a primary stressor for children in a residence.

One in five children witness their parent arrested by authorities, and a study
interviewing 30 children reported that the children experienced Flashbulb
Memories and Nightmares associated with the day their parent was
arrested.[268] These single, adverse moments have long-reaching effects and
policymakers around the country have attempted to ameliorate the situation.
For example, the city of San Francisco in 2005 implemented training policies
for its police officers with the goal of making them more cognizant of the
familial situation before entering the home. The guidelines go a step further
and stipulate that if no information is available before the arrest, that
officers ask the suspect about the possibility of any children in the
house.[269] San Francisco is not alone: New Mexico passed a law in 2009
advocating for child safety during parental arrest and California provides
funding to agencies to train personnel how to appropriately conduct an arrest
in the presence of family members.[270] Extending past the state level, the
Department of Justice has provided guidelines for police officers around the
country to better accommodate for children in difficult family
situations.[271]

##### Sentencing PhaseEdit

During the sentencing phase, the judge is the primary authority in determine
if the appropriate punishment, if any. Consideration of the sentencing effects
on the defendant’s children could help with the preservation of the parent-
child relationship. In a law passed in 2014, Oklahoma requires judges to
inquire if convicted individuals are single custodial parents, and if so,
authorize the mobility of important resources so the child’s transition to
different circumstances is monitored.[272] The distance that the jail or
prison is from the arrested individual’s home is a contributing factor to the
parent-child relationship. Allowing a parent to serve their sentence closer to
their residence will allow for easier visitation and a healthier relationship.
Recognizing this, the New York Senate passed a bill in 2015 that would ensure
convicted individuals be jailed in the nearest facility.

##### Incarceration PhaseEdit

While serving a sentence, measures have been put in place to allow parents to
exercise their duty as role models and caretakers. The state of New York
(state) allows newborns to be with their mothers for up to one year.[273]
Studies have shown that parental, specifically maternal, presence during a
newborn’s early development are crucial to both physical and cognitive
development.[274] Ohio law requires nursery support for pregnant inmates in
its facilities.[275] California also has a stake in the support of
incarcerated parents, too, through its requirement that women in jail with
children be transferred to a community facility that can provide pediatric
care.[276] These regulations are supported by the research on early child
development that argue it is imperative that infants and young children are
with a parental figure, preferably the mother, to ensure proper
development.[277] This approach received support at the federal level when
then-Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates instituted several family-friendly
measures, for certain facilities, including: improving infrastructure for
video conferencing and informing inmates on how to contact their children if
they were placed in the foster care system, among other improvements.[278]

##### Re-entry PhaseEdit

The last phase of the incarceration process is re-entry back into the
community, but more importantly, back into the family structure. Though the
time away is painful for the family, it does not always welcome back the
previously incarcerated individual with open arms.[279] Not only is the
transition into the family difficult, but also into society as they are faced
with establishing secure housing, insurance, and a new job.[280] As such,
policymakers find it necessary to ease the transition of an incarcerated
individual to the pre-arrest situation. Of the four outlined phases, re-entry
is the least emphasized from a public policy perspective. This is not to say
it is the least important, however, as there are concerns that time in a
correctional facility can deteriorate the caretaking ability of some
prisoners. As a result, Oklahoma has taken measurable strides by providing
parents with the tools they need to re-enter their families, including classes
on parenting skills.[281]

##### CaretakersEdit

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/87/Grandmother_and_grandchild.jpg/106px-

Grandmother_and_grandchild.jpg)

Grandmothers are a common caregiver of children with an incarcerated parent

Though the effects on caregivers of these children vary based on factors such
as the relationship to the prisoner and his or her support system, it is well-
known that it is a financial and emotional burden to take care of a
child.[282] In addition to taking care of the their nuclear family, caregivers
are now responsible for another individual who requires attention and
resources to flourish. Depending on the relationship to the caregiver, the
transition to a new household may not be easy for the child. The rationale
behind targeting caregivers for intervention policies is to ensure the new
environment for the children is healthy and productive. The federal government
funds states to provide counseling to caretaking family members to alleviate
some of the associated emotional burden. A more comprehensive program from
Washington (state) employs "kinship navigators" to address caretakers' needs
with initiatives such as parental classes and connections to legal
services.[283]

### Effects on employmentEdit

Felony records greatly influence the chances of people finding employment.
Many employers seem to use criminal history as a screening mechanism without
attempting to probe deeper.[284] They are often more interested in
incarceration as a measure of employability and trustworthiness instead of its
relation to any specific job.[285] People who have felony records have a
harder time finding a job.[286] The psychological effects of incarceration can
also impede an ex-felon's search for employment. Prison can cause social
anxiety, distrust, and other psychological issues that negatively affect a
person's reintegration into an employment setting.[287] Men who are unemployed
are more likely to participate in crime [286] which leads to there being a 67%
chance of ex-felons being charged again.[285] In 2008, the difficulties male
ex-felons in the United States had finding employment lead to approximately a
1.6% decrease in the employment rate alone. This is a loss of between $57 and
$65 billion of output to the US economy.[288]

Although incarceration in general has a huge effect on employment, the effects
become even more pronounced when looking at race. Devah Pager performed a
study in 2003 and found that white males with no criminal record had a 34%
chance of callback compared to 17% for white males with a criminal record.
Black males with no criminal record were called back at a rate of 14% while
the rate dropped to 5% for those with a criminal record. Black men with no
criminal background have a harder time finding employment than white men who
have a history of criminal activity. While having a criminal record decreases
the chance of a callback for white men by 50%, it decreases the callback
chances for black men by 64%.[284]

While Pager's study is greatly informative, it does lack some valuable
information. Pager only studied white and black males, which leaves out women
and people of other races. It also fails to account for the fact that applying
for jobs has largely shifted from applying in person to applying over the
Internet. A study done by Scott H. Decker, Cassia Spohn, Natalie R. Ortiz, and
Eric Hedberg from Arizona State University in 2014 accounts for this missing
information. This study was set up similarly to the Pager study, but with the
addition of female job applicants, Hispanic job applicants, and online job
applications.[289] Men and women of white, black, and Hispanic ethnicities
account for 92% of the US prison population.[290]

The results of Arizona State University study were somewhat different from
Pager's study, but the main finding was expected: Incarceration decreased the
chances of getting employed. For females submitting applications online and
in-person, regardless of criminal history, white women received the most
amount of callbacks, roughly 40%. Hispanic women followed up with a 34%
callback rate. Black women had the lowest rate at 27%. The effects of
incarceration on female applicants in general were that females with a prison
record were less likely to receive a callback compared to females without a
prison record. The significant exceptions are white women applying in person
and Hispanic women with a community college degree applying online.[289]

For males submitting applications online and in-person, regardless of criminal
history, Hispanic males received the most amount of callbacks, roughly 38%.
White males followed up with a 35% callback rate. Black males had the lowest
rate at 27%. The effects of incarceration on male applicants applying in-
person was that males with a prison record were less likely than males without
a prison record to receive a callback. However, the effects of incarceration
on male applicants applying online were nearly nonexistent. In fact, the study
found that "there was no effect of race/ethnicity, prison record, or community
college [education] on men's success in advancing through the [online] hiring
process". The Arizona State University study also had results that
contradicted Pager's study. It found that white males with a prison record did
not have a higher callback rate than black males (and Hispanic males) without
a prison record. Hispanic men without a prison record had a 40% higher
callback rate than white males with a prison record, and black men without a
prison record had a 6% higher callback rate than white males without a prison
record.[289]

### Proposed solutionsEdit

Mass incarceration cannot be remedied in a short length of time, because each
prisoner serves a separate sentence, the average length of sentences has risen
over the last 35 years and public support for prison reform is still
relatively low. Decriminalizing drugs has been suggested by libertarians and
advocated for by socialists, but remains a remote political option. Additional
parole and probation can be facilitated with enhanced electronic monitoring,
though monitoring is expensive. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld prisoner
releases to relieve California's unconstitutional prison conditions in _Brown
v. Plata,_ long-standing litigation wherein the federal courts intervened as
they have done in most states through the years.

There is also the Prison abolition movement which calls for the immediate
elimination and reduction of both public and private prisons. Angela Davis is
a popular advocate for the prison abolition movement and has outlined how
organizations like G4S, the third largest private corporation just behind
McDonald's and Foxconn, make a huge profit from privatized prisons across the
globe. Socialists have been a major advocate for abolition of prisons and
argues that capitalism has led to the creation of prisons as well as mass-
incarceration by pointing to G4S which profits from locking up other people
behind bars and segregating lands in other countries, as well as enforcing
borders and deporting immigrants. Angela Davis explains many of these views
and how to implement reforms based on rehabilitation over incarceration.[291]

There is greater indication that education in prison helps prevent
reincarceration.[292] Many people inside prisons lack education. Dropout rates
are seven times greater for children in impoverished areas than those who come
from families of higher incomes. This is due to the fact that many children in
poverty are more likely to have to work and care for family members.[293]
People in prisons generally come from poverty creating a continuous cycle of
poverty and incarceration.[294]

##

CriticismEdit

See also: Torture in the United States § Domestic police and prisons, and
Human rights in the United States § Prison system

“ | Mass incarceration on a scale almost unexampled in human history is a
fundamental fact of our country today—perhaps _the_ fundamental fact, as
slavery was the fundamental fact of 1850. | ”  
\---|---|---  
— Adam Gopnik[62]

High rates of incarceration may be due to sentence length, which is further
driven by many other factors.[295] Shorter sentences may even diminish the
criminal culture by possibly reducing re-arrest rates for first-time
convicts.[296] The U.S. Congress has ordered federal judges to make
imprisonment decisions "recognizing that imprisonment is not an appropriate
means of promoting correction and rehabilitation."[297]

Critics have lambasted the United States for incarcerating a large number of
non-violent and victimless offenders;[298][299] half of all persons
incarcerated under state jurisdiction are for non-violent offenses, and 20%
are incarcerated for drug offenses (in state prisons; federal prison
percentages are higher).[76][300] "Human Rights Watch believes the
extraordinary rate of incarceration in the United States wreaks havoc on
individuals, families and communities, and saps the strength of the nation as
a whole."[298] The population of inmates housed in prisons and jails in the
United States exceeds 2 million, with the per capita incarceration population
higher than that officially reported by any other country.[59] Criminal
justice policy in the United States has also been criticized for a number of
other reasons.[301] In the 2014 book _The Divide: American Injustice in the
Age of the Wealth Gap,_ journalist Matt Taibbi argues that the expanding
disparity of wealth and the increasing criminalization of those in poverty
have culminated in the U.S. having the largest prison population "in the
history of human civilization."[302] The scholars Michael Meranze and Marie
Gottschalk contend that the massive "carceral state" extends far beyond
prisons, and distorts democracy, degrades society, and obstructs meaningful
discourse on criminal punishment.[303] A December 2017 report by Philip
Alston, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights,
asserted that the justice system throughout the U.S. is designed to keep
people mired in poverty and to generate revenue to fund the justice system and
other governmental programs.[304]

Some scholars have linked the ascent of neoliberal, free market ideology in
the late 1970s to mass incarceration.[164][176][305][306][307][308]
Sociologist Loïc Wacquant postulates the expansive prison system has become a
political institution designed to deal with an urban crisis created by welfare
state retrenchment and economic deregulation, and that this "overgrown and
intrusive penal state" is "deeply injurious to the ideals of democratic
citizenship."[309] Academic and activist Angela Davis argues that prisons in
the U.S. have "become venues of profit as well as punishment;" as mass
incarceration has increased, the prison system has become more about economic
factors than criminality.[310] Professor of Law at Columbia University Bernard
Harcourt contends that neoliberalism holds the state as incompetent when it
comes to economic regulation but proficient at policing and punishing, and
that this paradox has resulted in the expansion of penal confinement.[311]
According to _The Routledge Handbook of Poverty in the United States_ ,
"neoliberal social and economic policy has more deeply embedded the carceral
state within the lives of the poor, transforming what it means to be poor in
America."[5]

Another possibly cause for this increase of incarceration since the 1970s
could be the "war on drugs," which started around that time. More elected
prosecutors were favored by voters for promising to take more harsh approaches
than their opponents, such as locking up more people.[312]

“ | Our vast network of federal and state prisons, with some 2.3 million
inmates, rivals the gulags of totalitarian states. | ”  
\---|---|---  
— Chris Hedges[313]

Reporting at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association
(August 3, 2008), Becky Pettit, associate professor of sociology from the
University of Washington and Bryan Sykes, a UW post-doctoral researcher,
revealed that the mammoth increase in the United States's prison population
since the 1970s is having profound demographic consequences that affect 1 in
50 Americans. Drawing data from a variety of sources that looked at prison and
general populations, the researchers found that the boom in prison population
is hiding lowered rates of fertility and increased rates of involuntary
migration to rural areas and morbidity that is marked by a greater exposure to
and risk of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV or AIDS.[314]

Guilty plea bargains concluded 97% of all federal cases in 2011.[315]

As of December 2012[update], two state prison systems, Alabama and South
Carolina, segregated prisoners based on their HIV status. On December 21, U.S.
District Court Judge Myron Thompson ruled in a lawsuit brought by the American
Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) on behalf of several inmates that Alabama's
practice in doing so violated federal disabilities law. He noted the state's
"outdated and unsupported assumptions about HIV and the prison system's
ability to deal with HIV-positive prisoners."[316]

### Department of Justice Smart on Crime ProgramEdit

On August 12, 2013, at the American Bar Association's House of Delegates
meeting, Attorney General Eric Holder announced the "Smart on Crime" program,
which is "a sweeping initiative by the Justice Department that in effect
renounces several decades of tough-on-crime anti-drug legislation and
policies."[317][318] Holder said the program "will encourage U.S. attorneys to
charge defendants only with crimes "for which the accompanying sentences are
better suited to their individual conduct, rather than excessive prison terms
more appropriate for violent criminals or drug kingpins…"[317][318] Running
through Holder's statements, the increasing economic burden of over-
incarceration was stressed.[317][318] As of August 2013[update], the Smart on
Crime program is not a legislative initiative but an effort "limited to the
DOJ's policy parameters."[317][318]

### Strip searches and cavity searchesEdit

The procedural use of strip searches and cavity searches in the prison system
has raised human rights concerns.[319]

##

References in popular cultureEdit

In relation to popular culture, mass incarceration has become a popular issue
in the Hip-Hop community. Artists like Tupac Shakur, NWA, LL Cool J, and
Kendrick Lamar have written songs and poems that condemn racial disparities in
the criminal justice system, specifically the practice of police officers
targeting African Americans. By presenting the negative implications of mass
incarceration in a way that is widespread throughout popular culture, rap
music is more likely to impact younger generations than a book or scholarly
article would. Hip hop accounts of mass incarceration are based on victim-
based testimony and are effective in inspiring others to speak out against the
corrupt criminal justice system.[320]

In addition to references in popular music, mass incarceration has also played
a role in modern film. For example, Ava DuVernay's Netflix film _13th,_
released in 2017, criticizes mass incarceration and compares it to the history
of slavery throughout the United States, beginning with the provision of the
13th Amendment that allows for involuntary servitude "as a punishment for
crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted." The film delivers the
staggering message that mass incarceration could be equated to the post-Civil
War Jim Crow Era.[321]

The fight against mass incarceration has also been a part of the larger
discourse in the 21st century movement for Black Lives. #BlackLivesMatter, a
progressive movement created by Alicia Garza after the death of Trayvon
Martin, was designed as an online platform to fight against anti-black
sentiments such as mass incarceration, police brutality, and ingrained racism
within modern society. According to Garza, "Black Lives Matter is an
ideological and political intervention in a world where Black lives are
systematically and intentionally targeted for demise. It is an affirmation of
Black folks' contributions to this society, our humanity, and our resilience
in the face of deadly oppression." This movement has focused on specific
racial issues faced by African Americans in the justice system including
police brutality, ending capital punishment, and eliminating "the
criminalization and dehumanization of Black youth across all areas of
society." [322]

##

Federal prisonsEdit

Further information: List of U.S. federal prisons

The Federal Bureau of Prisons, a division of the United States Department of
Justice, is responsible for the administration of United States federal
prisons.

##

States and insular areasEdit

Main article: List of United States state correction agencies

Imprisonment by the state judicial systems has steadily diminished since 2006
to 2012, from 689,536 annually to 553,843 annually.[323]

##

See alsoEdit

  * Capital punishment in the United States
  * Death in custody
  * History of United States Prison Systems
  * Religion in United States prisons
  * Prison gangs in the United States
  * Prisoner rights in the United States
  * Prisoner suicide
  * Social groups in male and female prisons in the United States
  * United States incarceration rate

Administration

  * Federal Prison Industries, Inc.
  * Inmate telephone system

Conditions of confinement

  * Prison Legal News

Controversies

  * Kids for cash scandal

Prison advocacy groups

  * November Coalition
  * Prison Policy Initiative

Related

  * Parole in the United States
  * Crime in the United States
  * United States cities by crime rate
  * Law enforcement in the United States
  * List of detention sites in the United States
  * Penal labor in the United States
  * Civilian noninstitutional population
  * Felony disenfranchisement in the United States
  * Human rights in the United States#Prison system
  * Race in the United States criminal justice system
  * Race and the War on Drugs
  * Race and crime
  * Racial profiling in the United States

By state

  * Prisons in California
  * List of Florida state prisons
  * Incarceration in Florida

##

ReferencesEdit

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Correctional Populations in the United States, 2010 (NCJ 236319). By Lauren E. Glaze, BJS Statistician. US Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), published in December 2011. See PDF. See page 2 for explanation of the difference between number of prisoners in custody and the number under jurisdiction. See appendix table 3 for "Estimated number of inmates held in custody in state or federal prisons or in local jails per 100,000 U.S. residents, by sex, race and Hispanic/Latino origin, and age, June 30, 2010". See appendix table 2 for "Inmates held in custody in state or federal prisons or in local jails, December 31, 2000, and 2009–2010."
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Correctional Populations in the United States, 2013 (NCJ 248479). Published December 2014 by U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). By Lauren E. Glaze and Danielle Kaeble, BJS Statisticians. See PDF. See page 1 "highlights" section for the "1 in ..." numbers. See table 1 on page 2 for adult numbers. See table 5 on page 6 for male and female numbers. See appendix table 5 on page 13, for "Estimated number of persons supervised by adult correctional systems, by correctional status, 2000–2013." See appendix table 2: "Inmates held in custody in state or federal prisons or in local jails, 2000 and 2012–2013".
  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Highest to Lowest. World Prison Brief (WPB). Use the dropdown menu to choose lists of countries by region or the whole world. Use the menu to select highest-to-lowest lists of prison population totals, prison population rates, percentage of pre-trial detainees/remand prisoners, percentage of female prisoners, percentage of foreign prisoners, and occupancy rate. Column headings in WPB tables can be clicked to reorder columns lowest to highest, or alphabetically. For detailed information for each country click on any country name in lists. See also the WPB main data page and click on the map links and/or the sidebar links to get to the region and country desired.
  4. **^** " "Contempt for the poor in US drives cruel policies," says UN expert". _OHCHR_. June 4, 2018. Retrieved June 25, 2018.
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Haymes, Stephen N.; de Haymes, María V.; Miller, Reuben J., eds. (2015). _The Routledge Handbook of Poverty in the United States_. London and New York: Routledge. pp. 346, 389. ISBN 978 0 41 567344 0.
  6. **^** United States of America. World Prison Brief.
  7. **^** "Correctional Populations In The United States, 2014" http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail &iid=5519
  8. **^** Kaeble, Danielle (April 2018). "Correctional Populations in the United States 2016" (PDF). _U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics_. Retrieved October 22, 2018.
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Sickmund, M., Sladky, T.J., Kang, W.,  & Puzzanchera, C.. "Easy Access to the Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement". Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Click "National Crosstabs" at the top, and then choose the census years. Click "Show table" to get the total number of juvenile inmates for those years. Or go **here** for all the years. And here.
  10. **^** Writer, Staff (April 14, 2009). "Debtors' prison – again". _The Tampa Bay Times_. United States.
  11. **^** California, State of (2012). "CAL. PEN. CODE § 1205". _Find Law.com_. California Penal Code.
  12. **^** Knafo, Saki (February 12, 2014). The U.S. Is Locking People Up For Being Poor. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved February 12, 2014.
  13. **^** Genevieve LeBaron and Adrienne Roberts (March 2012). "Confining Social Insecurity: Neoliberalism and the Rise of the 21st Century Debtors' Prison". _Politics & Gender_. **8** (1): 25–49. doi:10.1017/S1743923X12000062.
  14. **^** Timothy Williams (February 11, 2015). Jails Have Become Warehouses for the Poor, Ill and Addicted, a Report Says. _The New York Times._ Retrieved February 11, 2015.
  15. **^** Nation Behind Bars: A Human Rights Solution. _Human Rights Watch,_ May 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014.
  16. **^** Bureau of Justice Statistics (2018) Prisoners in 2016 [1].
  17. **^** "Why Texas is closing prisons in favour of rehab". _BBC News_. December 2014.
  18. **^** Oliver Laughland (February 12, 2015). Mass incarceration does not explain dramatic fall in US crime, study finds. _The Guardian._ Retrieved February 14, 2015. "Researchers at the Brennan Center for Justice placed crime statistics from all 50 states over the past four decades against 13 other potential explainers of crime reduction, including decreases in alcohol consumption, growth in income and data-driven policing techniques. The conclusion was that the sharp increase in prison numbers has had a negligible effect on the downward trend in crime, with mass incarceration responsible for around 6% of property crime reduction in the 1990s and less than a single percentage point in the 2000s."
  19. **^** Levitt, Steven D (2004). "Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain the Decline and Six that Do Not". _Journal of Economic Perspectives_. **18** (1): 179. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.210.3073. doi:10.1257/089533004773563485. ISSN 0895-3309.
  20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Rise of the Penitentiary | Yale University Press". _yalebooks.yale.edu_. Retrieved November 19, 2018.
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Christianson, Scott (October 19, 2000). _With Liberty for Some: 500 Years of Imprisonment in America_. UPNE. ISBN 9781555534684.
  22. **^** Dix, Dorothea L (1843), _Memorial to the Legislature of Massachusetts 1843_ , p. 2 , retrieved November 12, 2010
  23. **^** O'Donnell, Jayne. "State time or federal prison?" (Archive). _USA Today_. March 18, 2004. Retrieved on February 5, 2016.
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ John Pfaff (January 28, 2017). "A Better Approach to Violent Crime". _Wall Street Journal_. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
  25. **^** Holwager, James K. (August 2012). "Behavioral management disorders and serious mental illness in a maximum-security prison: it takes a "healthily codependent" staff". _Corrections Today_. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
  26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Prisoners in 2008. (NCJ 228417). December 2009 report from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). By William J. Sabol, Ph.D. and Heather C. West, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians. Also, Matthew Cooper, BJS Intern. See PDF. Table 9 on page 8 has the number of inmates in state or federal prison facilities, local jails, U.S. territories, military facilities, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) owned and contracted facilities, jails in Indian country, and juvenile facilities (2006 Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement). See 2007 juvenile total here. Table 8 on page 8 has the incarceration rates for 2000, 2007, and 2008.
  27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sawyer, Wendy; Wagner, Peter (March 19, 2019). "Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2019". _www.prisonpolicy.org_. Retrieved March 22, 2019.
  28. **^** Walmsley, Roy (30 Jan 2009). World Prison Population List (8th Edition). From World Prison Population Lists. By International Centre for Prison Studies. "The information is the latest available in early December 2008. … Most figures relate to dates between the beginning of 2006 and the end of November 2008." According to the summary on page one there were 2.29 million U.S. inmates and 9.8 million inmates worldwide. The U.S. held 23.4% of the world's inmates. The U.S. total in this report is for December 31, 2007 (see page 3), and does not include inmates in juvenile detention facilities.
  29. **^** Sawyer, Wendy; Wagner, Peter (March 19, 2019). "Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2019". _www.prisonpolicy.org_. Retrieved March 22, 2019.
  30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Sawyer, Wendy (February 27, 2018). "Youth Confinement: The Whole Pie". _www.prisonpolicy.org_. Retrieved March 22, 2019.
  31. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ West, Heather; Sabol, William (December 2010). "Prisoners in 2009" (PDF). Bureau of Justice Statistics.
  32. **^** "Report: Oklahoma now 'world's prison capital '". _KAKE_. June 7, 2018. Retrieved December 12, 2018.
  33. **^** Wagner, Peter; Sawyer, Wendy (June 2018). "States of Incarceration: The Global Context 2018". Prison Policy Initiative. Retrieved December 12, 2018. "Oklahoma now has the highest incarceration rate in the U.S., unseating Louisiana from its long-held position as “the world’s prison capital.”"
  34. **^** "GAO-05-337R Information on Criminal Aliens Incarcerated in Federal and State Prisons and Local Jails" (PDF). General Accounting Office. April 7, 2005.
  35. **^** Mauer, Marc; King, Ryan S; Young, Malcolm C (May 2004). "The Meaning of "Life": Long Prison Sentences in Context" (PDF). The Sentencing Project. p. 3.
  36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "2016 Crime Statistics Released". _FBI.gov_. Federal Bureau of Investigation. September 25, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2017.
  37. **^** "Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2016". _National Institute of Justice_. U.S. Department of Justice. March 16, 2016. Retrieved November 25, 2017.
  38. **^** Profile of Jail Inmates, 2002. By Doris J. James. July 18, 2004. NCJ 201932. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. See Table 3 of the PDF file for the percent of inmates in for violent offenses.
  39. **^** "United States - Punishment and Prejudice: Racial Disparities in the War on Drugs". _www.hrw.org_. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
  40. **^** "Incarcerated America" _Human Rights Watch_ (April 2003)
  41. **^** United States Crime Rates 1960–2009. Source: FBI, Uniform Crime Reports.
  42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics: "Prisoners in 2012 Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991–2012" by E. Ann Carson and Daniela Golinelli Table 11: Estimated sentenced state prisoners on December 31, by most serious offense and type of admission, 1991, 2001, 2006, and 2011 | December 2013
  43. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Langan, Patrick A.; Levin, David J. (June 2, 2002). "Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994" (PDF). Bureau of Justice Statistics.
  44. **^** Durose, Matthew (April 2014). "Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 30 States in 2005: Patterns from 2005 to 2010" (PDF). _Bureau of Justice Statistics_. line feed character in `|title=` at position 46 (help)
  45. **^** Gefangenenraten im internationalen und nationalen Vergleich (Prison rates international comparison), University Greifswald, FRIEDER DÜNKEL • BERND GENG • STEFAN HARRENDORF, Bewährungshilfe – Soziales • Strafrecht • Kriminalpolitik, Jg. 63, 2016, Heft 2, S. 178–200, 2016.
  46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ American Exception. Inmate Count in US Dwarfs Other Nations'. _New York Times._ April 22, 2008. Page 1, Section A, Front Page.
  47. **^** Walmsley, Roy (2 Feb 2016). World Prison Population List (11th edition) (PDF). From the Research  & Publications page of the World Prison Brief website. From page 1 of the PDF: "The information is the latest available at the end of October 2015." And from page 2: "This report shows that more than 10.35 million people are held in penal institutions throughout the world, either as pre-trial detainees/remand prisoners or having been convicted and sentenced."
  48. **^** Correctional Populations in the United States, 2015. By Danielle Kaeble and Lauren Glaze, _BJS Statisticians._ Dec. 2016. Bureau of Justice Statistics. See PDF. Page 2 says: "At yearend 2015, an estimated 2,173,800 persons were either under the jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or in the custody of local jails in the United States".
  49. **^** Population Clock. U.S. Census Bureau. 321,032,786 people in the US on June 30, 2015.
  50. **^** The World Population Prospects: 2015 Revision. 29 July 2015 article. From United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 7.3 billion people in 2015.
  51. **^** Canada. World Prison Brief.
  52. **^** United Kingdom: England  & Wales. World Prison Brief.
  53. **^** Australia. World Prison Brief.
  54. **^** Spain. World Prison Brief.
  55. **^** Greece. World Prison Brief.
  56. **^** Norway. World Prison Brief.
  57. **^** Netherlands. World Prison Brief.
  58. **^** Japan. World Prison Brief.
  59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Liptak, Adam (28 Feb 2008). 1 in 100 U.S. Adults Behind Bars, New Study Says. _New York Times_.
  60. **^** Rosefielde, Steven (2007). _The Russian economy: from Lenin to Putin. By Steven Rosefielde_. ISBN 978-1-4051-1337-3.
  61. **^** Applebaum, Anne (2003). _Gulag: a history. By Anne Applebaum_. ISBN 978-0-7679-0056-0.
  62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gopnik, Adam (30 January 2012). The Caging of America. _The New Yorker._
  63. **^** Breaking Down Mass Incarceration in the 2010 Census: State-by-State Incarceration Rates by Race/Ethnicity. Briefing by Leah Sakala. May 28, 2014. Prison Policy Initiative. Figures calculated with US Census 2010 SF-1 table P42 and the PCT20 table series.
  64. **^** Prisoners in 2015. By E. Ann Carson, Ph.D., _BJS Statistician_. And Elizabeth Anderson, _BJS Intern_. December 2016. Bureau of Justice Statistics.
  65. **^** "Prisoners in 2013" (PDF). Bureau of Justice Statistics. September 30, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2016.
  66. **^** Jamaal Bell. Mass Incarceration: A Destroyer of People of Color and Their Communities _The Huffington Post._ May 17, 2010.
  67. **^** American Indians and Crime Bureau of Justice Statistics.
  68. **^** Behind Bars: Native incarceration rates increase. Indianz.com. July 13, 2001.
  69. **^** Percent of American Indians in jail is high _The Bismarck Tribune,_ February 26, 2009.
  70. **^** Study of Native American Prisoner Issues. Native American Rights Fund, 1996.
  71. **^** Rubén G. Rumbaut, Roberto G. Gonzales, Golnaz Komaie, and Charlie V. Morgan. Debunking the Myth of Immigrant Criminality: Imprisonment Among First- and Second-Generation Young Men. Migration Policy Institute. June 1, 2006.
  72. **^** Ashley Klann. MA Hispanic Incarceration Rate 4th Highest in US. _Go Local Worcester,_ April 29, 2013.
  73. **^** Sophia Kerby. The Top 10 Most Startling Facts About People of Color and Criminal Justice in the United States. Center for American Progress. March 13, 2012
  74. **^** Why is the African American Imprisonment Rate Higher than Whites? The Sentencing Project. October 4, 2013.
  75. **^** ACS DEMOGRAPHIC AND HOUSING ESTIMATES. United States Census Bureau, 2013.
  76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Prison Inmates at Midyear 2009 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 230113). Published June 2010, by U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). By Heather C. West, Ph.D., BJS Statistician. See PDF. See tables 18 and 19. The rates are for adults. Rates per 100,000 can be converted to percentages.
  77. **^** Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin: 2010 Census Briefs Archived April 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. US Census Bureau. See Tables 1 and 2.
  78. **^** "Hispanic, Black incarceration rates signal trouble ahead". elreporterosf.com. August 3, 2007. Retrieved August 17, 2012.
  79. **^** "The Sentencing Project : Uneven Justice : State Rates of Incarceration by Race and Ethnicity" (PDF). Sentencingproject.org. Retrieved October 23, 2013.
  80. **^** "Model Minority? - Society and Culture". AEI. March 3, 2010. Retrieved August 17, 2012.
  81. **^** SpearIt (April 2, 2015). "How Mass Incarceration Underdevelops Latino Communities". Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. SSRN 2589112.
  82. **^** Bennett, Hans (October 22, 2009). "Book Review: Asian-American Prisoners". ColorLines.com. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
  83. **^** Engel, Robin S. (2014). Bucerius, Sandra (ed.). _The Oxford Handbook of Ethnicity, Crime, and Immigration_. Oxford University Press. p. 147. ISBN 9780199859016.
  84. **^** Stephan Thernstrom, Abigail Thernstrom (1997). _America in Black and White: One Nation, Indivisible_. ISBN 9780684844978. Retrieved August 17, 2012.
  85. **^** Simon McCormack (January 6, 2014). "Nearly Half Of Black Males, 40 Percent Of White Males Are Arrested By Age 23: Study". _Huffington Post_. huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved February 14, 2014.
  86. **^** Antonio Moore (February 23, 2015). The Black Male Incarceration Problem Is Real and It's Catastrophic. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved February 23, 2015.
  87. **^** "World Female Imprisonment List (fourth edition) | World Prison Brief". _www.prisonstudies.org_. Retrieved November 2, 2018.
  88. **^** "Did You Know? The Number Of Black Men Imprisoned In U.S. Could Fill The Prisons Of 8 Other Countries Combined". _Bossip_. February 25, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2018.
  89. **^** Barbara H. Zaitzow; Jim Thomas (2003). _Women in Prison: Gender and Social Control_. Lynne Rienner Publishers. p. vii. ISBN 978-1-58826-228-8.
  90. **^** Cyndi Banks (2003). _Women in Prison: A Reference Handbook_. ABC-CLIO. pp. 1–. ISBN 978-1-57607-929-4.
  91. **^** Mustard, David B. "Racial, ethnic, and gender disparities in sentencing: Evidence from the U.S. Federal Courts". _The Journal of Law, Economics & Policy_. **285**.
  92. **^** "Men Sentenced to Longer Prison Terms for Same Crimes, Study Says". _The Huffington Post_.
  93. **^** Stacey, Ann Martin. "Gender and the Social Costs of Sentencing: An Analysis of Sentences Imposed on Male and Female Offenders in Three U.S. District Courts". _Berkeley Journal of Criminal Law_.
  94. **^** Ed Pilkington (March 13, 2014). US criticised by UN for human rights failings on NSA, guns and drones. _The Guardian._ Retrieved April 5, 2014.
  95. **^** Natasja Sheriff (March 9, 2015). UN expert slams US as only nation to imprison kids for life without parole. _Al Jazeera America._ Retrieved March 13, 2015.
  96. **^** Chris Kirkham (October 22, 2013). Prisoners of Profit: Private Prison Empire Rises Despite Startling Record Of Juvenile Abuse. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved October 22, 2013.
  97. **^** Case, Anne C., and Lawrence F. Katz. _The company you keep: The effects of family and neighborhood on disadvantaged youths_. No. w3705. National Bureau of Economic Research, 1991.
  98. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Aging inmates clogging nation's prisons". Associated Press. September 30, 2007.
  99. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Aday, Ronald H. (2003). _Aging Prisoners: Crisis in American Corrections_. Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-97123-6.
  100. **^** "Elderly Inmate Population Soared 1,300 Percent Since 1980s: Report". The Huffington Post. June 13, 2012.
  101. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Marksamer, Jody; Tobin, Harper (2013). _Standing With LGBT Prisoners: An Advocate's Guide to Ending Abuse and Combating Imprisonment_ (PDF). Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality. pp. 1–88. Retrieved February 14, 2015.
  102. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Tobin, Harper (April 1, 2014). "Putting Prisons on the LGBT Agenda". _The Huffington Post_. The Huffington Post. Retrieved February 14, 2015.
  103. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bassichis, Daniel (2007). _"It's War In Here": A Report on the Treatment of Transgender and Intersex People in New York State Men's Prisons_ (PDF). Sylvia Rivera Law Project. pp. 1–50. Retrieved February 14, 2015.
  104. **^** Whitlock, Kay (December 15, 2005). "Corrupting Justice: A Primer for LGBT Communities on Racism, Violence, Human Degradation  & the Prison Industrial Complex" (PDF). American Friends Service Committee. American Friends Service Committee. Retrieved February 14, 2015.
  105. **^** Beck, Allan; Berzofsky, Marcus; Caspar, Rachel; Krebs, Christopher (May 2013). _Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-12_. National Criminal Justice Reference Service.
  106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Horowitz, Alana (February 4, 2013). "Mental Illness Soars In Prisons, Jails While Inmates Suffer". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved February 15, 2015.
  107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Mentally Ill Persons in Corrections". _nicic.gov_. National Institute of Corrections. Retrieved February 15, 2015.
  108. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Geller, Adam (July 15, 2014). "U.S. Jails Struggle With Role As Makeshift Asylums". _The Seattle Times_. The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 18, 2018.
  109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Skeem, Jennifer; Manchak, Sarah; Peterson, Jillian (April 2011). "Correctional Policy for Offenders with Mental Illness: Creating a New Paradigm for Recidivism Reduction". _Law and Human Behavior_. **35** (2): 110–126. doi:10.1007/s10979-010-9223-7. PMID 20390443.
  110. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ James, Doris; Glaze, Lauren (December 14, 2006). _Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates_ (PDF). U.S. Department of Justice: Office of Justice Programs: Bureau of Justice Statistics. pp. 1–12. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
  111. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _Mental Illness, Human Rights, and US Prisons: Human Rights Watch Statement for the Record Senate Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on Human Rights and the Law_ (PDF). Human Rights Watch. September 22, 2009. pp. 1–14. Retrieved February 20, 2015. See p. 10.
  112. **^** Marisa Taylor (May 12, 2015). Report: Mentally ill inmates are routinely abused by corrections officers. _Al Jazeera America._ Retrieved May 17, 2015.
  113. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Peterson, Jillian; Skeem, Jennifer; Kennealy, Patrick; Bray, Beth; Zvonkovic, Andrea (2014). "How Often and How Consistently do Symptoms Directly Precede Criminal Behavior Among Offenders With Mental Illness?" (PDF). _Law and Human Behavior_. **38** (5): 439–449. doi:10.1037/lhb0000075. PMID 24730388. Retrieved February 20, 2015.
  114. **^** Torrey, E. Fuller; Kennard, Aaron; Eslinger, Don; Lamb, Richard; Pavle, James (May 2010). _More Mentally Ill Persons Are in Jails and Prisons Than Hospitals: A Survey of the States_ (PDF). Arlington, Virginia: Treatment Advocacy Center. pp. 1–22. Retrieved February 21, 2015.
  115. **^** Sarah Biehl, The School-to-Prison Pipeline, 28 OHIO LAWYER, Jan.–Feb. 2014,
  116. **^** David M. Pedersen, _Zero-Tolerance Policies_ , _in_ SCHOOL VIOLENCE: FROM DISCIPLINE TO DUE PROCESS 48 (James C. Hanks ed., 2004); _see also_ CATHERINE Y. KIM, DANIEL J. LOSEN  & DAMON T. HEWITT, THE SCHOOL-TO-PRISON PIPELINE: STRUCTURING LEGAL REFORM 79 (2010)
  117. **^** Ralph M. Gerstein  & Lois A. Gerstein _Education Law: An Essential Guide for Attorneys, Teachers, Administrators, Parents and Students 195_ (2nd ed. 2007).
  118. **^** U.S. Dep't of Educ. Office for Civil Rights, _School Climate and Discipline_ , http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/school-discipline/index.html
  119. **^** Catherine Y. Kim, _Policing School Discipline_ , 77 BROOK. L. REV. 861, 901–02 (2012); Moll  & Simmons, _supra_ note 22, at 7; Advancement Project, _Clayton County, GA_ , http://safequalityschools.org/pages/clayton-county-ga [https://perma.cc/8CKX-URDD] (last visited Feb. 1, 2017).
  120. **^** Heitzeg, Nancy A. (2009). "Education Or Incarceration: Zero Tolerance Policies And The School To Prison Pipeline" (PDF).
  121. **^** Koon, Danfeng Soto-Vigil. "Exclusionary School Discipline: An Issue Brief and the Review of Literature." _The Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on Law and Social Policy_. University of California, Berkeley School of Law, n.d. Web. Apr. 2013.
  122. **^** O'Conner, R., Porowski, A.,  & Passa (2014). "Disproportionality in school discipline: An assessment of trends in Maryland, 2009–12" (PDF).CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  123. **^** Mallet, Christopher A. (2016). "The School-to-Prison Pipeline: Disproportionate Impact on Vulnerable Children and Adolescents" (PDF).
  124. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Smith  & Harper (2015). "Disproportionate impact of K-12 school suspension and expulsion on Black students in southern states" (PDF).
  125. **^** Feld, Barry C. (1999). "Bad Kids: Race and the Transformation of the Juvenile Court".
  126. **^** Edelman  & Smith (1975). _School Suspensions: Are they helping children?_. Washington Research Project.
  127. **^** "Transfer Of State Prisoners." United States Department of Justice. Retrieved on April 14, 2016.
  128. **^** "How The Program Works." United States Department of Justice. Retrieved on April 14, 2016.
  129. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "What Do Security Levels Means". Injustice Security. Retrieved August 28, 2016.
  130. **^** Christopher Zoukis (May 19, 2013). "Inmate Housing in the Federal Bureau of Prisons". Prison Law Blog. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
  131. **^** diZerega, M.,  & Agudelo, S. V. (2011). Piloting a tool for reentry: A promising approach to engaging family members. New York, NY: Vera Institute of Justice.
  132. **^** Christian, Johnna; Mellow, Jeff; Thomas, Shenique (July 2006). "Social and economic implications of family connections to prisoners". _Journal of Criminal Justice_. **34** (4): 443–452. doi:10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2006.05.010.
  133. **^** DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS TO BAN INMATES FROM SOLICITING PEN PALS ON WEBSITES – Missouri Department of Corrections, press release May 13, 2007. " _During our review, we have identified numerous offenders who, through misleading web postings and photos, have solicited thousands of dollars from individuals and have devised other creative and purposeful intents to defraud the public_ "
  134. **^** "Arizona Inmates Back on the Net". Wired News. December 17, 2002. Retrieved January 26, 2008.
  135. **^** Neal Moore (March 28, 2011). "Employment Upon Release". CNN. Retrieved March 28, 2011.
  136. **^** "Prisoners' Rights – Legal Correspondence". FindLaw. Retrieved January 26, 2008.
  137. **^** "California Prison Reform and Rehabilitation". California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation.
  138. **^** Prison and Detention Conditions. Human Rights Watch, retrieved May 22, 2015.
  139. **^** "Inhumane Prison Conditions Still Threaten Life, Health of Alabama Inmates Living with HIV/AIDS, According to Court Filings". Human Rights Watch. February 27, 2005. Retrieved June 13, 2006.
  140. **^** Cindy Struckman-Johnson  & David Struckman-Johnson (December 2000). "Sexual Coercion Rates in Seven Midwestern Prisons for Men" (PDF). _The Prison Journal_. **80** (4): 379–390. doi:10.1177/0032885500080004004.
  141. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hylton, Wil S. (July 2003). "Sick on the Inside". Harper's Magazine. Retrieved February 29, 2012.
  142. **^** Liliana Segura (October 1, 2013).With 2.3 Million People Incarcerated in the US, Prisons Are Big Business. _The Nation._ Retrieved October 9, 2013.
  143. **^** Abigail Leonard  & Adam May (May 28, 2014). Whistleblower: Arizona inmates are dying from inadequate health care. _Al Jazeera America._ Retrieved July 22, 2014.
  144. **^** David M. Reutter, Gary Hunter  & Brandon Sample. Appalling Prison and Jail Food Leaves Prisoners Hungry for Justice. _Prison Legal News._ Retrieved January 4, 2013.
  145. **^** Paul Egan (May 7, 2013). Michigan's new prison food contractor accused of skimping on size and quality of meals to boost profits. _Detroit Free Press._ Retrieved January 4, 2014.
  146. **^** Fassler, Joe; Brown, Claire (December 27, 2017). "Prison Food Is Making U.S. Inmates Disproportionately Sick". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
  147. **^** "Gang and Security Threat Group Awareness". Florida Department of Corrections. Retrieved June 13, 2006.
  148. **^** Thompson, Don (April 5, 2008). "Prison Attacks Calling Attention to Overcrowding". Associated Press. Retrieved August 6, 2009.
  149. **^** Moore, Solomon (August 5, 2009). "California Prisons Must Cut Inmate Population". New York Times. p. A10. Retrieved August 6, 2009.
  150. **^** Order for population reduction plan, pg. 9, three-judge court convened by the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit hearing _Plata v. Schwarzenegger_ and _Coleman v. Schwarzenegger_
  151. **^** Medina, Jennifer (May 24, 2011). "In a California Prison, Bunk Beds Replace Pickup Games". _The New York Times_.
  152. **^** "Calif. Faces Tough Choices on Overcrowded Prisons".
  153. **^** Liptak, Adam (May 23, 2011). "Justices, 5-4, Tell California to Cut Prisoner Population". _The New York Times_. Adam Liptak. Retrieved February 15, 2016.
  154. **^** "RBGG and Co-Counsel Win Affirmance at Supreme Court of the United States". _Rosen Bien Galvan & Grunfeld LLP_. 50 Fremont Street, 19th Floor San Francisco, CA 94105. May 23, 2011. Retrieved February 15, 2016.
  155. **^** "How Many Prisoners Are in Solitary Confinement in the United States?". February 2012.
  156. **^** UN News (October 18, 2011). "Solitary confinement should be banned in most cases".
  157. **^** Dana Larson (December 8, 1999). "Norway Grants Refuge to US Smuggler". _Cannabis Culture_.
  158. **^** Cara Tabachnick (December 27, 2013). There's an alarming number of deaths in US jails. _The Guardian._ Retrieved December 28, 2013.
  159. **^** Berman, Mark (July 23, 2015). "How often do prisoners die behind bars?". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved February 24, 2018.
  160. **^** Holly Richmond (September 18, 2013). "Everybody wants condom vending machines". _Grist Magazine_. Grist Magazine, Inc. Retrieved September 19, 2013.
  161. **^** George Lavender (January 21, 2015). "California Prisons Aim To Keep Sex Between Inmates Safe, If Illegal". _Around the Nation_. NPR. Retrieved June 17, 2017.
  162. **^** Alabama Guards Stage Work Strike Months After Prisoner Uprising at Overcrowded Holman Facility. _Democracy Now!_ September 28, 2016.
  163. **^** Khalek, Rania. How private prisons game the system. Salon.com. December 1, 2011.
  164. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Harcourt, Bernard (2012). _The Illusion of Free Markets: Punishment and the Myth of Natural Order._ Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674066162 pp. 235  & 236
  165. **^** Selman, Donna and Paul Leighton (2010). _Punishment for Sale: Private Prisons, Big Business, and the Incarceration Binge._ Rowman  & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 1442201738 p. xi
  166. **^** Archambeault, William G.; Donald R. Deis Jr. (1997–1998). "Cost Effectiveness Comparisons of Private Versus Public Prisons in Louisiana: A Comprehensive Analysis of Allen, Avoyelles, and Winn Correction Centers". _Journal of the Oklahoma Criminal Justice Research Consortium_. **4**.
  167. **^** Marie Gottschalk. _Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics._ Princeton University Press, 2014. p. 70
  168. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Shapiro, David. "Banking on Bondage: Private Prisons and Mass Incarceration" (PDF). American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved March 31, 2013.
  169. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chang, Cindy (May 29, 2012). "Louisiana is the world's prison capital". _The Times-Picayune_. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  170. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Margaret Newkirk  & William Selway (July 12, 2013). "Gangs Ruled Prison as For-Profit Model Put Blood on Floor." Bloomberg. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
  171. **^** Jerry Mitchell (September 25, 2014). East Mississippi prison called 'barbaric'. _The Clarion-Ledger._ Retrieved December 1, 2014. See also: A Tour of East Mississippi Correctional Facility. ACLU.
  172. **^** Timothy Williams (November 6, 2014). Christopher Epps, Former Chief of Prisons in Mississippi, Is Arraigned. _The New York Times._ Received December 2, 2014.
  173. **^** Stroud, Matt (February 24, 2014). The Private Prison Racket. _Politico._ Retrieved February 25, 2014.
  174. **^** Kirkham, Chris (September 27, 2012). Private Prisons: Immigration Convictions In Record Numbers Fueling Corporate Profits. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved February 25, 2014.
  175. **^** Renee Lewis (February 23, 2015). Inmates riot at for-profit Texas immigrant detention facility. _Al Jazeera America._ Retrieved February 24, 2015.
  176. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ John L. Campbell (2010). "Neoliberalism's penal and debtor states". _Theoretical Criminology_. **14** (1): 59–73. doi:10.1177/1362480609352783.
  177. **^** Boucher, Dave (October 28, 2016). "CCA changes name to CoreCivic amid ongoing scrutiny". _The Tennessean_. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
  178. **^** Matt Taibbi (2014). _The Divide: American Injustice in the Age of the Wealth Gap._ Spiegel  & Grau. ISBN 081299342X pp. 214-216.
  179. **^** "Prison Economics Help Drive Ariz. Immigration Law". NPR. October 28, 2010. Retrieved August 17, 2012.
  180. **^** Sullivan, Laura (2010). Shaping State Laws With Little Scrutiny. _National Public Radio._
  181. **^** Elk, Mike and Sloan, Bob (2011). The Hidden History of ALEC and Prison Labor. _The Nation_.
  182. **^** Prison Privatization and the Use of Incarceration. The Sentencing Project, September 2004.
  183. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Whitehead, John (April 10, 2012). "Jailing Americans for Profit: The Rise of the Prison Industrial Complex". The Rutherford Institute. Retrieved April 2, 2013.
  184. **^** Pat Beall (November 22, 2013). Big business, legislators pushed for stiff sentences. _The Palm Beach Post._ Retrieved November 10, 2014.
  185. **^** Greenblatt, Alan (October 2003). "What Makes Alec Smart?". **Governing**.
  186. **^** Beau Hodai, "Corporate Con Game. How the private prison industry helped shape Arizona's anti-immigrant law", In These Times, June 20, 2010, http://inthesetimes.com/article/6084/corporate_con_game, retrieved July 25, 2015.
  187. **^** Page, Joshua (2011). _Toughest Beat - Oxford Scholarship_. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195384055.001.0001. ISBN 9780195384055.
  188. **^** California Prison Guards Union Pushes For Prison Expansion. The Huffington Post. September 9, 2013.
  189. **^** Chris Kirkham (September 19, 2013). Prison Quotas Push Lawmakers To Fill Beds, Derail Reform. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved September 20, 2013.
  190. **^** Eric Schlosser (December 1998). The Prison-Industrial Complex. _The Atlantic._ Retrieved December 31, 2013.
  191. **^** Ray Downs (May 17, 2013). Who's Getting Rich Off the Prison-Industrial Complex? _Vice._ Retrieved December 31, 2013.
  192. **^** Selman, Donna and Paul Leighton (2010). _Punishment for Sale: Private Prisons, Big Business, and the Incarceration Binge._ Rowman  & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 1442201738 p. 78
  193. **^** Prison Payback on YouTube. Russia Today on YouTube
  194. **^** Marie Gottschalk (March 5, 2015). It's Not Just the Drug War. _Jacobin._ Retrieved March 5, 2015.
  195. **^** Detention Watch Network, "The Influence of the Private Prison Industry in Immigration Detention", 2012, http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/privateprisons, retrieved July 25, 2015.
  196. **^** DiversityInc, "The Prison Industrial Complex: Biased, Predatory and Growing", October 8, 2010, http://www.diversityinc.com/diversity-management/the-prison-industrial-complex-biased-predatory-and-growing/, retrieved July 25, 2015.
  197. **^** David Harris-Gershon, "America's Corrupt Justice System: Federal Private Prison Populations Grew by 784% in 10 Year Span", Alternet, crossposted on Tikkun Daily, May 23, 2013, http://www.alternet.org/speakeasy/tikkundaily/americas-corrupt-justice-system-federal-private-prison-populations-grew-784-10, retrieved July 25, 2015.
  198. **^** Camp, Camille; Camp, George (2000). "Corrections Yearbook 2000: Private Prisons". _National Criminal Justice Reference Service_. Retrieved June 14, 2015.
  199. **^** Justice Is Not For Sale Act. Sanders.senate.gov
  200. **^** Bernie Sanders declares war on the prison-industrial complex with major new bill. Salon. September 17, 2015.
  201. **^** Private federal prisons more dangerous, damning DoJ investigation reveals. _The Guardian._ August 12, 2016.
  202. **^** Justice Department Will Stop the Use of Private Prisons. _Time._ August 18, 2016.
  203. **^** U.S. reverses Obama-era move to phase out private prisons. Reuters. Feb 23, 2017
  204. **^** Watkins, Eli; Tatum, Sophie (August 18, 2017). "Private prison industry sees boon under Trump administration". _CNN_. Retrieved August 22, 2017.
  205. **^** Washington, John (December 14, 2017). "Under Trump, the Private-Prison Boom Shows No Sign of Slowing". _The Nation_. Retrieved December 18, 2017.
  206. **^** Lartey, Jamiles (December 28, 2017). "Private prison investors set for giant windfall from Trump tax bill". _The Guardian_. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
  207. **^** Conlin, Michelle; Cooke, Kristina (January 18, 2019). "$11 toothpaste: Immigrants pay big for basics at private ICE lock-ups". _www.reuters.com_. Retrieved January 18, 2019.
  208. **^** Nathan James. Federal Prison Industries. CRS Report for Congress. Updated July 13, 2007.
  209. **^** McCollum, William (1996). _Federal Prison Industries, Inc: Hearing Before the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representatives_. DIANE Publishing. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-7567-0060-7.
  210. **^** Nate C. Hindman (August 15, 2012). Unicor Under Fire For Dominating Small Competitors With Cheap Prison Labor. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved May 9, 2014.
  211. **^** Beth Schwartzapfel (February 12, 2009). Your Valentine, Made in Prison. _The Nation._ Retrieved April 15, 2015.
  212. **^** Simon McCormack (December 10, 2012). Prison Labor Booms As Unemployment Remains High; Companies Reap Benefits. _The Huffington Post._ Retrieved April 15, 2015.
  213. **^** Chris Hedges (April 5, 2015). Boycott, Divest and Sanction Corporations That Feed on Prisons. _Truthdig._ Retrieved April 4, 2015.
  214. **^** Marie Gottschalk. _Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics._ Princeton University Press, 2014. p. 61
  215. **^** Justin Jouvenal (January 28, 2012). "Town struggles to survive close of prison". _Washington Post_.
  216. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Inmates strike in prisons nationwide over 'slave labor' working conditions. _The Guardian_ September 9, 2016.
  217. **^** The Largest Prison Strike in U.S. History Enters Its Second Week. _The Intercept_ September 16, 2016.
  218. **^** Work Stoppage Prison Strike Continues in 11 US States. The Real News. September 20, 2016.
  219. **^** Kamala Kelkar (December 18, 2016). "From media cutoffs to lockdown, tracing the fallout from the U.S. prison strike". _PBS Newshour_.
  220. **^** Tarr, Duncan; Onderchanin, Stephanie (August 21, 2018). "How the National Prisoner Strike Is Working to Help Incarcerated People in the United States". _Teen Vogue_. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
  221. **^** Neufeld, Jennie (August 22, 2018). "A mass incarceration expert says the 2018 prison strike could be "one of the largest the country has ever seen"". _Vox_. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
  222. **^** Pilkington, Ed (August 23, 2018). "Major prison strike spreads across US and Canada as inmates refuse food". _The Guardian_. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
  223. **^** Corley, Cheryl (August 21, 2018). "U.S. Inmates Plan Nationwide Prison Strike To Protest Labor Conditions". _NPR_. Retrieved August 23, 2018.
  224. **^** Bozelko, Chandra; Lo, Ryan (August 25, 2018). "As prison strikes heat up, former inmates talk about horrible state of labor and incarceration". _USA Today_. Retrieved August 30, 2018.
  225. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Direct expenditures by justice function, 1982–2007 (billions of dollars). Inflation adjusted to 2007 dollars. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Retrieved January 1, 2012 by the Internet Archive. See BJS timeline graph based on the data.
  226. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Justice Expenditures and Employment, FY 1982–2007 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 236218). Published December 2011. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). By Tracey Kyckelhahn, Ph.D., BJS statistician. See table 2 of the PDF. "Total justice expenditures, by justice function, FY 1982–2007 (real dollars)". A total of around $74 billion for corrections in 2007.
  227. **^** As Arrest Records Rise, Americans Find Consequences Can Last a Lifetime. August 18, 2014. _Wall Street Journal._
  228. **^** Annual Determination of Average Cost of Incarceration. A notice by the Prisons Bureau on March 9, 2015 in the _Federal Register._
  229. **^** The Price of Prisons: What Incarceration Costs Taxpayers. February 29, 2012, the Vera Institute of Justice. By Christian Henrichson and Ruth Delaney. "Total taxpayer cost per inmate. Among the 40 states surveyed, representing more than 1.2 million inmates (of 1.4 million total people incarcerated in all 50 state prison systems), the total per-inmate cost averaged $31,286 and ranged from $14,603 in Kentucky to $60,076 in New York (see Figure 4)."
  230. **^** California Criminal Justice FAQ: How much does it cost to incarcerate an inmate? California Legislative Analyst's Office.
  231. **^** Inmates Who Can't Make Bail Face Stark Options. By Laura Sullivan. January 22, 2010. National Public Radio.
  232. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bail Burden Keeps U.S. Jails Stuffed With Inmates. By Laura Sullivan. January 21, 2010. National Public Radio.
  233. **^** Jail Inmates at Midyear 2009 – Statistical Tables. By Minton D. Todd. June 3, 2010. NCJ 230122. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. See Table 7 of the PDF file for percent unconvicted.
  234. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bondsman Lobby Targets Pretrial Release Programs. By Laura Sullivan. January 22, 2010. National Public Radio.
  235. **^** Jails Stuffed To Capacity In Many U.S. Counties. January 20, 2010. National Public Radio. Chart using 2008 jail statistics showing "50 U.S. counties with the largest numbers of inmates."
  236. **^** "Fiscal Year 2009 State Expenditure Report". National Association of State Budget Officers. Retrieved October 10, 2011.
  237. **^** One in 100: Behind Bars in America 2008. February 28, 2008. The Pew Center on the States.
  238. **^** The Full Cost Of Incarceration In The U.S. Is Over $1 Trillion, Study Finds. _The Huffington Post_. September 13, 2016.
  239. **^** Emma Brown and Danielle Douglas-Gabriel (July 7, 2016). Since 1980, spending on prisons has grown three times as much as spending on public education. _The Washington Post._ Retrieved July 12, 2016.
  240. **^** "Violent crime rate per 1,000 persons age 12 and up".
  241. **^** Liedka, Raymond V.; Piehl, Anne Morrison; Useem, Bert (May 1, 2006). "The Crime-Control Effect of Incarceration: Does Scale Matter?". _Criminology & Public Policy_. **5** (2): 245–276. doi:10.1111/j.1745-9133.2006.00376.x.
  242. **^** DeFina, Robert H.; Avanites, Thomas M. (2002). "The Weak Effect of Imprisonment on Crime: 1971-1998". _Social Science Quarterly_. **83** (3): 635–653. doi:10.1111/1540-6237.00106.
  243. **^** Clear, Todd R.; Rose, Dina R.; Waring, Elin; Scully, Kristen (March 1, 2003). "Coercive mobility and crime: A preliminary examination of concentrated incarceration and social disorganization". _Justice Quarterly_. **20** (1): 33–64. doi:10.1080/07418820300095451. ISSN 0741-8825.
  244. **^** DeFina, Robert; Hannon, Lance (November 1, 2010). "For incapacitation, there is no time like the present: The lagged effects of prisoner reentry on property and violent crime rates". _Social Science Research_. **39** (6): 1004–1014. doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2010.08.001.
  245. **^** John J. Gibbons and Nicholas de B. Katzenbach (June 2006). "Confronting Confinement". Vera Institute of Justice.
  246. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Lyons, John. _War on the Family: Mothers in Prison and the Children They Leave Behind_ (DVD). Peace Productions.
  247. **^** Alexander, Elizabeth (Fall 1998). "A Troubling Response To Overcrowded Prisons". _Civil Rights Journal_.
  248. **^** Aizenman, N.C. (February 29, 2008). "The high cost of incarceration". _Denver Post_.
  249. **^** "Majority of employers background check employees … Here's why".
  250. **^** Michelle Alexander (December 6, 2010). "How mass incarceration turns people of color into permanent second-class citizens". _The American Prospect_.
  251. **^** Michael O'Hear (November 8, 2014). "The "New Jim Crow" Reconsidered". Retrieved November 8, 2014.
  252. **^** Renny., Golden (October 18, 2013). _War on the family : mothers in prison and the families they leave behind_. New York. ISBN 9781135939700. OCLC 861692996.
  253. **^** Cochran, Joshua C.; Siennick, Sonja E.; Mears, Daniel P. (April 2018). "Social Exclusion and Parental Incarceration Impacts on Adolescents' Networks and School Engagement". _Journal of Marriage and the Family_. **80** (2): 478–498. doi:10.1111/jomf.12464. ISSN 0022-2445. PMC 5880045. PMID 29622839.
  254. **^** "POP1 Child population: Number of children (in millions) ages 0–17 in the United States by age, 1950–2017 and projected 2018–2050". _www.childstats.gov_. Retrieved October 21, 2018.
  255. **^** Sawyer, Wendy (May 8, 2017). "Bailing moms out for Mother's Day". _Prison Policy Initiative_. Retrieved April 5, 2019.
  256. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Geller, Amanda; Garfinkel, Irwin; Cooper, Carey E.; Mincy, Ronald B. (December 1, 2009). "Parental Incarceration and Child Wellbeing: Implications for Urban Families". _Social Science Quarterly_. **90** (5): 1186–1202. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6237.2009.00653.x. ISSN 0038-4941. PMC 2835345. PMID 20228880.
  257. **^** Lee, Rosalyn D.; Fang, Xiangming; Luo, Feijun (April 2013). "The impact of parental incarceration on the physical and mental health of young adults". _Pediatrics_. **131** (4): e1188–1195. doi:10.1542/peds.2012-0627. ISSN 1098-4275. PMC 3608482. PMID 23509174.
  258. **^** Turney, Kristin (September 2014). "Stress proliferation across generations? Examining the relationship between parental incarceration and childhood health". _Journal of Health and Social Behavior_. **55** (3): 302–319. doi:10.1177/0022146514544173. ISSN 2150-6000. PMID 25138199.
  259. **^** Geller, Amanda; Cooper, Carey E.; Garfinkel, Irwin; Schwartz-Soicher, Ofira; Mincy, Ronald B. (February 2012). "Beyond absenteeism: father incarceration and child development". _Demography_. **49** (1): 49–76. doi:10.1007/s13524-011-0081-9. ISSN 0070-3370. PMC 3703506. PMID 22203452.
  260. **^** Garner, Andrew S.; Shonkoff, Jack P.; Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family Health; Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption, and Dependent Care; Section on Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics (January 2012). "Early childhood adversity, toxic stress, and the role of the pediatrician: translating developmental science into lifelong health". _Pediatrics_. **129** (1): e224–231. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-2662. ISSN 1098-4275. PMID 22201148. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  261. **^** Murray, Joseph; Murray, Lynne (July 2010). "Parental incarceration, attachment and child psychopathology". _Attachment & Human Development_. **12** (4): 289–309. doi:10.1080/14751790903416889. ISSN 1469-2988. PMID 20582842.
  262. **^** Poehlmann, Julie (September 2005). "Incarcerated mothers' contact with children, perceived family relationships, and depressive symptoms". _Journal of Family Psychology: JFP: Journal of the Division of Family Psychology of the American Psychological Association (Division 43)_. **19** (3): 350–357. doi:10.1037/0893-3200.19.3.350. ISSN 0893-3200. PMID 16221015.
  263. **^** Murray, Joseph; Farrington, David P.; Sekol, Ivana (March 2012). "Children's antisocial behavior, mental health, drug use, and educational performance after parental incarceration: a systematic review and meta-analysis". _Psychological Bulletin_. **138** (2): 175–210. doi:10.1037/a0026407. ISSN 1939-1455. PMC 3283435. PMID 22229730.
  264. **^** Sack, W. H. (May 1977). "Children of imprisoned fathers". _Psychiatry_. **40** (2): 163–174. ISSN 0033-2747. PMID 870921.
  265. **^** Petsch, P.,  & Rochlen, A. B. (2009). Children of Incarcerated Parents: Implications for School Counselors. _Journal of School Counseling_ , _7_ (40), n40.
  266. **^** Dacass, Tennecia (July 25, 2017). "Intergenerational Effects of Mass Incarceration" (PDF).
  267. **^** Shaw, Marcus (December 2016). "The racial implications of the effects of parental incarceration on intergenerational mobility". _Sociology Compass_. **10** (12): 1102–1109. doi:10.1111/soc4.12440. ISSN 1751-9020.
  268. **^** _Children of incarcerated parents_. Gabel, Katherine., Johnston, Denise, 1947-. New York: Lexington Books. 1995. ISBN 978-0029110423. OCLC 31739788.CS1 maint: others (link)
  269. **^** Peterson, Bryce (June 2015). "Children of Incarcerated Parents Framework Document" (PDF). _Urban Institute_. Retrieved October 2, 2018.
  270. **^** N.M. Stat. Ann. §29-7-7.3
  271. **^** "Safeguarding Children of Arrested Parents" (PDF). _Bureau of Justice Assistance_. Retrieved November 12, 2018.
  272. **^** Okla. Stat. tit. 22, §22-20
  273. **^** N.Y. Corrections Law §611
  274. **^** Winston, Robert; Chicot, Rebecca (2016). "The importance of early bonding on the long-term mental health and resilience of children". _London Journal of Primary Care_. **8** (1): 12–14. doi:10.1080/17571472.2015.1133012. ISSN 1757-1472. PMC 5330336. PMID 28250823.
  275. **^** Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §5120.65
  276. **^** Cal. Penal Code §§3410-3424
  277. **^** Perry, Bruce (2013). "Bonding and Attachment in Maltreated Children" (PDF). _The ChildTrauma Academy_. Retrieved October 4, 2018.
  278. **^** "Deputy Attorney General Sally Q. Yates Announces Family-Friendly Prison Policies to Strengthen Inmate-Familial Bonds". April 26, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2018.
  279. **^** Naser, Rebecca L.; La Vigne, Nancy G. (March 2006). "Family Support in the Prisoner Reentry Process". _Journal of Offender Rehabilitation_. **43** (1): 93–106. doi:10.1300/j076v43n01_05. ISSN 1050-9674.
  280. **^** Serin, Ralph C.; Lloyd, Caleb D.; Hanby, Laura J. (August 2010). "Enhancing Offender Re-Entry an Integrated Model for Enhancing Offender Re-Entry". _European Journal of Probation_. **2** (2): 53–75. doi:10.1177/206622031000200205. ISSN 2066-2203.
  281. **^** 2007 Okla. Sess. Laws, Chap. 274
  282. **^** Turanovic, Jillian J.; Rodriguez, Nancy; Pratt, Travis C. (2012). "The Collateral Consequences of Incarceration Revisited: A Qualitative Analysis of the Effects on Caregivers of Children of Incarcerated Parents". _Criminology_. **50** (4): 913–959. doi:10.1111/j.1745-9125.2012.00283.x.
  283. **^** "Having a Parent Behind Bars Costs Children, States". _www.pewtrusts.org_. Retrieved November 12, 2018.
  284. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Pager, Devah (March 2003). "The Mark of a Criminal Record" (PDF). _American Journal of Sociology_. **108** (5): 937–975. doi:10.1086/374403.
  285. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Marked: Race, Crime, and Finding Work in an Era of Mass Incarceration by Devah Pager, an excerpt". _press.uchicago.edu_. Retrieved April 9, 2017.
  286. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Western, Bruce (August 2002). "The Impact of Incarceration on Wage Mobility and Inequality" (PDF). _American Sociology Review_. **67** (4): 526–546. doi:10.2307/3088944. JSTOR 3088944.
  287. **^** "The Psychological Impact of Incarceration: Implications for Post-Prison Adjustment". _ASPE_. November 23, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2017.
  288. **^** Schmitt, John; Warner, Kris (2010). _Ex-Offenders and the Labor Market_ (PDF). Center for Economic and Policy Research.
  289. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Decker, Scott; Spohn, Cassia; Ortiz, Natalie; Hedberg, Eric (2014). _Criminal Stigma, Race, Gender, and Employment: An Expanded Assessment of the Consequences of Imprisonment for Employment_ (PDF). National Institute of Justice.
  290. **^** Carson, E. Ann (2014). _Prisoners in 2013_ (PDF). U.S. Department of Justice.
  291. **^** Davis, Angela. _Freedom is a Constant Struggle_. Haymarket Books.
  292. **^** SpearIt (January 6, 2016). "Keeping It REAL: Why Congress Must Act to Restore Pell Grant Funding for Prisoners". Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. SSRN 2711979.
  293. **^** "11 Facts About Education and Poverty in America | DoSomething.org | Volunteer for Social Change". _www.dosomething.org_. Retrieved February 18, 2017.
  294. **^** Initiative, Prison Policy. "Prisons of Poverty: Uncovering the pre-incarceration incomes of the imprisoned | Prison Policy Initiative". _www.prisonpolicy.org_. Retrieved February 18, 2017.
  295. **^** SpearIt (January 1, 2014). "Economic Interest Convergence in Downsizing Imprisonment". Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. SSRN 2608698.
  296. **^** "The effect of prison on criminal behavior". Public Safety Canada. November 1999. Retrieved August 28, 2009.
  297. **^** 18 U.S.C. § 3582(a)
  298. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fellner, Jamie (November 30, 2006). "US Addiction to Incarceration Puts 2.3 Million in Prison". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved June 2, 2007.
  299. **^** Abramsky, Sasha (January 22, 2002). _Hard Time Blues: How Politics Built a Prison Nation_. Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-0-312-26811-4.
  300. **^** "America's One-Million Nonviolent Prisoners" (PDF). Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice. March 1999.
  301. **^** Slevin, Peter (June 8, 2006). "U.S. Prison Study Faults System and the Public". _The Washington Post_.
  302. **^** READ: Matt Taibbi on "The Divide: American Injustice in the Age of the Wealth Gap". _Democracy Now!_ April 14, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
  303. **^** Meranze, Michael (February 4, 2015). Pathology of the Carceral State. _Los Angeles Review of Books._ Retrieved February 16, 2015.
  304. **^** Alston, Philp (December 15, 2017). "Statement on Visit to the USA, by Professor Philip Alston, United Nations Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights". OHCHR. Retrieved December 21, 2017. "In many cities and counties the criminal justice system is effectively a system for keeping the poor in poverty while generating revenue to fund not only the justice system but diverse other programs. The use of the legal system, not to promote justice, but to raise revenue, as documented so powerfully in the Department of Justice’s report on Ferguson, is pervasive around the country."
  305. **^** Hadar Aviram (September 7, 2014). Are Private Prisons to Blame for Mass Incarceration and its Evils? Prison Conditions, Neoliberalism, and Public Choice. University of California, Hastings College of the Law. Retrieved December 27, 2014.
  306. **^** Loïc Wacquant. _Prisons of Poverty._ University of Minnesota Press (2009). ISBN 0816639019.
  307. **^** David Jaffee (December 29, 2014). Guest column: Real reason behind prison explosion. _The Florida Times-Union._ Retrieved January 8, 2015.
  308. **^** Marie Gottschalk. _Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics._ Princeton University Press, 2014. p. 10
  309. **^** Loïc Wacquant. _Punishing the Poor: The Neoliberal Government of Social Insecurity._ Duke University Press, 2009. ISBN 082234422X
  310. **^** Frances Goldin, Debby Smith, Michael Smith (2014). _Imagine: Living in a Socialist USA._ Harper Perennial. ISBN 0062305573 pp. 59-60.
  311. **^** Bernard Harcourt (April 30, 2012). Laissez-faire with strip-searches: America's two-faced liberalism. _The Guardian._ Retrieved December 27, 2014.
  312. **^** "There is nothing inevitable about America's over-use of prisons". _The Economist_. Retrieved October 25, 2018.
  313. **^** Chris Hedges. The Shame of America's Gulag. _Truthdig._ March 17, 2013.
  314. **^** Schwarz, Joel (August 3, 2008). "Bulging Prison System Called Massive Intervention in American Family Life" (Press release). University of Washington.
  315. **^** Fields, Gary (September 24, 2012). "Federal Guilty Pleas Soar As Bargains Trump Trials". _Wall Street Journal_. New York City. pp. A1.
  316. **^** "Federal judge blocks Alabama policy of segregating HIV inmates". _Washington Post_. December 21, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2012.
  317. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Carter, Terry (August 12, 2013). "Sweeping reversal of the War on Drugs announced by Atty General Holder". _ABA's 560-member policy making House of Delegates_. American Bar Association. p. 1. Retrieved August 16, 2013.
  318. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Smart on Crime: Reforming The Criminal Justice System" (PDF). _Remarks to American Bar Association's Annual Convention in San Francisco, CA_. US Department of Justice. August 12, 2013. p. 7. Retrieved August 16, 2013.
  319. **^** "Prison Strip Search is Sexually Abusive". ACLU. Retrieved December 24, 2013.
  320. **^** Tibbs, Donald F. (Fall 2015). "HIP HOP AND THE NEW JIM CROW: RAP MUSIC'S INSIGHT ON MASS INCARCERATION". _University of Maryland Law Journal of Race, Religion, Gender & Class_.
  321. **^** Butler, Bethonie (October 6, 2016). "Ava DuVernay's Netflix film '13th' reveals how mass incarceration is an extension of slavery". _Washington Post_. Retrieved April 23, 2017.
  322. **^** Garza, Alicia (October 7, 2014). "A Herstory of the #BlackLivesMatter Movement by Alicia Garza". _The Feminist Wire_. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2017.
  323. **^** Johnson, Kevin (March 31, 2014). "Toughness on Crime gradually gives way to fairness". _USA Today_. pp. 1B, 2B. Retrieved March 31, 2014.

##

Further readingEdit

**Incarceration in the United States** at Wikipedia's sister projects

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/27px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png) Definitions from Wiktionary
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Media from Wikimedia Commons
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/27px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png) News from Wikinews
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/23px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) Quotations from Wikiquote
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png) Texts from Wikisource
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikibooks-logo.svg/27px-Wikibooks-logo.svg.png) Textbooks from Wikibooks
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Wikiversity-logo-en.svg/27px-Wikiversity-logo-en.svg.png) Resources from Wikiversity

### BooksEdit

  * Alexander, Michelle (2012). _The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness._ The New Press. ISBN 1595586431
  * Davis, Angela (2003). _Are Prisons Obsolete?._ Seven Stories Press. ISBN 9781583225813
  * Enns, Peter K. (2016). _Incarceration Nation: How the United States Became the Most Punitive Democracy in the World._ Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781316500613
  * Gottschalk, Marie (2014). _Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics._ Princeton University Press. Book Hardcover ISBN 9780691164052, eBook ISBN 9781400852147.
  * Harcourt, Bernard (2012). _The Illusion of Free Markets: Punishment and the Myth of Natural Order._ Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674066162
  * Hinton, Elizabeth (2016). _From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime: The Making of Mass Incarceration in America._ Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674737237
  * Selman, Donna and Paul Leighton (2010). _Punishment for Sale: Private Prisons, Big Business, and the Incarceration Binge._ Rowman  & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 1442201738
  * Taibbi, Matt (2014). _The Divide: American Injustice in the Age of the Wealth Gap._ Spiegel  & Grau. ISBN 081299342X
  * Wacquant, Loïc (2009). _Prisons of Poverty._ University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 0816639019
  * ——— (2009). _Punishing the Poor: The Neoliberal Government of Social Insecurity_ _._ Duke University Press. ISBN 082234422X
  * Wang, Jackie. (2018). _Carceral Capitalism._ Semiotext(e). ISBN 978-1635900026
  * Western, Bruce (2007). _Punishment and Inequality in America._ Russell Sage Foundation. ISBN 087154895X
  * DeConde, A. (2001). Gun Violence in America. 1st ed. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
  * Todd R. Clear; Natasha A. Frost (2015). _The Punishment Imperative: The Rise and Failure of Mass Incarceration in America_. NYU Press. ISBN 978-1479851690.

### Articles and interviewsEdit

  * The Prison State of America (2014-12-28), Chris Hedges, _Truthdig_
  * How Prisons Rip Off and Exploit the Incarcerated, Part I (2015-01-04) and Part II (2015-01-07), Marshall "Eddie" Conway and Chris Hedges, _The Real News_
  * Do Prisons and Mass Incarceration Keep Us Safe? Part I (2015-01-11) and Part II (2015-01-13), Marshall "Eddie" Conway and Maya Schenwar, author of _Locked Down and Locked Out._ _The Real News._ See also Tomgram: Maya Schenwar, Prison by Any Other Name (2015-01-18), _TomDispatch_
  * "Carceral Conglomerate" Makes Millions From Incarcerated, Their Friends and Families (February 2015), James Kilgore and Brian Dolinar, _Truthout_
  * Prison Industries: "Don't Let Society Improve or We Lose Business" (April 2012), Dina Rasor, _Truthout_
  * Immigrants mistreated in 'inhumane' private prisons, finds report. _Al Jazeera America._ June 10, 2014.
  * Watch John Oliver Explain the Insanity of Our Prison System With Puppets. _Mother Jones._ July 21, 2014.
  * Locked Up for Being Poor: How private debt collectors contribute to a cycle of jail, unemployment, and poverty. _The Atlantic._ February 25, 2015.
  * Why does the US imprison so many people? _Al Jazeera America._ May 14, 2015.
  * Why Isn't More Happening to Reduce America's Bloated Prison Population? _Rolling Stone._ June 24, 2015.
  * Cruel and All-Too-Usual. _The Huffington Post._ July 1, 2015.
  * Big business built the prison state. Why should we trust them to tear it down? _The Guardian._ July 17, 2015.
  * SpearIt, Economic Interest Convergence in Downsizing Imprisonment (2014). University of Pittsburgh Law Review, Vol. 25, 2014. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2608698
  * "My Four Months as a Private Prison Guard": Shane Bauer Goes Undercover to Expose Conditions. _Democracy Now!_ June 27, 2016.
  * Inside America's biggest prison strike: 'The 13th amendment didn't end slavery'. _The Guardian._ October 22, 2016.
  * 5 facts behind America's high incarceration rate "CNN"'Drew Kann' July 10,2018

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1&mobile=1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Incarceration_in_the_United_States&oldid=899691262"

Last edited on 31 May 2019, at 17:54

## ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy
  * Desktop

