

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png) Find your
Lawyer Explore Resources For...

Learn About the Law

  * Accidents and Injuries
  * Arbitration and Mediation
  * Bankruptcy
  * Car Accidents
  * Civil Rights
  * Consumer Protection
  * Criminal Law
  * DUI Law
  * Education Law
  * Elder Law
  * Employment Law
  * Estate Planning
  * Family Law
  * Health Care Law
  * Immigration Law
  * Litigation and Appeals
  * Military Law
  * Product Liability
  * Real Estate Law
  * Small Business Law
  * Social Security and Retirement Planning
  * State Laws
  * Tax Law
  * Traffic Laws

FindLaw Answers

Legal Forms

Blogs

Are you a Legal Professional?

__

Visit Legal Professionals Site

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png)

  *   * Find a Lawyer

  * Learn About the Law
  * FindLaw Answers
  * Legal Forms
  * Blogs
  * For Legal Professionals

#####

##### Popular Directory Searches

##### More Options

  * Legal Issues
  * Name Search
  * Browse Lawyers
  * Browse Law Firms
  * Browse Types of Cases
  * Help

#####

##### Popular Directory Searches

Cancel

##### More Options

  * Legal Issues
  * Name Search
  * Browse Lawyers
  * Browse Law Firms
  * Browse Types of Cases
  * Help

  * FindLaw

  * Learn About The Law
  * Criminal Law
  * Criminal Charges
  * Federal Marijuana Laws

# Federal Marijuana Laws

![Subscribe to FindLaw Newsletters](https://www.findlawimages.com/newsletters-

component/nlmodulefinal.jpg)

__

By submitting this form, you agree to Findlaw.com's terms. We respect your
privacy.

Top Headlines U.S. Supreme Court Modern Practice Is It Legal? Weirdly Legal
Everyday Legal California Lawyers Federal Practice What the L? Law & Tech

**Thank you for subscribing!**

#

Created by FindLaw's team of attorney writers and editors.

If you live in a state that legalized medical or recreational marijuana use,
it may come as an unpleasant surprise to learn that you are still committing a
federal crime by possessing, buying, or selling marijuana. The problem is,
despite the liberalization of state laws across the country, federal law still
treats marijuana as a controlled substance, just like cocaine or heroin.

This conflict between state and federal law creates a situation where you can
be charged with a federal crime for activities that are allowed by your home
state, although federal agencies mostly have been reluctant to do so. There
are also several ways that federal marijuana laws can affect everyday life
decisions, from where you bank to where you live.

**Understanding Federal Marijuana Laws**

Since the 1930s, federal law has declared the use, sale or distribution of
marijuana illegal. Current federal drug laws are contained in the Controlled
Substances Act (CSA). The CSA classifies and regulates illegal drugs, and
places listed drugs on a schedule according to their medicinal value and
potential for abuse.

Under the CSA, marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. This
designation is reserved for drugs that have a high potential for abuse, lack
any medical value, and can’t be safely prescribed. Anyone growing, marketing,
or distributing marijuana is likely violating multiple federal laws (but, as
noted earlier, it's a matter of enforcement)..

You can run into problems with the CSA even if you're not directly involved
with the marijuana industry. If you provide services to a business that
operates under state marijuana laws, you may also be violating federal law and
thus subject to prosecution. So if you run a janitorial service and have a
client that operates a dispensary, you may be profiting from illegal drug
trafficking.

The CSA also makes it unlawful to “knowingly open, lease, rent, maintain, or
use property for the manufacturing, storing, or distribution of controlled
substances.” So landlords that have tenants involved in state-permitted
marijuana industry may risk federal asset forfeiture or other criminal fines.

Penalties for violating the CSA are not just targeting growers and
distributors. Simple possession with no intent to distribute is a misdemeanor,
punishable by up to one year in prison and a minimum fine of $1,000.
Individuals involved in marijuana businesses can receive up to five years in
prison and fines up to $250,000 for individuals and $1 million.

There is currently a ceasefire in the federal war on medical and even
recreational marijuana as long as individuals adhere to state law and don't
engage in interstate commerce. Since 2014, Congress has approved a budget
amendment that prohibits the Department of Justice to use funds to prevent
state from implementing their medical marijuana laws. Known as the
Rohrabacher-Farr or CJS amendment, this piece of legislation must be acted on
each year to keep it in place so its future is uncertain.

**Federal Law and State Ballot Initiatives**

State ballot measures to legalize marijuana have no impact of federal law or
the CSA. In 2005, Congress’ constitutional authority under the Commerce Clause
to ban local marijuana production and consumption was affirmed by the Supreme
Court in _Gonzales v. Raich_. Under the Commerce Clause, Congress has the
power to regulate purely local activities that are part of an economic "class
of activities" that have a substantial effect on interstate commerce. This is
the reason that no state law will affect the federal classification of
Marijuana as a Class I controlled substance

**Common Conflicts With Federal Marijuana Laws**

The ongoing conflict with federal law can make it for problems in your day-to-
day life. The following are common issues you should be aware of:

_Employment_

You can be fired from your job for your off-the-clock use of marijuana. So
says the Supreme Court in _Coats v. Dish Network_ (2015),a Colorado case where
an employee sued for wrongful termination after testing positive for
marijuana. State unfair employment practice laws generally find it unlawful to
prohibit legal activities as a condition of employment. In many states the use
of marijuana is legal. But under federal law, the use of marijuana is illegal
so it can be prohibited by an employer.

Labor laws are not only determined by your home state. The Fair Labor
Standards Act, and other federal laws and agency regulations also set
workplace rules. For example, the federal government sets a national minimum
wage, maintains child labor laws, and rule prohibiting forms of
discrimination. Employers must maintain an environment that is consistent with
both these state and federal rules.

These conflicting laws also create problems in some professions. Doctors
cannot legally prescribe marijuana since it is a Schedule I drug under the
CSA. A few doctors have lost their license or been reprimanded by state
medical boards, but stricter enforcement is still possible. Lawyers also risk
their licenses when advising clients involved in the marijuana industry, since
they are providing advice on how to violate federal law.

_Housing_

Renters can face eviction even when their marijuana uses is compliant with
their state’s law if their lease prohibits illicit drugs. Since federal law
states marijuana is a controlled substance, it can be prohibited by your
landlord. If you are a section 8 or other federal housing aid recipient, you
are not allowed to use marijuana. Violations can lead to a loss of benefits or
eviction.

_Taxes_

If you work in the marijuana industry, you are likely familiar with Internal
Revenue Code Section 280E. This law prohibits marijuana businesses from
deducting ordinary business expenses such as marketing, training,
transportation. What it creates is a federal tax rate of 60 to 90 percent.
These businesses can deduct cost of goods sold, so shrewd accounting
incorporates many of their expenses into the cost of goods.

_Right to Bear Arms_

The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals held that if you have a medical
marijuana card you can be prevented from buying a gun. The court held this ban
on gun ownership did not violate the Second Amendment since federal law
prohibits gun purchases by an "unlawful user and/or an addict of any
controlled substance." In 2011, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
clarified in a letter that the law applies to marijuana users regardless of
their home state’s laws.

_Banking_

Many banks and credit card companies are reluctant to provide accounts to
participants in the marijuana industry for fear of prosecution under the CSA.
The U.S. Department of Treasury has issued guidelines on how financial
companies can services the industry without violating federal money laundering
laws.

**Confused About State and Federal Marijuana Laws? An Attorney Can Help**

Being charged with a federal drug crime is serious business, and punishment
for people found guilty is frequently very severe. Further complicating
matters, federal courts don’t recognize state medical or recreational
marijuana laws as a defense to possession or cultivation. If you’re being
investigated for a marijuana-related offense, it's important to understand the
law and your rights. Get in touch with a drug crimes attorney today.

### Next Steps

Contact a qualified criminal lawyer to make sure your rights are protected.

### Help Me Find a Do-It-Yourself Solution

  * Criminal Law Forms
  * Expungement Handbook - Procedures and Law
  * Bond Forms

## Popular Directory Searches

  * Drug Charge Attorney
  * Assault Defense
  * White Collar Defense

## Criminal Charges

  * Alcohol Crimes
  * Attempt, Conspiracy and Aiding
  * Crimes Against Children
  * Crimes Against Justice
  * Crimes Against the Government
  * Crimes Against the Person
  * Curfew Laws
  * Cyber Crimes
  * Drug Charges
  * Fraud and Financial Crimes
  * Homicide
  * Property Crimes
  * Public Safety Violations
  * Sex Crimes

Back to Top

Learn More About

    
    
    Legal Topics
    State Laws
    Blogs
    FindLaw RSS Feeds
    Abogado
    LawInfo
    Super Lawyers
    

Find a Lawyer

    
    
    Browse by Location
    Browse by Legal Issue
    Browse by Law Firm & Lawyer Profile
    

Get Legal Forms

    
    
    Visit our Legal Forms site
    

Find Answers

    
    
    FindLaw Answers
    Community Guidelines
    

For Lawyers

    
    
    Visit our professional site
    Edit your legal profile
    Website development
    Advertise on our site
    

About Us

    
    
    Company History
    Media
    About FindLaw.com
    Contact Us
    Privacy
    Cookies
    Terms
    Disclaimer
    Advertising
    Jobs
    

Social

    
    
    ![Facebook icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Facebook
    ![Youtube icon](data:image/png;base64,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) YouTube
    ![Twitter icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Twitter
    ![Pinterest icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Pinterest
    

Law Firm Marketing

    
    
    Attorney Websites
    Online Advertising
    Buy a Directory Profile
    

Marketing Resources

    
    
    On-Demand Webcasts
    White Papers
    

* * *

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png)

![Thomson Reuters Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/tr-logo.png)

Copyright (C) 2019, Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

