

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

  *     *       *         * 

Log In or Sign Up

  * Log In
  * Sign Up

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * More 

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts ✕

# The research suggests marijuana legalization could lead to more use

By German Lopez@germanrlopez Updated Nov 14, 2018, 4:14pm EST

Share Tweet Share

**Share** The research suggests marijuana legalization could lead to more use

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

Part of Marijuana legalization, explained

In marijuana policy debates, whether legalization leads to more use is a
crucial point of contention. Legalization advocates argue that allowing the
drug but regulating it could reduce use and make its use safer, while critics
say legalization will make pot more easily accessible and, therefore, more
widely used and misused.

It’s too early to say whether full legalization will lead to more widespread
use, but recent research has found that pot use increased in states that
legalized **medical marijuana**.

**A comprehensive study** from researchers at the RAND Corporation found that
laws that allow medical marijuana dispensaries correlate with increases in
overall pot use and dependence for adults 21 and older but only rises in
dependence among youth. The findings suggest that allowing businesses to sell
marijuana leads to more access and use, particularly for adults.

**Another study** from Emory University researchers found that after some
states legalized medical marijuana, they saw increases in overall marijuana
use and, for adults 21 and over, a rise in binge drinking. The increase in
binge drinking is particularly worrying because while marijuana carries **few
health and social risks** , alcohol causes **many serious public health and
safety issues** , such as liver damage, more fatal car crashes, and violent
behaviors that can spur crime.

This latest research disputes **earlier studies** that found no increases in
teen pot use following the legalization of medical marijuana. Drug policy
experts argue these earlier studies were far less robust; they failed to
control for factors like whether a state allows dispensaries, cultivation, or
only possession — rendering them incapable of gauging the full effect of
different pot policies.

Still, the studies by and large only show correlation, meaning it might not be
medical marijuana legalization that’s necessarily causing the increase in use.
And it’s possible — although not likely — that the effects of medical
marijuana laws on use could be more pronounced than full legalization.

If legalization does lead to more pot use, the **question** for society and
public health officials is whether that downside outweighs the benefits of
legalization. More people getting intoxicated — albeit through a **relatively
safe drug** — isn’t an outcome that most supporters of legalization see as
desirable, but banning pot has costs of its own, including hundreds of
thousands of racially skewed arrests and the creation of a black market that
helps finance violent drug cartels around the world.

## Marijuana legalization, explained

  * Marijuana has been legalized in 10 states and Washington, DC 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879063/marijuana_plant.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana legalization is a response to the failures of the war on drugs 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879069/shutterstock_226135945.0.0.jpg)

  * A majority of Americans now support legal marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879081/1539738.jpg.0.jpg)

  * 15 states have decriminalized — but not legalized — marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879129/73244614.jpg.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is legal for medical purposes in 33 states 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879177/medical_marijuana.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is illegal under federal law even in states that legalize it 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879191/GettyImages-171549255.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is a relatively safe drug — with some risks 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879205/175231438.0.0.jpg)

  * The case for marijuana legalization 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879233/451907616.jpg.0.jpg)

  * The case against marijuana legalization 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879265/73245308.0.jpg)

  * Uruguay was the first country to fully legalize marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879247/GettyImages_949178554.0.jpg)

### Most Read

  1. “We don’t want to be knee-jerk”: YouTube responds to Vox on its harassment policies A conservative commentator has been harassing a Vox journalist for a long time. YouTube still isn’t quite sure what to do about it.
  2. Russia and China are waging a “shadow war” against the US, and the battlefields will be AI and space, CNN’s Jim Sciutto says Hacking and election interference were just the start.

vox-mark

### Vox Sentences

The news, but shorter, delivered straight to your inbox.

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 5. The sidebar size is short.

Chorus

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * GDPR Commitment
  * Communications Preferences

  * Contact

  * Send Us a Tip
  * Masthead
  * About Us
  * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

