

Skip directly to search Skip directly to A to Z list Skip directly to
navigation Skip directly to page options Skip directly to site content

![Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving

Lives, Protecting People](/TemplatePackage/3.0/images/masthead_subpage.svg)
![Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving

Lives, Protecting People](/TemplatePackage/3.0/images/masthead_1-col.svg)

Start of Search Controls

Search Form Controls

Cancel Submit

Search The CDC

CDC A-Z Index

  * MENU
  * CDC A-Z
  * SEARCH

  * A

  * B
  * C
  * D
  * E
  * F
  * G
  * H
  * I
  * J
  * K
  * L
  * M
  * N
  * O
  * P
  * Q
  * R
  * S
  * T
  * U
  * V
  * W
  * X
  * Y
  * Z
  * # 

Start of Search Controls

Search Form Controls

Cancel Submit

Search The CDC

## Opioid Overdose

Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this
reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information
about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov.

### Opioid Overdose

  * Opioid Basics
    * Understanding the Epidemic
    * Commonly Used Terms
    * Prescription Opioids
    * Heroin
    * Fentanyl
  * Data
    * Data Analysis and Resources
    * Drug Overdose Deaths
    * Nonfatal Drug Overdoses
    * Prescription Opioids
    * U.S. Prescribing Rate Maps
    * Heroin Overdose
    * Synthetic Opioid Overdose
    * Fentanyl Encounters Data
    * Other Drugs
  * Overdose Prevention
    * Improve Opioid Prescribing
    * Prevent Opioid Use Disorder
    * Treat Opioid Use Disorder
    * Reverse Overdose
    * Help and Resources
    * CDC's Role
  * Information for Patients
    * Know Your Options
    * Expectations for Opioid Therapy
    * Prevent Opioid Misuse
    * Helpful Materials
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Rx Awareness Campaign
  * Information for Providers
    * Guideline Overview
    * Guideline Resources
    * QI and Care Coordination
    * Clinical Tools
    * Posters
    * Videos
    * Mobile App
    * Training for Providers
    * Interactive Training Series
    * Webinar Series
    * PDMP Overview for Providers
    * Research & Activities
    * Frequently Asked Questions
  * State Information
    * Promising State Strategies
    * Prevention for States
    * Enhanced State Opioid Overdose Surveillance
    * Data-Driven Prevention Initiative
    * What States Need to Know about PDMPs
    * State Prescription Drug Laws
    * State Successes
  * CDC Publications
  * Resource Center
    * Pressroom 
    * Shareable Graphics
    * Microsite
    * Data Resources
    * Additional HHS Resources
    * Rx Awareness Campaign

#### Get Email Updates

To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address:

Enter Email Address Enter Email AddressWhat's this?SubmitWhat's this? Submit
Button

#### **National Center for Injury Prevention and Control**

  * Child Safety and Injury Prevention
  * HEADS UP to Brain Injury Awareness
  * Home and Recreational Safety
  * Motor Vehicle Safety
  * Parents Are The Key to Safe Teen Drivers
  * STEADI Initiative for Health Care Providers
  * Traumatic Brain Injury
  * Violence Prevention
  * WISQARS  
(Injury & Death Data)

# Prescription Opioid Data

Recommend on Facebook Tweet
![Share](/TemplatePackage/3.0/images/social/addthis-32.png)ShareCompartir

Prescription opioids are often used to treat chronic and acute pain and, when
used appropriately, can be an important component of treatment. However,
serious risks are associated with their use, and it is essential to carefully
consider the risks of using prescription opioids alongside their benefits.
These risks include misuse, opioid use disorder (addiction), overdoses, and
death.

  * Key Messages
  * Prescribing Practices
  * Overdose Deaths
  * Guideline Evaluation
  * Overdose Map
  * Urbanicity

#### Key Messages

![](/drugoverdose/images/data/callouts/RxOpioids_JK_FINAL.png)

Millions of Americans suffer from pain and are often prescribed opioids to
treat their conditions. However, the dangers of prescription misuse, opioid
use disorder, and overdose have been a growing problem throughout the United
States.

Since the 1990s, when the amount of opioids prescribed to patients began to
grow, the number of overdoses and deaths from prescription opioids has also
increased. Even as the amount of opioids prescribed and sold for pain has
increased, the amount of pain that Americans report has not similarly changed.

From 1999 to 2017, almost 218,000 people died in the United States from
overdoses related to prescription opioids. Overdose deaths involving
prescription opioids were five times higher in 2017 than in 1999.1

#### Prescribing Practices

### Changes in Opioid Prescribing Practices

Taking prescription opioids for longer periods of time or in higher dosages
can increase the risk of opioid use disorder (addiction), overdose, and death.
It is also important for patients and providers to discuss the risks of
opioids, consider alternative therapies, and, if prescribing opioids is
appropriate, the provider should offer fewer prescriptions for fewer days and
at lower dosages.

The overall opioid prescribing rate in the United States peaked and leveled
off from 2010-2012 and has been declining since 2012, but the amount of
opioids in morphine milligram equivalents (MME) prescribed per person is still
around three times higher than it was in 1999.2 MME is a way to calculate the
total amount of opioids, accounting for differences in opioid drug type and
strength.

There was a more than 19% reduction in annual prescribing rate from 2006 to
2017\. The declines in opioid prescribing rates since 2012 and high-dose
prescribing rates (≥90 MME) since 2008 suggest that healthcare providers have
become more cautious in their opioid prescribing practices.

In 2017, however, there were still almost 58 opioid prescriptions written for
every 100 Americans.

  * More than 17% of Americans had at least one opioid prescription filled, with an average of 3.4 opioid prescriptions dispensed per patient.
  * Per prescription, the average daily amount was more than 45.3 MME.
  * The average number of days per prescription continues to increase, with an average of 18 days in 2017.3

There is wide variability at the county level in the amount of opioids
received per resident. Counties with higher prescribing have been shown to
have these characteristics:

  * Generally smaller cities or larger towns
  * Higher percentage of white residents
  * Higher number of dentists and primary care physicians per capita
  * More people who are uninsured or unemployed
  * More residents who have diabetes, arthritis, or a disability2

Healthcare providers report concerns about opioid-related risks of addiction
and overdose for their patients, as well as insufficient training in pain
management. The 2016 _CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain_
offers recommendations that may help to improve prescribing practices and
ensure all patients receive safer, more effective pain treatment. Healthcare
providers can also earn continuing education through this _interactive
training series called Applying the CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids_.

#### Overdose Deaths

### Calculating Prescription Opioid Overdose Deaths

When looking at overdose deaths from prescription opioids, CDC analyzes the
following:

  * **Natural opioids:** Pain medications like morphine and codeine
  * **Semi-synthetic opioids** : Pain medications like oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone
  * **Methadone:** A synthetic opioid used to treat pain, but it can also be provided through opioid treatment programs to treat opioid use disorders

Current information reported about overdose deaths does not distinguish
pharmaceutical fentanyl from illegally-made fentanyl. In order to account for
increases in illicitly manufactured fentanyl, CDC Injury Center separates
synthetic opioids (other than methadone) from prescription opioid death
calculations.

### **Overdose Deaths Involving Prescription Opioids**

46 people die every day from overdoses involving prescription opioids.4 In
2017, prescription opioids continue to contribute to the epidemic in the U.S.
\- they were involved in more than 35% of all opioid overdose deaths.

The most common drugs involved in prescription opioid overdose deaths include:

  * Methadone
  * Oxycodone (such as OxyContin®)
  * Hydrocodone (such as Vicodin®)5

For people who died from prescription opioid overdose in 2017:

  * Overdose rates from prescription opioids significantly increased among people more than 65 years of age.
  * Overdose rates from prescription opioids were higher among non-Hispanic whites and American Indian or Alaskan Natives, compared to non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics.
  * The rate of overdose deaths from prescription opioids among men was 6.1 per 100,000 people and the rate among women was 4.2 in 2017.

The highest overdose death rates from prescription opioids were in West
Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and Utah.4

#### Guideline Evaluation

### Guideline in Practice

Health systems can create Electronic Health Record (EHR) alerts (e.g., for
high daily dosage, multiple opioid prescriptions), which allows providers to
make informed prescribing decisions within clinical workflow.

In March 2016, CDC released the CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for
Chronic Pain to ensure that patients have access to safer, more effective
chronic pain treatment, while reducing the number of people who misuse
opioids, develop opioid use disorder, or overdose. The Guideline focused on
the prescribing of opioid pain medication to patients 18 years and older in
primary care settings outside of active cancer treatment, palliative care and
end of life care.

CDC is evaluating implementation of the Guideline by providers, health
systems, and insurers with the goal of identifying how the recommendations are
being applied, and potential barriers to implementation.

As of April 2018:

  * 46 states are now implementing activities to improve local prescribing practices so that they are in alignment with the Guideline
  * 1,300 continuing education (CE) credits have been earned from the interactive training series, Applying CDC's Guideline for Prescribing Opioids.
  * 3,600 CE credits have been earned from the COCA Call Webinar Series
  * 35 state Medicaid programs have elected to or plan to implement the Guideline's recommendations.5
  * Providers have downloaded 
    * 2,200 copies of the poster: Safer, More Effective Pain Management
    * 9,800 copies of the brochure: Pocket Guide: Tapering Opioids for Chronic Pain
    * 30,000 of the CDC Opioid Guideline Mobile App

#### Overdose Map

**Statistically significant changes in drug overdose death* rates** †
**involving prescription opioids § by select states,¶ United States, 2016 to
2017. ** _*_ *Note: Rate comparisons between states should not be made due to
variations in reporting across states.**

*Deaths are classified using the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10). Drug overdose deaths are identified using underlying cause-of-death codes X40-X44, X60-X64, X85, and Y10-Y14.

† Rates shown are for the number of deaths per 100,000 population. Age-
adjusted death rates were calculated using the direct method and the 2000
standard population.

**§** Drug overdose deaths, as defined, that have natural and semi-synthetic
opioids (T40.2) and methadone (T40.3) as contributing causes.

**¶** Analyses were limited to states meeting the following criteria: For
states with very good to excellent reporting, ≥90% of drug overdose deaths
mention at least one specific drug in 2016, with the change in drug overdose
deaths mentions of at least one specific drug differing by no more than 10
percentage points (pp) between 2016 and 2017. States with good reporting had
80% -  <90% of drug overdose deaths mention of at least one specific drug in
2016, with the change in the percentage of drug overdose deaths mentioning at
least one specific drug differing by no more than 10 percentage points between
2016 and 2017. States included also were required to have stable rate
estimates, based on ≥20 deaths, in at least two drug categories (i.e.,
opioids, prescription opioids, synthetic opioids other than methadone,
heroin).

**Absolute rate change is the difference between 2016 and 2017 rates. Percent
change is the absolute rate change divided by the 2016 rate, multiplied by
100\. Statistically significant at p<0.05 level. Nonoverlapping confidence
intervals based on the gamma method were used if the number of deaths was <100
in 2016 or 2017, and z-tests were used if the number of deaths was ≥100 in
both 2016 and 2017. Note that the method of comparing confidence intervals is
a conservative method for statistical significance; caution should be observed
when interpreting a nonsignificant difference when the lower and upper limits
being compared overlap only slightly.

SOURCE: CDC/NCHS, National Vital Statistics System, Mortality. CDC WONDER,
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2018.
https://wonder.cdc.gov/.

### 2015-2016 Overdose Map

#### Urbanicity

![](/drugoverdose/images/data/RxUrbanicity2016to2017.JPG)

  * **Large central metro** \--Counties in metropolitan statistical areas of 1 million or more population that: 
    * Contain the entire population of the largest principal city
    * Have their entire population contained in the largest principal city
    * Contain at least 250,000 inhabitants of any principal city
  * **Large fringe metro** \--Counties of 1 million or more population that did not qualify as large central metro counties.
  * **Medium metro** \--Counties of populations of 250,000 to 999,999.
  * **Small metro** \--Counties of populations less than 250,000.
  * **Micropolitan** \--Counties in micropolitan statistical areas that have a population of at least 10,000 but less than 50,000.
  * **Noncore** \--Nonmetropolitan counties that did not qualify as micropolitan.

Categories of 2013 NCHS Urban-Rural Classification Scheme for Counties
(https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/urban_rural.htm)

Age-adjusted death rates for prescription opioids are plotted above by
urbanization classification of residence for 2016 to 2017. The rates remained
stable for all urbanization level. The prescription opioid overdose death rate
also remained stable in the United States overall from 2016 to 2017, with a
total of 17,029 deaths in 2017. Deaths are classified using the International
Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10). Drug overdose deaths are
identified using underlying cause-of-death codes X40-X44, X60-X64, X85, and
Y10-Y14. Drug overdose deaths, as defined, that have prescription (natural and
semi-synthetic) opioids (T40.2) or methadone (T40.3) as a contributing cause.
Age-adjusted death rates were calculated using the direct method and the 2000
standard population.1

### Data Table

**County Urbanization Level** | **2016 Rate** | **2017 Rate**  
\---|---|---  
United States | 5.2 | 5.2  
Large Central Metro | 4.7 | 4.7  
Large Fringe Metro | 5.2 | 5.2  
Medium Metro | 6 | 5.9  
Small Metro | 5.2 | 5.2  
Micropolitan | 5.7 | 5.6  
Noncore | 5.7 | 5.3

### 2015-2016 Urbanicity

![](/drugoverdose/images/data/RxODdealthratebyurbanization2016_FINAL.JPG)

  * **Large central metro** \--Counties in metropolitan statistical areas of 1 million or more population that: 
    * Contain the entire population of the largest principal city
    * Have their entire population contained in the largest principal city
    * Contain at least 250,000 inhabitants of any principal city
  * **Large fringe metro** \--Counties of 1 million or more population that did not qualify as large central metro counties.
  * **Medium metro** \--Counties of populations of 250,000 to 999,999.
  * **Small metro** \--Counties of populations less than 250,000.
  * **Micropolitan** \--Counties in micropolitan statistical areas that have a population of at least 10,000 but less than 50,000.
  * **Noncore** \--Nonmetropolitan counties that did not qualify as micropolitan.

Categories of 2013 NCHS Urban-Rural Classification Scheme for Counties
(https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/urban_rural.htm)

Age-adjusted death rates for prescription opioids are plotted above by
urbanization classification of residence for 2015 to 2016. Rates increased
significantly for large central metro (14.6%), large fringe metro (23.8%), and
medium metro (7.1%) areas. The prescription opioid overdose death rate also
increased in the United States overall--a statistically significant 10.6%
increase from 2015 to 2016, with a total of 17,087 deaths in 2016. Deaths are
classified using the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision
(ICD-10). Drug overdose deaths are identified using underlying cause-of-death
codes X40-X44, X60-X64, X85, and Y10-Y14. Drug overdose deaths, as defined,
that have prescription (natural and semi-synthetic) opioids (T40.2) or
methadone (T40.3) as a contributing cause. Age-adjusted death rates were
calculated using the direct method and the 2000 standard population.1

#### References

  1. Wide-ranging online data for epidemiologic research (WONDER). Atlanta, GA: CDC, National Center for Health Statistics; 2016. Available at _http://wonder.cdc.gov_.
  2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. _Vital Signs: Changes in Opioid Prescribing in the United States, 2006-2015. MMWR 2017_ ; 66(26):697-704.
  3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018 Annual Surveillance Report of Drug-Related Risks and Outcomes -- United States. Surveillance Special Report 2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Published August 31, 2018.
  4. Scholl L, Seth P, Kariisa M, Wilson N, Baldwin G. Drug and Opioid-Involved Overdose Deaths - United States, 2013-2017. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub: 21 December 2018
  5. Hedegaard H, Bastian BA, Trinidad JP, Spencer M, Warner M. Drugs most frequently involved in drug overdose deaths: United States, 2011-2016. National Vital Statistics Reports; vol 67 no 9. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2018.
  6. Kaiser Family Foundation, Medicaid Moving Ahead in Uncertain Times: Results from a 50-State Medicaid Budget Survey for State Fiscal Years 2017 and 2018, (Washington, DC: Kaiser Family Foundation, October 2017).

#### Get Email Updates

To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address:

Enter Email Address Enter Email AddressWhat's this?SubmitWhat's this? Submit
Button

* * *

![Empowering Providers. Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain.

www.cdc.gov](/drugoverdose/images/persistent-content-

area/FooterGraphicAssessManageMonitor.jpg)

##### File Formats Help:

How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?

  * Adobe PDF file
  * Microsoft PowerPoint file
  * Microsoft Word file
  * Microsoft Excel file
  * Audio/Video file
  * Apple Quicktime file
  * RealPlayer file
  * Text file
  * Zip Archive file
  * SAS file
  * ePub file
  * RIS file

  * Page last reviewed: December 19, 2018

  * Page last updated: December 19, 2018
  * Content source: 

    * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
    * National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
    * Division of Unintentional Injury Prevention
  * Email

  * Recommend
  * Tweet
  * YouTube
  * Instagram

  * Listen

  * Watch
  * RSS

  * ###### ABOUT

    * About CDC
    * Jobs
    * Funding
    * ###### LEGAL

    * Policies

    * Privacy
    * FOIA
    * No Fear Act
    * OIG
  * 1600 Clifton Road Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 USA   
800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636), TTY: 888-232-6348  
Email CDC-INFO

  * U.S. Department of Health & Human Services   
HHS/Open  
USA.gov

TOP

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

