

Breaking News

Health+

FoodFitnessWellnessParentingLive Longer

WorldUS PoliticsBusinessEntertainmentSportTravelStyleHealthVideo

Live TV __

Search »

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

Home

World

  * US
  * Africa
  * Americas
  * Asia
  * Australia
  * China
  * Europe
  * Middle East
  * India
  * UK

US Politics

  * 45
  * Congress
  * Supreme Court
  * Facts First
  * 2020 Election

Business

  * Markets
  * Tech
  * Media
  * Success
  * Perspectives
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

  * Stars
  * Screen
  * Binge
  * Culture
  * Media

Tech

  * Innovate
  * Gadget
  * Mission: Ahead
  * Upstarts
  * Business Evolved
  * Work Transformed
  * Innovative Cities

Sport

  * Football
  * Tennis
  * Equestrian
  * Golf
  * Skiing
  * Horse Racing
  * Formula E
  * F1
  * Sailing
  * Rugby

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

  * Destinations
  * Food & Drink
  * Play
  * Stay
  * Videos

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

  * Arts
  * Design
  * Fashion
  * Architecture
  * Luxury
  * Autos
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

  * Food
  * Fitness
  * Wellness
  * Parenting
  * Live Longer

Features

  * Freedom Project
  * Impact Your World
  * Inside Africa
  * 2 degrees
  * CNN Heroes
  * All Features

Video

  * Video news
  * Feature shows
  * HLN
  * TV shows
  * TV schedule
  * Faces of CNN Worldwide
  * CNNVR

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

  * How To Watch VR
  * Archives

More…

  * Weather
  * CNN Profiles
  * Leadership
  * Pressroom
  * Partner sites
  * Work for CNN

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)U.S.

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)International

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_espaniol.png)Español

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_arabic.png)Arabic

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

FacebookTwitterInstagram

# States that legalized recreational weed see increase in car accidents,

studies say

By Jen Christensen, CNN

Updated 2007 GMT (0407 HKT) October 18, 2018

Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as
it unfolds.

![Studies link weed legalization, car

crashes](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180824110523-beme-legal-

weed-6-exlarge-169.jpg)

![Studies link weed legalization, car

crashes](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/180824110523-beme-legal-

weed-6-exlarge-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## Studies link weed legalization, car crashes

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

Studies link weed legalization, car crashes 02:44

### Story highlights

  * A fatal accident in Texas is blamed on a driver high on marijuana and a sedative 
  * Accidents overall are up in Colorado, Washington and Oregon, where recreational use is legal, new studies say

(CNN)The National Transportation Safety Board said Tuesday that the probable
cause of a crash that killed 12 people on a church bus near Concan, Texas, in
March 2017 was that the 20-year-old man whose truck hit the bus was under the
influence of marijuana and a sedative.

In its report, the board says that there has been an increase in the number of
drug-impaired drivers across the country and that something must be done about
it.

That call to action seems to match up with a report released Thursday from the
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety's Highway Loss Data Institute.

![Your brain on

marijuana](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Your brain on marijuana](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/140310200119-orig-

jr-brain-on-weed-story-top.jpg)

![Your brain on marijuana](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/140310200119-orig-

jr-brain-on-weed-story-top.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## Your brain on marijuana

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

Your brain on marijuana 01:39

Though a 2017 study found that the legalization of recreational weed has not
increased the number of accidents involving fatalities, states that have
legalized recreational use are seeing more car crashes overall, according to
the report, which includes two studies presented Thursday at the Combating
Alcohol- and Drug-Impaired Driving summit **** at the insurance institute's
Vehicle Research Center.

The first study found that crashes are up as much as 6% in Washington, Oregon
and Colorado, compared with neighboring states that haven't legalized
recreational use of weed. Researchers estimated the frequency of collision
claims per insured vehicle year, controlling for differences in other factors
that could contribute to an accident, including age, location, job status and
weather, and still saw an increase.

Read More

The second study looked at the number of police-reported accidents before and
after the legalization of recreational use of weed. The findings were similar:
a 5.2% increase in crash rates after legalization than before weed was legal
in those states.

![Weed was legal in Canada for a whole hour before someone got a ticket for

driving and

toking](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Weed was legal in Canada for a whole hour before someone got a ticket for

driving and toking](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/181018092408-canada-pot-

ticket-large-169.jpg)

Weed was legal in Canada for a whole hour before someone got a ticket for
driving and toking

Other research has found that in a small sample of drivers who used weed
before driving, they had slower thinking and perceptual skills. Drivers under
the influence of weed tended to weave more when tested in simulators, studies
show, although scientists say more research needs to be done to better
understand the correlation between blood or oral fluid concentrations and
psychoactive effects of tetrahydrocannabinol or THC, the main psychoactive
ingredient in cannabis.

Driving while impaired by any substance, including marijuana, is illegal in
all states.

The National Transportation Safety Board said in its report on the fatal
accident in Texas -- where recreational use is illegal -- that police across
the country need better training and better tools to detect whether a driver
is under the influence of drugs. It also encouraged the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration to **** come up with a system of best practices
and model specifications for oral fluid drug screening devices that police can
use when they pull someone over.

There are no national standards or standardized tests for weed-impaired
drivers like there are for alcohol. The tests designed to determine whether
someone is driving drunk are only moderately successful in determining that
someone is impaired from using weed, studies have shown.

Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter

Sign up here to get **The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta** every Tuesday
from the CNN Health team.

About 6 in 10 Americans support marijuana legalization, an October poll found,
and thus more states will probably legalize recreational use -- meaning there
will probably be **** more drivers on the road under the influence.

"The pick-up truck driver in this crash made terrible choices with tragic
consequences," National Transportation Safety Board Chairman Robert L. Sumwalt
said in a statement. "But the rising tide of drug-impaired driving did not
begin with this driver, and it will not end with him. Law enforcement needs
additional tools and advanced training to detect impaired drivers before they
crash, regardless of the impairing drug they're using."

  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   * Home

  * World

    1. US
    2. Africa
    3. Americas
    4. Asia
    5. Australia
    6. China
    7. Europe
    8. Middle East
    9. India
    10. UK
  * US Politics

    1. 45
    2. Congress
    3. Supreme Court
    4. Facts First
    5. 2020 Election
  * Business

    1. Markets
    2. Tech
    3. Media
    4. Success
    5. Perspectives
    6. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

    1. Stars
    2. Screen
    3. Binge
    4. Culture
    5. Media
  * Tech

    1. Innovate
    2. Gadget
    3. Mission: Ahead
    4. Upstarts
    5. Business Evolved
    6. Work Transformed
    7. Innovative Cities
  * Sport

    1. Football
    2. Tennis
    3. Equestrian
    4. Golf
    5. Skiing
    6. Horse Racing
    7. Formula E
    8. F1
    9. Sailing
    10. Rugby
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

    1. Destinations
    2. Food & Drink
    3. Play
    4. Stay
    5. Videos
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

    1. Arts
    2. Design
    3. Fashion
    4. Architecture
    5. Luxury
    6. Autos
    7. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

    1. Food
    2. Fitness
    3. Wellness
    4. Parenting
    5. Live Longer
  * Features

    1. Freedom Project
    2. Impact Your World
    3. Inside Africa
    4. 2 degrees
    5. CNN Heroes
    6. All Features
  * Video

    1. Video news
    2. Feature shows
    3. HLN
    4. TV shows
    5. TV schedule
    6. Faces of CNN Worldwide
    7. CNNVR
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

    1. How To Watch VR
    2. Archives
  * More…

    1. Weather
    2. CNN Profiles
    3. Leadership
    4. Pressroom
    5. Partner sites
    6. Work for CNN

International Edition

  * Set edition preference:
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Confirm
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Arabic
  * Español

(C) 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights
Reserved.  
CNN Sans ™ & (C) 2016 Cable News Network.

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Accessibility & CC
  * AdChoices
  * Modern Slavery Act Statement
  * Advertise with us
  * About us
  * CNN Store
  * Newsletters
  * Transcripts
  * License Footage
  * CNN Newsource

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-D1yc5zQgjmqr5.gif?labels=noscript%3ANo%20Labels%20Set)

