

Skip to Main Content

CBCMenu

##### Quick Links

  * News
  * Sports
  * Radio
  * Music
  * Listen Live
  * TV
  * Watch

  * CBC.ca HOME

  * Discover CBC

    * Comedy
    * Arts
    * Music
    * Books
    * Docs
    * Life
    * Parents
    * Kids
    * Kids News
    * Indspire Awards
    * Archives
    * MyCBC
  * All Locals

    * British Columbia
    * Calgary
    * Edmonton
    * Saskatchewan
    * Saskatoon
    * Manitoba
    * Thunder Bay
    * Sudbury
    * Windsor
    * London
    * Kitchener-Waterloo
    * Hamilton
    * Toronto
    * Ottawa
    * Montreal
    * New Brunswick
    * Prince Edward Island
    * Nova Scotia
    * Newfoundland & Labrador
    * North
    * My Local Settings

Ottawa

Changequickly access local content from your selected regionSelect a new
default local region:

    
    
    * British Columbia
    * Calgary
    * Edmonton
    * Saskatchewan
    * Saskatoon
    * Manitoba
    * Thunder Bay
    * Sudbury
    * Windsor
    * London
    * Kitchener-Waterloo
    * Hamilton
    * Toronto
    * Montreal
    * New Brunswick
    * Prince Edward Island
    * Nova Scotia
    * Newfoundland & Labrador
    * North
    

  * News

    * Top Stories
    * Local
    * The National
    * Opinion
    * World
    * Canada
    * Politics
    * Indigenous
    * Business
    * Health
    * Entertainment
    * Tech & Science
    * CBC News Investigates
    * Go Public
    * Shows
    * About CBC News
    * Sports

    * Top Stories

    * Scores
    * NHL
    * Olympic Sports
    * Video
    * Podcasts
    * Player's Own Voice
    * All Sports
    * Radio

    * Top Stories

    * All Shows
    * Podcasts
    * Schedules
    * LISTEN LIVE
    * Music

    * Read

    * Watch
    * Events
    * Explore
    * LISTEN LIVE
    * CBC Music Playlists
    * TV

    * Shows

    * Schedule
    * CBC Gem
    * Shop
    * More
    * Shop
    * Sitemap
    * Help
    * Contact
    * Contests
  * news

  * Top Stories

  * Local
  * The National
  * Opinion
  * World
  * Canada
  * Politics
  * Indigenous
  * Business
  * Health
  * Entertainment
  * Tech & Science
  * CBC News Investigates
  * Go Public
  * Shows
  * About CBC News

news

Cannabis is legal in Canada — here's what you need to know

## Social Sharing

Canada

# Cannabis is legal in Canada — here's what you need to know

Recreational marijuana is legal, but the vision of a pot-permissive Canada
still remains hazy. We try to answer some frequently asked questions
surrounding legal weed.

## Social Sharing

## Rules around legal weed vary from province to province

Patrick Butler · CBC News · Posted: Oct 17, 2018 4:00 AM ET | Last Updated:
October 17, 2018

![](https://i.cbc.ca/1.4862216.1539467059!/cpImage/httpImage/image.jpg_gen/derivatives/16x9_780/canada-

legalized-marijuana-20181012.jpg)

In most provinces and all the territories, people will be allowed to possess
four marijuana plants per household. That's the limit Ottawa imposed when it
passed the Cannabis Act in June. (Jeff McIntosh/Canadian Press)

comments

Recreational marijuana is legal as of today, but the vision of what a pot-
permissive Canada looks like remains somewhat hazy.

There's still a lot we don't know, including what will happen to the illicit
dispensaries that popped up in cities across the country in recent years. But
here's a look at what we do know as Canadian consumers buy legal cannabis for
the first time.

  * **Read our full coverage of cannabis legalization in Canada**
  * **Legal cannabis is here, it 's time to answer some burning questions**

## How will people buy pot?

How people purchase legal cannabis depends on where they live.

There is one constant across the country: Online sales are available in all
provinces and territories, whether via private retailers or through
government-run websites. E-commerce giant Shopify, which will manage online
sales for four provinces, is confident its system will be able to handle the
volume.

But there are distinctions across the county with respect to age limits and
retail models. Minimum age limits for purchasing and consuming cannabis vary,
but most provinces mirror their rules for alcohol.

## **What 's the latest where you live?**

  * **B.C.** Here's what you need to know about legal weed in B.C.

  * **Alberta** Cannabis countdown: What Albertans need to know to buy weed

  * **Sask.** Where you can (and mostly can't) consume legal pot in Saskatchewan

  * **Manitoba** From buying to selling to smoking, what we know about the pot rules in Manitoba so far

  * **Ontario** Pot is now legal in Ontario — what you need to know 

  * **Quebec** Your guide to legalized cannabis in Quebec 

  * **N.B.** Cannabis NB's online store posts price list, instructions for rolling joints

  * **N.S.** Buying cannabis in Nova Scotia — What you need to know

  * **P.E.I.** What to expect on P.E.I. when cannabis becomes legal 

  * **N.L.** All your questions about legal recreational cannabis in N.L. answered

  * **Yukon** Government preparing for marijuana despite questions over roadside tests

  * **N.W.T.** ****With 1 week to spare, N.W.T. gov't finalizes plan for cannabis legalization

  * **Nunavut** Nunavut scraps ban on homegrown cannabis in final version of its Cannabis Act

## Can I grow marijuana at home?

In most provinces and all territories, adults are allowed to possess four
marijuana plants per household for recreational use. That's the limit the
federal government imposed when it passed the Cannabis Act in June.

Quebec and Manitoba are the two holdouts. Both fiercely opposed that decision
and enacted their own rules banning growing cannabis plants at home — a move
some lawyers argue could eventually result in a constitutional challenge.

## How much will it cost?

Much of the success of Canada's decision to legalize marijuana will be pegged
to the price Canadians end up paying per gram of legal weed. Should legal
cannabis turn out to be more expensive than pot on the black market, there may
be little incentive for Canadians to quit buying from their current source.

A recent McMaster University study suggested that the sweet spot for consumers
— the price where they'd buy legal weed instead of turning to the black market
— was $10 to $12 a gram.

Prices could change, but for now, it looks like retail prices in New Brunswick
will range from $8-$16 per gram; between $8.21-$14.55 per gram in the
Northwest Territories; between $6-$13 in Newfoundland and Labrador; and prices
will start at $8 per gram in Yukon.

Ontario's new PC government has been quiet on prices, but said it aims to set
them at a rate that would be competitive with illicit dispensaries.

In Quebec, a spokesperson for SQDC, the provincial crown corporation
responsible for cannabis sales, told CBC News it has yet to announce detailed
pricing, adding that a lot of items would retail starting at $7 per gram.

## Could there be a weed shortage?

##

According to Health Canada, there are currently more than 120 licensed
cannabis producers in the country — with many based in Ontario and B.C.

Several companies rapidly expanded ahead of legalization, but one of Canada's
top cannabis producers recently said labour shortages and supply chain issues
may cause "sold out" signs to pop up at pot stores soon after it becomes
legal.

"I'm concerned about the supply side," business consultant Sarah Stockdale
said of pot e-commerce. "The tech that the government has is set up to handle
the load on the servers, but are Canadians going to be waiting a really long
time to receive their shipments when they're used to Amazon? If they have to
wait one to two weeks will they turn to the black market?"

  * **Read more about thepotential for a legal cannabis shortage.**

## How does legalization work at the border?

Despite some changes at the state level, pot possession is still illegal under
U.S. federal law. Ahead of legalization, Ottawa warned Canadian travellers
that "previous use of cannabis, or any substance prohibited by U.S. federal
laws, could mean that you are denied entry to the U.S."

One day ahead of legalization, a U.S. border official noted that nothing had
changed in that regard, saying: "If you've been the subject of a violation of
U.S. laws, that will still make you inadmissible to our country."

What's remains unclear is whether travellers will be questioned more
frequently about past cannabis use.

There's also going to be some changes for people coming into Canada, CBC's
J.P. Tasker reported. An official speaking on background told CBC News that
Canada Border Services Agency guards will have to ask every traveller about
pot possession. Travellers arriving by air should expect to see a question
about cannabis use on declaration forms.

  * **Read more aboutcannabis and the border.**

## What can I take on a plane?

People flying within Canada will be able to pack up to 30 grams of cannabis.
But travellers should remember they still can't bring weed aboard
international flights.

  * Read more about **travelling with pot.**

_ **Check out this primer on age restrictions and travelling with pot:** _

## How could this affect my job?

It depends on your field and your employer. Ahead of legalization, many
Canadian companies updated cannabis policies — especially companies where
employees work in high-risk positions.

  * **Read more abouthow employers' cannabis policies are evolving**.

Both Air Canada and WestJet have prohibited recreational cannabis use for
pilots and those in "safety-sensitive positions." Rules for police officers
vary widely across the country: Calgary's police service forbids cannabis
consumption outright, while Vancouver's requires officers to self-evaluate
whether they are fit for duty.

Experts say policies will likely evolve in the months following legalization.

**_How ready are employers for legal weed?_**

CBC News Network’s John Northcott speaks to employment lawyer, Soma Ray-Ellis
5:16

## What are the rules around driving?

Under new legislation passed in June, police can conduct roadside saliva tests
of drivers they suspect to be under the influence of drugs. How drivers will
be treated depends on how much THC, the primary psychoactive substance in pot,
is found in their blood.

  * Drivers with between two and five nanograms in their blood could face a fine of up to $1,000.
  * Drivers with either more than five nanograms, or who were drinking alcohol and consuming cannabis at the same time, could face steeper fines and jail time.
  * People convicted in the most serious cases could face 10 years in prison.

In August, Statistics Canada reported nearly five per cent of Canadians —
about 1.4 million people — said they had been a passenger in a vehicle driven
by someone who had consumed cannabis within two hours of driving.

  * Read more about **cannabis use and driving — and about whether police are ready.**

_ **The new rules around impaired driving are expected to face legal
challenges.** _

A pot investment company CEO and former Liberal Party treasurer says he's
putting up $25,000 of his own money to challenge Canada's drug-impaired
driving laws. 3:15

## What are the health effects of using cannabis?

Expect more research around cannabis and health — both in terms of health
benefits and potential risks — in the years ahead. For now, campaigns are
underway to try and educate people about cannabis and health, particularly
groups deemed at risk of dangers linked to cannabis consumption, including
pregnant women and children.

The federal government has a website outlining the health effects of cannabis
use, including both short-term effects (like impairing your ability to drive)
and longer-term effects (including potential lung damage). CBC Radio's _White
Coat, Black Art_ took a deep dive into issue and asked medical experts to
answer your questions about pot.

The outreach effort won't stop once pot is legal: Health Canada alone is
slated to spend more than $100 million over six years on awareness, public
education and surveillance, The Canadian Press reported in September.

  * **Read more about thehealth effects related to cannabis.**

## **What else do you need to know?**

  * Everything you want to know about pot: Your questions answered 

  * Canadian police ready to deal with legal marijuana, chiefs say 

  * RCMP expect massive spike in blood test requests with new impaired driving law 

  * Campfires and cannabis: Parks Canada says it's OK to smoke pot at campsites 

  * Expect cannabis to be 'sold out' across the country, says Aphria

​

With files from Catharine Tunney, Justin Li and J.P. Tasker

CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC News

Report Typo or Error|Send Feedback

## Related Stories

  * Analysis

How will Canadians buy pot? It depends where they live

  * Legal cannabis is here, it's time to answer some burning questions

## Comments

To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names
will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities
(except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer
be permitted.

By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and
publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please
note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on
this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are
welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.

## Footer Links

### Connect with CBC

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube
  * Instagram
  * Mobile
  * RSS
  * Podcasts
  * Newsletters

### Contact CBC

Audience Relations, CBC  
P.O. Box 500 Station A  
Toronto, ON  
Canada, M5W 1E6

Toll-free (Canada only):  
1-866-306-4636

TTY/Teletype writer:  
1-866-220-6045

  * FAQ
  * Help Centre
  * Contact Us

### Services & Info

  * Corporate Info
  * Ombudsperson
  * Public Appearances
  * Commercial Services
  * Reuse & Permission
  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy
  * CBC Shop
  * Jobs
  * Our Unions
  * Doing Business with Us
  * Renting Facilities
  * Independent Producers
  * Sitemap

### Accessibility

It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all
Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive
challenges.

Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC-TV shows
offered on CBC Gem.

  * More about CBC Accessibility
  * Accessibility Feedback

  * ![](/a/static/media/logo_cbc-radio-canada.svg)

  * ©2019 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. 

  * Visitez Radio-Canada.ca

