

# ____Focus on the Family

## Helping Families Thrive™

        
                  * Menu 
          * __Search
        

Search Focus on the Family

Submit Search

        
                  * Today's Broadcast 
          * Family Q&A 
          * About 
          * Store 
          * Marriage 
          * Parenting 
          * Life Challenges 
          * Faith 
          * Social Issues 
          * Pro Life
        

Donate Strengthen families with your gift

GIVE MONTHLY Help fund our ministry programs

        
                  1. Social Issues
        

# By the Numbers: U.S. Abortion Statistics

By Carrie Gordon Earll

Part of the Abortion: Why I'm Pro-Life Series

        
                  1. Abortion: Why I’m Pro-Life
          2. The 'Sanctity of Life' Ethic
          3. Remembering Roe
          4. The Serpent's Whisper
          5. What is a Chemical Abortion?
          6. Abortion Complications
          7. By the Numbers: U.S. Abortion Statistics
          8. State Ultrasound Laws
          9. 'Women's Right to Know' Legislation
          10. Abortion and ObamaCare
          11. A Pro-Life Response to Abortion in ObamaCare
        

Series About:

Life Issues

The U.S. has seen a steady and significant drop in the number of abortions in
recent years. In 2015, the number of abortions was at its lowest since 1976 -
and![](/-/medialibrary/images/articles/social-issues/2018/by-the-numbers-

abortion-

statistics.jpg?h=400&w=300&la=en&hash=02B84BCFC7CE867E5A296F0AC5EA20299303D126)
had dropped almost in half in the last 20 years.

It's estimated that fewer than **one million abortions take place annually**
and more than 55 million abortions have been performed in the U.S. since 1973,
based on accumulative data from the two primary sources of U.S. abortion
statistics - U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the Guttmacher
Institute.

### Problematic Reporting

The graph below shows the reported number of legal abortions in the U.S. for
selected years according to the CDC's 2015 Abortion Surveillance Report.

From 1973 to 1997, the CDC received data from all 50 states; however,
beginning in 1998, some states did not report, including California.

The sizable drop in abortions between 1997 and 1998 (from 1,186,039 to
884,273) reflects the absence of data from those non-reporting states. The
third column of the chart lists the annual percent of change based on the
states reporting the previous year and provides the best big picture of
abortion trends.

In 2014, several states, including California, Maryland, and New Hampshire -
did not report abortions to the CDC. Based on other sources, the total number
of abortions in those states in 2014 is approximately 188,000 - the majority
occurring in California.

**That puts the estimated number of U.S. abortions in 2015 closer to
826,199**. However, the downward trend in the abortion numbers continues, even
with this adjustment.

Unfortunately, the lack of mandatory abortion reporting for all 50 states
hampers the CDC's ability to accurately report the number of abortions
performed in the U.S.

![](/-/medialibrary/images/articles/social-issues/2018/abortion-stats-

updated2018.png?la=en&hash=FA0107597745194BB41A4FBCABFB8E60D436A1F1)

According to the 2015 CDC report:

        
                  * More than 25 percent of abortions are chemical 
          * Nearly 75 percent of abortions are surgical
          * 41 percent women who had abortions in the U.S. had no other children
          * 44 percent of women who had abortions in the U.S. had at least one previous abortion
          * 86 percent of women who had abortions in the U.S. were unmarried
          * 41 percent of abortions are among women and teens 24-years old and younger
        

And according to the Guttmacher Institute, the research arm of the nation's
leading abortion seller, Planned Parenthood:

        
                  * At current rates, an estimated 1/4 of American women will have an abortion by the age of 45
          * About 15,000 abortions are attributed to rape and incest -- representing 1.5 percent of all abortions.
        
          1. ↩
        

Copyright (C) 2011, 2013, 2016, 2018 Focus on the Family. All rights reserved.

Next in this Series: State Ultrasound Laws

____Focus on the Family

        
                  *       *       *       *       * Asset 1
        

#### Sign Up for Our E-Newsletters

Get our updates straight to your inbox.

Sign Up

        
                  * Donate
        
            * Make a Donation 
            * Why Donate? 
            * How Funds Are Used 
            * Planned Giving 
            * Manage My Donor Account 
          * Shop
        
            * Magazines 
            * All Products 
          * Media
        
            * FOTF Broadcast 
            * Adventures in Odyssey 
            * Plugged In 
            * Radio Theatre 
            * The Boundless Show 
            * Weekend 
            * All Shows 
          * About
        
            * About Us 
            * Global Outreach 
            * Contact Us 
            * Visit Us 
            * On-Campus Bookstore 
            * Jobs & Volunteering 
            * Advertise With Us 
            * Press Center 
          * Popular Websites
        
            * Plugged In 
            * Boundless 
            * Kids' Websites 
            * The Truth Project 
            * Hope Restored 
            * That the World May Know 
            * Find a Counselor 
            * All Websites and Ministries
        
          * Permissions 
          * Privacy & Terms 
          * En Español 
          * Need Help? Call 1-800-A-FAMILY (232-6459)
        

(C) 1997-2019 Focus on the Family

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

