

![CNBC logo](//sc.cnbcfm.com/applications/cnbc.com/staticcontent/img/login-

cnbc-logo.png)

Ã—

  * LOG IN
  * SIGN UP

Keep Me Logged In

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

  * Sign In
  * Pro
  * Watchlist
  * Make It

  * USA

  * INTL

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

Markets

  * Pre-Markets
  * U.S. Markets
  * Currencies
  * Cryptocurrency
  * Futures & Commodities
  * Bonds
  * Funds & ETFs

Watchlist

Business

  * Economy
  * Finance
  * Health & Science
  * Media
  * Real Estate
  * Energy
  * Transportation
  * Industrials
  * Retail
  * Wealth
  * Small Business

Investing

  * Invest In You
  * Personal Finance
  * Financial Advisors
  * Trading Nation
  * Futures Now
  * Options Action
  * ETF Street
  * Buffett Archive
  * Earnings
  * Trader Talk

Tech

  * Cybersecurity
  * Enterprise
  * Internet
  * Media
  * Mobile
  * Social Media
  * Venture Capital
  * Tech Guide

Politics

  * White House
  * Policy
  * Defense
  * Congress
  * Elections

CNBC TV

  * Live TV
  * Live Audio
  * Latest Video
  * Top Video
  * Business Day Shows
  * Primetime Shows
  * CNBC World
  * Digital Originals
  * Full Episodes

Menu

SEARCH QUOTES __

##

Business News

  * Economy
  * Finance
  * Health
  * Real Estate
  * Energy
  * Transportation
  * Industrials
  * Retail
  * Wealth
  * Small Business

# How Big Is The Marijuana Market?

Ariel Nelson

Published 11:51 AM ET Mon, 19 April 2010 Updated 12:35 PM ET Wed, 20 April
2011

Put arguments for and against legalization aside for a moment. If people could
use marijuanaâ€”without fear of legal consequenceâ€”just how much would get used?
More to the point, how much money is at stake?

![Jars filled with various types and grades of

Marijuana.](https://fm.cnbc.com/applications/cnbc.com/resources/img/editorial/2011/08/23/36489595-business_featured_marketsize_200.530x298.jpg?v=1271446037)

Getty Images

Jars filled with various types and grades of Marijuana.

A variety of businesses and tax-deprived governments would love to know the
answer. Unfortunately, there isnâ€™t a simple one. By its taboo nature,
marijuana consumption and demand is not well-measured.

Economists, reformists, law enforcement authorities and the pro-marijuana
lobby, however, have come up with a variety of estimates. Put them all
together and you get a range of $10 billion to over $120 billion a year. Such
a wide spread is hardly a solid answer.

But some calculations may be better than others. All estimates begin with some
key assumptions on the basic economic theory of supply and demand, thus laying
the foundation for the size of the pot market.

**Demand-Based Models: How Much Do People Consume?**

Demand-based models use consumption volumes and price to estimate the size of
a total market. Here, the tricky part is coming up with exact figures on how
much pot is consumed and how much it costs. Opinions differ.

The US Department of Health & Human Services' Substance Abuse & Mental Health
Administration conducts a National Survey on Drug Use and Health. This survey,
among others like it, states that roughly 10 percent of the population above
the age of 12 has used marijuana in the past year, while 6 percent has used it
in any given month. Of all monthly users, 15 percent use marijuana on a daily
basis. By comparison, 52 percent of Americans above the age of 12 have had an
alcoholic beverage and 28 percent have used tobacco in any given month.

While tobacco use has drifted downward from over 30 percent of the population
per month, the marijuana percentages have been roughly consistent for at least
the past ten years, according to H&HS data, and have varied by less than 1
percent over a two-decade period. Alcohol consumption has also been relatively
constant, hovering around 51 percent.

On price and volume, various reports and studies conclude a typical marijuana
cigarette, or joint, contains between 0.5 - 1.0 grams of the drug. The price
of a gram can vary from $5-$20, or even more depending on potency and origin.
Among others, "High Times" magazine conducts a monthly survey of its readers
to aggregate prices from around the country. See its current survey results
here.

Based on this data, most demand-based studies put the market at $10-$40
billion. If a sensitivity analysis is applied to consumption and price
variables (that is, testing different combinations of price and use), the
market can reach as high as $100 billion (see chart). It all depends on what
you believe, given the number of variables involved. Are more consumers
smoking more frequently and at higher prices or less frequently at lower
prices? The answer is probably somewhere in the middle.

Proponents of this approach include Harvard economist Jeffrey Miron, perhaps
the foremost independent authority on the economics of drug use, and the lobby
group National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, NORML. (See the
analysis of NORML's California branch.) Miron conservatively sizes the market
at about $14 billion and in his February 2010 paper on "The Budgetary
Implications of Drug Prohibition" states that legalization of marijuana could
yield over $20 billion in tax revenues and enforcement cost savings.

Critics of these estimates argue that these surveys, because they are
administered by the government, underreport the number of users. The frequency
of usage and price estimates vary as well.

**Supply-Side Models: How Much Pot is Farmed?**

The alternative approach is to look at the supply side of the equation.
Proponents of this methodology look at seizures by the US Drug Enforcement
Administration and US Customs and Border Protection as a measure of how much
cannabis is in the system and then extrapolate out based on assumptions for
what percent of the market the captured material represents.

Unlike the steady levels of consumption, the levels of supply, seizures and
eradications keep growing. According to the DEAâ€™s National Drug Intelligence
Center, over 7 million plants were eradicated in 2007, up 120 percent from
2004\. The DEA seized 660,969 kg (1.5 million pounds) of marijuana in 2008, up
149 percent from 2005.

In his 2006 study, "Marijuana Production in the United States", Dr. John
Gettman, a marijuana reform activist and professor at George Mason University,
used data from the DEA and other sources in estimating that the average,
annual domestic marijuana crop totaled some 65 million plants at a weight of
22 million pounds (10,000 metric tons). In addition, he calculated that
another 50 percent was harvested in neighboring Mexico and Canada.

Based on average yields for these plants of ~7 oz per outdoor plant and ~3.5
oz per indoor plant, assumptions on the total crop size, and using the
aforementioned price ranges per ounce or per joint as well as consumption
rates, the market value swells to up to $120 billion.

Critics of this approach argue that the DEA numbers are inflated because the
federal government has an incentive to demonstrate it is winning the war on
drugs. Further, they say, the actual measure of weight is inflated because
some of the confiscated material is finished product while a large amount
consists of entire plants (not the flowers and leaves typically used) along
with the root structure that is weighed down by soil.

Harvard's Miron tells CNBC, "some people have produced estimates of the size
of the marijuana market that are literally 20 times my estimates... there are
aspects of the methodology that have been used to produce these numbers that
are substantially higher than mine that I find problematic. So, I think that
the smaller number is much more likely, it could well be that Iâ€™m wrong, and
that it's $15-17 billion, but the $200 billion is hard to believe."

**Comparisons: Alcohol or Tobacco?**

A third way to look at the market is by comparing it to other vices that are
already legal.

According to a November 2009 Standard & Poor's industry report,the tobacco and
alcohol industries generated $263 billion combined in 2008. Alcohol
represented $188 billion of the total, with $99 billion in beer, $61 billion
in spirits and $27 billion in wine. Tobacco generated $75 billion, including
$71 billion in cigarette sales.

This gut-check approach asks, can marijuana be bigger than cigarettes or beer
(if it were legal)?

Another way to think about this is to ask yourself, if a typical smoker
consumes 1 pack of cigarettes per day and spends $7-8 per pack, what would a
marijuana user need to smoke for the market to be as big? (Not to suggest that
drinkers or smokers would necessarily become marijuana users).

According to the H&HS data, there are nearly 5 to 1 as many smokers as there
are pot users. For the pot market to be as big as tobacco, the average user
would need to spend $35-40 per day, or smoke 2-4 joints per day. That number
implies that perhaps the marijuana market would need to be smaller.

**Reasonable Range? $35-45 Billion**

If you believe prices are higher and/or users will partake more then assumed
in the data then you will likely fall on the right side of the scale. If,
however, you believe consumption will remain low and legalization will
actually bring prices down, then the marijuana market will be smaller. After
looking at all three approaches above, the answer likely falls somewhere in
the middle, between $35 and $45 billion.

Tobacco and alcohol sales generate over $17 billion in federal tax revenue.
States tax tobacco and alcohol and benefit as well. Given the current economic
environment and the deficits states are facing, it is understandable why
legalization is a topic of discussion. Assuming comparable taxes to tobacco of
40-50% (excise and sales tax), a $40 billion marijuana market would yield
$16-20 billion in taxes.

![Ariel

Nelson](https://fm.cnbc.com/applications/cnbc.com/resources/img/editorial/2012/08/28/100010290-ariel_nelson_SILO.60x60.jpg?v=1346175473)

Ariel NelsonDirector of Market Data & Content Services, CBNC

![logo](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

  * Subscribe to CNBC PRO

  * Licensing & Reprints

  * Join the CNBC Panel

  * Supply Chain Values

  * Advertise With Us

  * Closed Captioning

  * Digital Products

  * Terms of Service

  * Privacy Policy

  * News Releases

  * Internships

  * Corrections

  * About CNBC

  * AdChoices

  * Site Map

  * Podcasts

  * Contact

  * Careers

  * Help

  *     *       *         *           *             *               * 

#### News Tips

Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.

Get In Touch

####

CNBC Newsletters

Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox

Sign Up Now

Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and
services. Privacy Policy.

Â© 2019 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal

Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global
Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.

Data also provided by
![Reuters](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

