

  * Menu
  * # High Country News

  * ![](https://www.hcn.org/issues/51.10/@@images/5fb349f5-1606-4732-9225-45313184460a.jpeg)

  * _Subscribe_
  * The Magazine
  * Donate Now
  * Twitter
  * Facebook
  * Search

  * Features

  * Wildfire
  * Climate
  * Public Lands
  * Energy & Industry
  * Tribal Affairs
  * Immigration
  * Photos
  * Perspective

  * _Subscribe_

  * _Donate Now_
  * The Magazine
  * Jobs & Classifieds

  * Jobs & Classifieds

  * Login
  * Twitter
  * Facebook

Info

# Marijuana

![A high alpine weed grower’s unusual

harvest](https://www.hcn.org/articles/agriculture-blind-pot-farmer-cultivates-

marijuana-at-high-altitude-with-zero-carbon-

footprint/@@images/2c5f30fc-8c8c-4345-85f2-4cd0c654a88c.jpeg)

A high alpine weed grower’s unusual harvest

Rob Trotter’s vision continues to deteriorate as he works on his marijuana
farm in Gypsum, Colorado.

Daniel Brenner Photos March 1, 2019

![A corporate takeover of legal weed looms in

California](https://www.hcn.org/issues/50.5/opinion-the-impending-corporate-

takeover-of-legal-weed/@@images/32c581d1-45d7-44b9-9ba2-669e9967252b.jpeg)

A corporate takeover of legal weed looms in California

Thousands of small-scale marijuana growers could be replaced by Big Ag.

Desdemona Dallas Opinion Feb. 27, 2018 From the print edition

![Rural economies get high on legal

cannabis](https://www.hcn.org/articles/rural-economies-get-high-on-legal-

cannabis/@@images/31c29e74-7785-4e09-809a-1f5dff430a44.jpeg)

Rural economies get high on legal cannabis

For some small Colorado communities, recreational marijuana is generating
much-needed revenue.

Leah Todd/Solutions Journalism Network Nov. 15, 2016

![Podcast: What’s with the Western pot

boom?](https://www.hcn.org/articles/podcast-western-weed-boom-marijuana-range-

pot-podcast/@@images/641bd8bc-73b0-48df-b39f-d9a105e2b26d.jpeg)

Podcast: What’s with the Western pot boom?

Amid a patchwork of regulations, marijuana is becoming a legitimate industry.

Amy Westervelt and Julia Ritchey Audio April 20, 2016

![77 years later, here comes pot](https://www.hcn.org/wotr/77-years-later-

here-comes-pot/@@images/73c44bc0-4d8e-4aaa-bdff-bbefb5a53941.jpeg)

77 years later, here comes pot

The history of marijuana is clouded by racism and muddled thinking.

Allen Best Opinion Feb. 19, 2014

Side effects

Google Earth shows the toll marijuana takes on the land in Northern California

Marshall Swearingen Feb. 28, 2013

![A long, strange trip: A review of Pot

Farm](https://www.hcn.org/issues/44.14/a-long-strange-trip-a-review-of-pot-

farm/@@images/60f92f92-462c-4efc-be08-aee2d9c6524e.jpeg)

A long, strange trip: A review of Pot Farm

In his memoir, Matthew Gavin Frank takes the reader on a hallucinatory journey
through the medical marijuana industry in Mendocino County, Calif.

Annie Dawid Aug. 20, 2012 From the print edition

Friday news roundup: repeals and drying rivers

Fish v. farmers in California; cleaning up gas; marijuana mayhem

Danielle Venton March 16, 2012

![The real side effect of medical marijuana](https://www.hcn.org/wotr/the-

real-side-effect-of-medical-

marijuana/@@images/acf1124a-9b31-4724-9f92-5e543f561461.jpeg)

The real side effect of medical marijuana

In a country where cigarettes and alcohol kill so many people every year, the
argument against medical marijuana is pure hypocrisy.

Ray Ring Opinion Essay Aug. 26, 2011

![Ganjanomics: bringing Humboldt’s shadow economy into the

light](https://www.hcn.org/issues/43.13/ganjanomics-bringing-humbolts-shadow-

economy-into-the-light/@@images/66422c13-ade6-449f-83e4-184f6b4eb6b3.jpeg)

Ganjanomics: bringing Humboldt’s shadow economy into the light

Marijuana growers and government officials in California's notorious "Emerald
Triangle" work towards legitimizing the local cash crop.

Matt Jenkins Aug. 15, 2011 From the print edition

![Ganjanomics](https://www.hcn.org/issues/43.13/@@images/ad67b02b-a79d-4024-a781-c7683166f309.jpeg)

Ganjanomics

The marijuana growers of California's notorious "Emerald Triangle" wrestle
with bringing their shadow economy into the light of day.

Aug. 8, 2011

![Economies of vice](https://www.hcn.org/issues/43.13/economies-of-

vice/@@images/9f732a91-ccb8-491c-ba90-4f3b662c9984.jpeg)

Economies of vice

If marijuana becomes fully legal and taxable, it won't be the first time
authorities have learned that it's easier - and more profitable - to manage
vice than to try to eliminate it.

Sarah Gilman Opinion Aug. 8, 2011 From the print edition

![California: Dope, eBay, pollution and

moonbeams](https://www.hcn.org/issues/42.18/california-dope-ebay-pollution-

and-moonbeams/@@images/6bb746c2-1b1a-45d2-998b-c6f822cf8e49.jpeg)

California: Dope, eBay, pollution and moonbeams

California flashes back to the 1970s with campaigns to legalize marijuana and
re-elect Jerry Brown as governor, while other key races are also sizzling hot.

Jonathan Thompson Oct. 20, 2010 From the print edition

Finding treasure in the "Treasure State"

"Medical" marijuana and a cat named Ricky on the loose in Montana

Betsy Marston Sept. 29, 2010

![Medical marijuana trips up Montana](https://www.hcn.org/wotr/medical-

marijuana-trips-up-montana/@@images/11c64b44-4a36-44f3-a212-eccd229dad1b.jpeg)

Medical marijuana trips up Montana

Montana's medical marijuana law is unnecessarily confusing and complicated.

Joe Barnhart Opinion Essay Aug. 19, 2010

![Reefer politics](https://www.hcn.org/issues/42.5/reefer-

politics/@@images/245fe6c1-28b4-453e-b8af-7f147e225f66.jpeg)

Reefer politics

The West leads the way on medical marijuana.

Ray Ring March 8, 2010 From the print edition

![Marijuana stores get no respect](https://www.hcn.org/wotr/marijuana-stores-

get-no-respect/@@images/36e7e6dd-6f96-4fce-acfe-c422cc42df9b.jpeg)

Marijuana stores get no respect

Marijuana should be legal for recreational as well as medical uses, as long as
it’s taxed and nobody drives under the influence.

Rob Pudim Opinion Jan. 29, 2010

Weed picking

Growth of medical marijuana dispensaries in Colorado starts search for a "pot
critic."

Betsy Marston Nov. 10, 2009

Heard around the West

Dirk Kempthorne and luxury RVs; The Farmer Wants a Wife, maybe; no rules (or
bras) at Sturgis; look before you pee; hard-working Washington pot-growers;
Arizona’s biggest marijuana farm; with defense lawyers like this one, who
needs a prosecutor?; and big bird with a bad grip

Betsy Marston Sept. 4, 2006 From the print edition

![The Public Lands' Big Cash

Crop](https://www.hcn.org/issues/309/@@images/872bc81b-d8a7-4f71-b955-f937023e1cb9.jpeg)

The Public Lands' Big Cash Crop

Elaborate marijuana gardens created and managed by Mexican drug lords are
turning California’s public lands into a dangerous, illegal, industrial-style
landscape. Also in this issue: The Forest Service’s claim that a recent court
order would suspend routine activities – such as cutting Christmas trees or
picking mushrooms – has been dismissed by the judge as the agency’s attempt to
blow the issue out of proportion.

Oct. 31, 2005

1 2

Get Our Newsletter ↓

    
    
    Most Popular Stories
    

  * Court throws book at BLM over fracking Chaco
  * One rancher’s plan to establish water buffalo in Colorado
  * The Forrest Fenn treasure has been found
  * Gun-safety debate reaches Montana’s Supreme Court
  * The playground of Lake Powell isn’t worth drowned canyons

## Today's Featured Stories

  * ![NOAA’s university partners tackle climate change research](https://www.hcn.org/articles/climate-change-noaas-university-partners-tackle-climate-change-research-despite-attacks-on-science-trump-admin/@@images/44b50a08-6943-4b1a-bf05-f4ab1b537e95.png)

NOAA’s university partners tackle climate change research

Despite the Trump administration’s attacks on science, university partnerships
continue their studies.

  * ![‘None of this happened the way you think it did’](https://www.hcn.org/issues/51.10/communities-none-of-this-happened-the-way-you-think-it-did-cremated-remains/@@images/d4a6b5ed-0948-45c2-8be6-e6b5721a3f59.png)

‘None of this happened the way you think it did’

For years, the clients of a Colorado funeral home kept their loved ones’
cremated remains. Then the FBI called.

  * ![One rancher’s plan to establish water buffalo in Colorado](https://www.hcn.org/articles/ranching-one-ranchers-plan-to-establish-water-buffalo-in-colorado/@@images/fe7a16e9-a3fb-4690-8c5a-9f2aa3ac9e82.jpeg)

One rancher’s plan to establish water buffalo in Colorado

The challenges and possibilities of water buffalo ranching in the Roaring Fork
Valley.

High Country News Classifieds

  * ASSISTANT DIRECTOR ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJjaCI6ICI0NDgiLCAiY3IiOiAiMSIsICJjdyI6ICI3NzYiLCAiczMiOiAiQzBBODAxRkUxYjRjNzIwMUJFV1lYM0ZGMjlBOC82NzQyOWJjYThlN2Y0M2Y1ODc4ODQ1OWI5ZjViL2ltZy9iNGM0NjNiMWVmN2FiNzJmMjI3NWI0MWVkZTUwLkpQRyIsICJiIjogImFkYXMtb3JlZ29uLWNhcyIsICJkIjogNzIsICJybyI6ICIwIiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwLCAieCI6ICIzNyIsICJ5IjogIjE0In0=) The West Region Wildfire Council (www.COwildfire.org) is a regional wildfire organization that promotes wildfire adaptation, preparedness and mitigation education across Delta, Gunnison, Hinsdale, Montrose, Ouray... 
  * REPORTER ![](https://cdn-assets.prfct.cc/assets/brand/images/ui-elements/action-icons-orange-grey/no-photo-camera-white.jpg) The Wallowa County Chieftain, has an opening for a reporter. Experience with and understanding of editorial photography also required. Journalism degree or equivalent, an understanding... 
  * ORGANIZER/OUTREACH COORDINATOR ![](https://cdn-assets.prfct.cc/assets/brand/images/ui-elements/action-icons-orange-grey/no-photo-camera-white.jpg) Seeking an energetic Organizer/Outreach Coordinator to help us conserve Arizona's public lands and shape the policies that affect them. 
  * 2017 JOHN DEERE LAWN MOWER Z930R ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4Lzc4YTY1ODYxYjgxZTRkYzJiODY1NGYwNmNmNTEvaW1nLzdmZDUwYjA4NmJiZTEwYzZlZGMyYmU4Y2I4YTQuanBnIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) 15 hours on it, 3 years warranty, 22,5 HP, $1600 Sale price. Contact: [email protected]
  * DONOR RELATIONS MANAGER ![](https://cdn-otf-cas.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L0FDMUUwMDQ0MGVjNjcyMkE2RXh5VUY2QUE3RkEvaW1nLzc0YjU2MDUzZmI0ODJmODlhM2NjOTE0MDk2YmEucG5nIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Join us in helping to match charitable interests and passions to the needs of The Nature Conservancy. The Nature Conservancy seeks a fast learner with... 
  * YELLOWSTONE RIVER FIELD INSTITUTE ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L2EyODc5ZTJiODQ4MjQzZTBiMTY5OTdhZmE2ZDEvaW1nL2QwMmYzMDA5Nzk0N2FkMjc2MWVlMjMzZWI1N2YuanBnIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) The Yellowstone River Field Institute is an intensive week-long field course for multimedia storytellers, working journalists, and students of journalism, offered by the Montana-based Freeflow... 
  * OWN YOUR OWN CANYON - 1400 SF STRAW-BALE ECO-HOME ON 80 ACRES - 3 HOURS FROM L.A. ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L2NkMDhiZjM3YWM4ZTRlZGFhZGM4MDI1ODZlZWIvaW1nL2EzYTBlZWQ3YTEwNzUxOWRmYWM3NDIwNmRlMWYuanBnIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) 1400 sf of habitable space in a custom-designed eco-home created and completed by a published L.A. architect in 1997-99. Nestled within its own 80-acre mountain... 
  * EDUCATION & ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM MANAGER ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4LzAwYzU1NDE2NDJmMDQzMmFiOWI1NDc4YjA5ZmQvaW1nLzk5NmZkNmQxOTM3OGY1ZDNhMDU5YWI5ZWY0MWMucG5nIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Baltimore Green Space (BGS) is Baltimore's environmental land trust. We promote vibrant neighborhoods and a healthy environment through land preservation, research, and community advocacy. We... 
  * LEAD FORESTER ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L2Q4MjgxMzRhN2I1NjRhOTZiMmRhOWU1OTY1YWUvaW1nLzYyZGQxN2ZkY2ZjZjdiZTczYTFkZDQ0ODdmMzcucG5nIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Northwest Natural Resource Group seeks forester based in Seattle or Olympia area to manage our ecological forestry harvest program. Full description at nnrg.org. 
  * ENERGY MARKET POLICY ANALYST, CLEAN ENERGY PROGRAM ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4LzVhNTkxZmQwNjk0NDRkYjM4YTRiMTg0MzhiMDkvaW1nL2RjZGI4MzI1NjU3NWRlMjI1MDZhOGI2OWFmY2UucG5nIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Western Resource Advocates (WRA) is seeking an experienced Policy Analyst or Senior Analyst to develop and advocate for policies and mechanisms that promote the development... 
  * MILLION DOLLAR VIEW FOR $460,000 ![](https://cdn-otf-cas.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L0FDMUUwMkY3MGNlNTMxMTI2OWhQNzlENzEwQUEvaW1nLzY0YzMwOWY2NDgwNzljZDUxMGI2M2Y0M2EzZTUuanBnIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) from a beautiful log home. 20-acre private parcel in the sunny Okanogan of WA. Visit: www.juliedubois.ca/house. Inquiries: [email protected]
  * VICE PRESIDENT OF PROGRAMS AND STRATEGY ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4LzVkOTEyZTUyMzFkYTRkMTJiYjE4OTlhYjA0NGQvaW1nLzM1ZTNiNzhhMDIzODBlNThjYzQzNGJhY2ZjMDYucG5nIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Western Resource Advocates is looking for a VP of Programs and Strategy to bring a strategic focus to the development of multi-faceted advocacy plans that... 
  * HEAD BREAD/PASTRY BAKER AND ASSISTANT POSITIONS ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L2E0OTAzN2ZhY2E4YjQ0ODI4Y2M4YTI0ZmMzZDYvaW1nLzJlNTg2ZGY1OTFhMDllMDBmZTI3NzllM2U4NjkucG5nIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Hiring Part/Full time for Summer Season - entry level & experienced positions. Year round employment for optimal candidates. Pay DOE. 
  * SPECTACULAR SCENIC MOUNTAIN VIEW HOME BUILDING SITE ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4LzcwNTlmNzY4NTg0NDQ3NThhZTM2OWIzNGQwNWYvaW1nLzkyNjNhODBlNGIyNGM0NGMxYmE5NGYxMGI4NGQuSlBHIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Located on top of Sugarloaf Mtn. 5 mi W of downtown Colorado Springs, CO. $80,000. 
  * CURATOR, DRAPER NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM ![](https://cdn-otf-cas.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L0FDMUUwMEYyMGNjNWYxMUNFMElUbTExRTU2MkEvaW1nLzI2ZGFkMDAxMjYxYjU4NTBlYWI4YjhlNzY0ZTEuanBnIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) The Draper Natural History Museum (DNHM) at the Buffalo Bill Center of the West in Cody, WY, invites applications for Curator of Natural Science. Seeking... 
  * UNDEVELOPED 40 ACRES - SOUTHWEST COLORADO ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L2JhZjFmNmJkNzhhZDQ0ZjQ4YTMwMzViOTQ0NmMvaW1nL2QzNTRiYThiNDE0OGZkN2VlNzdkMGIxMGQ2MDUuanBnIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) in Southwest Colorado. $60K plus costs. 
  * PARTNERSHIP-LEASE ![](https://cdn-assets.prfct.cc/assets/brand/images/ui-elements/action-icons-orange-grey/no-photo-camera-white.jpg) Seeking full-time experienced farmer on 52-acre organic farm Union, OR. [email protected]
  * SAN JUAN METALS ![](https://cdn-otf-cas.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L0FDMUUwMkY3MGM5M2YxOTc2Q1VsNkM0MEU0NDUvaW1nL2I2NTYxY2QxMTI0ODdlMDcxYmU1MGIxMDVmZDgucGRmIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Metal roofing & siding, thru-fastened & seam profiles. Stronger, more attractive and longer lasting than any other panel on the market. 970-275-4070. 
  * EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ![](https://otf-cache1.adperfect.com/dfs1/eyJzMyI6ICJDMEE4MDFGRTFiNGM3MjAxQkVXWVgzRkYyOUE4L2IzNjMwZjkwY2UyYzQ4MTZhMzBjZGE5Yjc0YjEvaW1nLzdmZGRhZDQwYTEyYzI1Yjg5NWI1MDkzZWY1YzcuSlBHIiwgImIiOiAiYWRhcy1vcmVnb24tY2FzIiwgImQiOiA3MiwgImgiOiAxMDAsICJtIjogIkpQRyIsICJ3IjogMTAwfQ==) Forever Our Rivers Foundation seeks a driven and creative individual to lead this national movement for river health. Deadline 6/14/19. 
  * SIERRA CLUB SENIOR CAMPAIGN REPRESENTATIVE, BEYOND DIRTY FUELS ![](https://cdn-assets.prfct.cc/assets/brand/images/ui-elements/action-icons-orange-grey/no-photo-camera-white.jpg) We are looking for an experienced campaigner to lead our work challenging the oil and fracked gas industry, specifically focused on fighting fossil fuel expansion... 

VIEW ALL ADS › PLACE AN AD ›

![](https://www.hcn.org/media/west-in-perspective-header)

  * New Godzilla movie makes a mess of environmental ethics

Nick Bowlin

  * Court throws book at BLM over fracking Chaco

Jonathan Thompson

  * Montana’s vigilante obsession obscures the truth

Gabriel Furshong

Get 2 free issues ↓

![](https://www.hcn.org/issues/51.10/@@images/5fb349f5-1606-4732-9225-45313184460a.jpeg)

State AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DC DE FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN
MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI
WY

  * High Country News
  * 119 Grand Avenue
  * PO Box 1090
  * Paonia, CO 81428
  * (970) 527-4898
  * Contact Us

  * About Us

  * Pitch us a Story
  * Internships
  * Education
  * Support Our Work
  * Advertising
  * Syndication
  * Subscriber Services

  * Facebook

  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * YouTube
  * LinkedIn
  * Tumblr
  * RSS

© 2014 High Country News. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Use

