

![Portland Mercury](/assets/sites/mercury/images/site-

logo.png?2018-09-13-121404)

  * Things to Read ****
    * __The Portland Guide to Summer
    * __Queer Issue 2019
    * __Eat & Drink Guide 
    * __100 Portland Happy Hours
    * Home 
    * Blogtown 
    * Savage Love 
    * I, Anonymous 
    * News 
    * Fashion 
    * Music 
    * Food &Drink 
    * Movies&TV 
    * Cannabis 
    * Visual Art 
    * Comedy 
    * Books 
    * Theater&Performance 
    * Sports 
    * Feature 
  * Things to Do ****

    * __Pride
    * __Burger of the Week
    * __Pedalpalooza
    * __Oregon Cider Week
    * __Outdoor Events
    * __Resistance & Solidarity
    * __My Events
    * Things To Do Home
    * All Events
    * Cheap, Free, & Fun
    * Music
    * Movie Times
    * Comedy
    * Theater &Performance
    * Art
    * Readings&Talks
    * Podcasts
    * Food&Drink Events
    * Festivals
    * Fashion
    * Community
    * Sports
    * Restaurants
    * Bars&Clubs
    * Dispensaries
  *     * __
  * __
    * Log in
    * Sign up
    * __My Events
  * __

Menu __

Close __

__

![Portland Mercury](/assets/sites/mercury/images/site-

logo.png?2018-09-13-121404)

__

  * Things To Read
  * __The Portland Guide to Summer
  * __Queer Issue 2019
  * __Eat & Drink Guide
  * __100 Portland Happy Hours
  * Home
  * Blogtown
  * Savage Love
  * I, Anonymous
  * News
  * Fashion
  * Music
  * Food &Drink
  * Movies&TV
  * Cannabis
  * Visual Art
  * Comedy
  * Books
  * Theater&Performance
  * Sports
  * Feature
  * Print Archives

  * Things To Do

  * __Pride
  * __Burger of the Week
  * __Pedalpalooza
  * __Oregon Cider Week
  * __Outdoor Events
  * __Resistance & Solidarity
  * __My Events
  * Things To Do Home
  * All Events
  * Cheap, Free, & Fun
  * Music
  * Movie Times
  * Comedy
  * Theater &Performance
  * Art
  * Readings&Talks
  * Podcasts
  * Food&Drink Events
  * Festivals
  * Fashion
  * Community
  * Sports
  * Restaurants
  * Bars&Clubs
  * Dispensaries

  * Other Things

  * Merc Tickets
  * Ad Info & Rates
  * MercPerks

  * Account

  * Log in
  * Sign up

Ask a Pot Lawyer Feb 15, 2017

# Is It Illegal to Be High in Public?

## So You Smoked at Home, Then Went Out. Are You Breaking the Law?

by Sean Clancy

![](https://media2.fdncms.com/portmerc/imager/u/large/18847584/pot2-stoner-

gettyimages-106400234.jpg)

Getty / schroedl

Tweet ![submit to reddit](//www.redditstatic.com/spreddit5.gif)

**_I know I can’t_** _smoke weed in public, but what if I smoked at home and
then went outside? I’m so high right now and everyone is staring at me—am I
going to get fined or arrested?!_

**OKAY, BREATHE** —it’s unlawful to _consume_ marijuana in public, but simply
being stoned is not unlawful behavior under Oregon law, even in public. If
you’re being a weirdo or engaging in criminal conduct, people may indeed be
staring at you and the police might want to know what’s up. But if you’re just
walking around, eating tacos, not bothering anyone or breaking any laws, chill
out.

As a practical matter, if you’re under the influence but acting normally,
people except for your mom are unlikely to notice. So seriously: chill out.

As a legal matter, “public intoxication” laws evoke complex policies around
behavior regulation, personal privacy, individual autonomy, freedom from
unwarranted searches, public health, and other issues exceeding this column’s
word limit. Two Portland lawyers recently published a well-researched legal
argument on the Weed Blog (theweedblog.com) suggesting a “fundamental right to
use cannabis.” It’s relevant and I’d encourage anyone interested to check it
out. Otherwise, here’s some food for thought:

No Oregon law makes marijuana intoxication illegal by itself, and the state
specifically prohibits local governments from making public intoxication
unlawful. Oregon’s prohibition on public intoxication laws apparently
acknowledges that homeless people might have substance addiction problems and
appear intoxicated in public, so it’s a dick move to fine them for it. The US
Supreme Court decided it’s cruel and unusual to criminalize addiction, even
though addiction-related conduct (such as stealing coffee, smoking cigarettes
indoors, or impaired driving) can be unlawful.

Oregon has a history of treating public intoxication as a public health issue
rather than a crime. If someone is _dangerously_ intoxicated (a high
standard), to the point of incapacitation or “true emergency,” police are
empowered to take that person to a medical facility.

Intoxicated people sometimes have, let’s say, less-than-positive run-ins with
law enforcement. Police have been known to question people for a variety of
reasons that may be legal or illegal. Intoxicated people have been known to
answer in a variety of ways that may be stirringly eloquent or really, really
stupid. You have a constitutional right to keep your mouth shut, but being
silent doesn’t always stop innocent people from getting arrested. According to
my public defender friends, common charges include disorderly conduct,
blocking traffic, creating a risk of public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm,
making unreasonable noise, and interfering with a peace officer. If you’re
seriously freaked out by these possibilities, consider Netflix, Pranayama
breathing, a bath, and/or not being so intoxicated in public.

Publicly possessing more marijuana than state law allows is unlawful (check
out the state’s chipper whatslegaloregon.com campaign) but under Oregon case
law, ingesting a controlled substance does not constitute possessing that
controlled substance. Being high on drugs is not the same as possessing those
drugs.

The moral of this one is pretty obvious: Like with drinking, using pot changes
your judgment, so don’t do anything stupid or otherwise illegal (you _can_ and
_will_ get a DUII if you are caught driving impaired) and you should be
a-okay.

![Share on Facebook](/images/social/share-on-facebook.png)

![Share on Twitter](/images/social/share-on-twitter.png)

### __ 1

## You might also be interested in these:

### Don’t Forget About Social Equity in Cannabis

by Josh Jardine

### Illinois Will Have Legal Weed in 2020

by Josh Jardine

### Which Country Smokes the Most Weed? It's Probably Not Who You Think

by Josh Jardine

__

#### Newsletters

Sign up for the latest news and to win free tickets to events

__

#### Mercury Ticketing

Buy tickets to events around Portland

__

#### MercPerks

Great deals on local businesses

__

#### Mercury Things To Do

Comprehensive calendar of Portland events

#### This Week's Issue

![Cover of this issue of Portland

Mercury](https://media1.fdncms.com/portmerc/imager/u/small/26591237/2019-06-06-maarquii-

aaronlee.jpg)

Print Archives

#### Publication Info

  * Masthead
  * Ad Info & Rates
  * Jobs at Portland Mercury
  * Contact

#### Check it out

![Cocktail

Compass](https://media1.fdncms.com/portmerc/imager/u/original/16686580/cocktailcompass-188x80.png)

#### Follow Us

  * __RSS
  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter
  * __Instagram

![Portland Mercury](/assets/sites/mercury/images/site-

logo.png?2018-09-13-121404)

All contents (C) Index Newspapers LLC  
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204

Contact | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Takedown Policy

* * *

![Portland Mercury](/assets/sites/mercury/images/site-

logo.png?2018-09-13-121404)

All contents (C) Index Newspapers LLC  
115 SW Ash St. Suite 600, Portland, OR 97204

Contact | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Takedown Policy

![Quantcast](https://secure.quantserve.com/pixel/p-aaXEgDiyQODdU.gif)
![Quantcast](https://secure.quantserve.com/pixel/p-a4LDpi_DEopn-.gif)

