

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
  * How To
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO ProfilesGTRHomoloGeneIdentical
Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Advanced
  * Journal list
  * Help

  * Journal List

  * Harm Reduct J
  * v.2; 2005
  * PMC1277837

![Logo of harmred](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-harmred.png)

Harm Reduct J. 2005; 2: 21.

Published online 2005 Oct 18. doi: 10.1186/1477-7517-2-21

PMCID: PMC1277837

PMID: 16232311

# Cannabis and tobacco smoke are not equally carcinogenic

Robert Melamede![corresponding author](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/corrauth.gif)1,2

### Robert Melamede

1Biology Department, 1420 Austin Bluffs Parkway, University of Colorado,
Colorado Springs, 80918, USA

2Bioenergetics Institute, 1420 Austin Bluffs Parkway, University of Colorado,
Colorado Springs, 80918, USA

Find articles by Robert Melamede

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information Disclaimer

1Biology Department, 1420 Austin Bluffs Parkway, University of Colorado,
Colorado Springs, 80918, USA

2Bioenergetics Institute, 1420 Austin Bluffs Parkway, University of Colorado,
Colorado Springs, 80918, USA

![corresponding author](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/corrauth.gif)Corresponding
author.

Robert Melamede: ude.sccu@demalemr

Received 2004 Nov 30; Accepted 2005 Oct 18.

Copyright (C) 2005 Melamede; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0),
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.

## Abstract

More people are using the cannabis plant as modern basic and clinical science
reaffirms and extends its medicinal uses. Concomitantly, concern and
opposition to smoked medicine has occurred, in part due to the known
carcinogenic consequences of smoking tobacco. Are these reactions justified?
While chemically very similar, there are fundamental differences in the
pharmacological properties between cannabis and tobacco smoke. Cannabis smoke
contains cannabinoids whereas tobacco smoke contains nicotine. Available
scientific data, that examines the carcinogenic properties of inhaling smoke
and its biological consequences, suggests reasons why tobacco smoke, but not
cannabis smoke, may result in lung cancer.

**Keywords:** marijuana, tobacco, cancer, smoke, cannabinoids, carcinogens,
nicotine

Tobacco has dramatic negative consequences for those who smoke it. In addition
to its high addiction potential [1], tobacco is causally associated with over
400,000 deaths yearly in the United States, and has a significant negative
effect on health in general [2]. More specifically, over 140,000 lung-related
deaths in 2001 were attributed to tobacco smoke [3]. Comparable consequences
would naturally be expected from cannabis smoking since the burning of plant
material in the form of cigarettes generates a large variety of compounds that
possess numerous biological activities [4].

While cannabis smoke has been implicated in respiratory dysfunction, including
the conversion of respiratory cells to what appears to be a pre-cancerous
state [5], it has not been causally linked with tobacco related cancers [6]
such as lung, colon or rectal cancers. Recently, Hashibe et al [7] carried out
an epidemiological analysis of marijuana smoking and cancer. A connection
between marijuana smoking and lung or colorectal cancer was not observed.
These conclusions are reinforced by the recent work of Tashkin and coworkers
[8] who were unable to demonstrate a cannabis smoke and lung cancer link,
despite clearly demonstrating cannabis smoke-induced cellular damage.

Furthermore, compounds found in cannabis have been shown to kill numerous
cancer types including: lung cancer [9], breast and prostate [10], leukemia
and lymphoma [11], glioma [12], skin cancer [13], and pheochromocytoma [14].
The effects of cannabinoids are complex and sometimes contradicting, often
exhibiting biphasic responses. For example, in contrast to the tumor killing
properties mentioned above, low doses of THC may stimulate the growth of lung
cancer cells in vitro [15].

The genotoxic effects of partially oxidized hydrocarbons created by burning
either cannabis or tobacco have been widely examined as the likely source of
genetic changes that lead to the carcinogenic state [16]. As a result, the
medical potential of cannabis has been obscured by the potential negative
impact of using a smoked medicine [17]. Those who deny the validity of
"medical marijuana," cite that marijuana smoke contains four fold more tars
than does tobacco smoke [18]. Nevertheless, smoking is often the preferred
route of intake by medical cannabis users because rapid action allows self-
titration [19]. Are the biological consequences of smoking cannabis and
tobacco similar?

Smoke from tobacco and cannabis contains many of the same carcinogens and
tumor promoters [20,21]. However, cannabis and tobacco have additional
pharmacological activities, both receptor-dependent and independent, that
result in different biological endpoints. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
found in smoke are pro-carcinogens that are converted to carcinogens by the
enzymatic activity of the cytochrome P4501A1 oxidase protein (CYP1A1 gene
product). Benzo [a] pyrene is converted to its carcinogenic metabolite diol
epoxide, which binds to specific hyper-mutable nucleotide sequences in the
K-ras oncogene and p53 tumor suppressor [22]. Recent work by Roth _et al_.
demonstrates that THC treatment of murine hepatoma cells caused a dose
dependent increase in CYP1A1 gene transcription, while at the same time
directly inhibiting the enzymatic activity of the gene product [23]. Thus,
despite potentially higher levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons found in
cannabis smoke compared to tobacco smoke (dependent on what part of the plant
is smoked), the THC present in cannabis smoke should exert a protective effect
against pro-carcinogens that require activation. In contrast, nicotine
activates some CYP1A1 activities, thus potentially increasing the carcinogenic
effects of tobacco smoke [24].

It is worth noting that cytochrome P4501A1 oxidase has numerous substrates
including biologically active lipid metabolites such as arachidonic acid, and
eicosinoids [25]. These molecules are components of metabolic pathways that
are interwoven with the synthesis and degradation of endocannabinoids such as
arachidonylethanolamine (anandamide) [26]. Hence, the inhibition of cytochrome
P4501A1 oxidase by THC is likely to have multiple biological effects such as
possibly enhancing cannabinoid activities by decreasing their catabolism.

The need to better understand the biological consequences of tobacco compared
to cannabis smoke has been underscored by recent studies that demonstrate a
unique role for nicotine in the pathogenesis of lung cancer [27]. In order to
appreciate potential biological differences between tobacco and cannabis
smoke, the molecular basis of signal transduction must be considered with
respect to the life and death of cells. Evolution has provided cells with
biochemical feedback loops, checkpoints that monitor genetic integrity and the
overall state of the cell. Under conditions of sufficient cellular damage,
apoptotic cell death is induced [28]. While a variety of different biochemical
states are consistent with a cell either living or dying, constant
communication between a cell and its environment is critical for survival of
the cell and ultimately the organism.

Cells communicate with each other via specific cell surface receptors. When
bound with their appropriate ligand, the receptors initiate signaling cascades
that alter cellular biochemistry [29]. THC found in cannabis [30] and nicotine
found in tobacco [31] both have specific receptors by which their
corresponding ligands modulate cellular functions. Interestingly, both
cannabinoid [32] and nicotine receptors [27] are coupled to the AKT (PKB)
signaling pathway. Activation of either receptor type can induce an anti-
apoptotic state that prevents cell death. However, it is the context in which
the AKT pathway is activated that determines whether an organism benefits or
is harmed by this anti-apoptotic activity.

Nicotine receptors are widely distributed and are found in the epithelial
cells lining respiratory passages. Cannabinoid receptors are also widely
distributed, but have not been reported in respiratory epithelial cells. The
differential expression of receptors may account for the apparent difference
in carcinogenic activity that results from smoking tobacco compared to
cannabis. Both types of smoke contain a complex mixture of compounds, some of
which are carcinogenic. They both contain hot gasses and irritating
particulate matter (tars). However, the anti-apoptotic response that results
from the stimulation of the nicotine receptors, under mutagenic conditions,
creates a worst-case scenario. The very cells that have accumulated sufficient
genetic damage to normally initiate the apoptotic cascade are prevented from
going down this suicidal path [33] even though it would be best for the
organism as a whole. In contrast, when the AKT pathway is activated in the
brain after head injury [34] or stroke, [35] cannabinoids protect against cell
death to the organism's benefit. Likewise, nicotine can also activate the AKT
pathway in the brain in a beneficial manner. For example, activation of the
nicotine receptors, as is also true of cannabinoid receptors [36], can prevent
the brain cell death that results from exposure to beta amyloid protein [37]
as occurs in Alzheimer's disease.

The impact of receptor and downstream activation is complicated. Both nicotine
and cannabinoids have been shown to effect angiogenesis in a receptor-mediated
manner [13]. However, nicotine and tobacco have opposite effects on
angiogenesis. Nicotine promotes neo-vacularization along with associated tumor
growth, atheroma, up-regulation of VEGF, and cell migration [38]. In contrast,
cannabinoids promote tumor regression in rodents and inhibit pro-angiogenic
factors [39]. In fact, clinical trials to treat human glioma with THC have
resulted in decreased levels of VEGF [40].

The signal transduction pathway described above represents one means by which
the carcinogenic affects of tobacco are amplified in a contrasting manner to
what occurs with cannabis. The immunological effects resulting from smoking
tobacco or cannabis are also distinctive and result in opposite end-points.
Again, the carcinogenic potential of smoke is increased by tobacco, whereas it
is uniquely reduced by the specific immune regulatory activity of cannabinoids
in cannabis smoke. The introduction of hot gaseous material containing both
carcinogens and particulate material into the respiratory passages produces
pro-inflammatory immune responses [41]. The inflammatory state is a double-
edged sword that can serve to protect or kill an organism. A functional
characteristic of the pro-inflammatory state is the production of free
radicals [42]. These reactive chemical species are essential armaments in the
body's defense against various pathogens, in particular against intracellular
parasites and bacteria. Free radicals are thought to be contributing
etiological agents behind a number of pathological states [43] including
cardiovascular and neuro-degenerative diseases [44], cancers, and aging in
general [45]. Endocannabinoids are specific immunological homeostatic
modulators when acting on "peripheral" CB2 receptors [30]. Both endo- and exo-
cannabinoids push the immune system towards the relatively anti-inflammatory
Th2 cytokine profile [46]. Thus, cannabinoids inhaled in cannabis smoke
physiologically reduce the potential amplification of carcinogens in smoke
that results from biologically produced free radicals. This response is not
induced by tobacco smoke.

In conclusion, while both tobacco and cannabis smoke have similar properties
chemically, their pharmacological activities differ greatly. Components of
cannabis smoke minimize some carcinogenic pathways whereas tobacco smoke
enhances some. Both types of smoke contain carcinogens and particulate matter
that promotes inflammatory immune responses that may enhance the carcinogenic
effects of the smoke. However, cannabis typically down-regulates
immunologically-generated free radical production by promoting a Th2 immune
cytokine profile. Furthermore, THC inhibits the enzyme necessary to activate
some of the carcinogens found in smoke. In contrast, tobacco smoke increases
the likelihood of carcinogenesis by overcoming normal cellular checkpoint
protective mechanisms through the activity of respiratory epithelial cell
nicotine receptors. Cannabinoids receptors have not been reported in
respiratory epithelial cells (in skin they prevent cancer), and hence the DNA
damage checkpoint mechanism should remain intact after prolonged cannabis
exposure. Furthermore, nicotine promotes tumor angiogenesis whereas cannabis
inhibits it. It is possible that as the cannabis-consuming population ages,
the long-term consequences of smoking cannabis may become more similar to what
is observed with tobacco. However, current knowledge does not suggest that
cannabis smoke will have a carcinogenic potential comparable to that resulting
from exposure to tobacco smoke.

It should be noted that with the development of vaporizers, that use the
respiratory route for the delivery of carcinogen-free cannabis vapors, the
carcinogenic potential of smoked cannabis has been largely eliminated [47,48].

## Competing interests

The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.

## References

  * Khurana S, Batra V, Patkar AA, Leone FT. Twenty-first century tobacco use: it is not just a risk factor anymore. Respir Med. 2003;97:295–301. doi: 10.1053/rmed.2002.1443. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Thun MJ, Henley SJ, Calle EE. Tobacco use and cancer: an epidemiologic perspective for geneticists. Oncogene. 2002;21:7307–7325. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205807. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Alavanja MC. Biologic damage resulting from exposure to tobacco smoke and from radon: implication for preventive interventions. Oncogene. 2002;21:7365–7375. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205798. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Novotny M, Merli F, Weisler D, Fencl M, Saeed T. Fractionation and capillary gas chromatographic-mass spectrometric characterization of the neutral components in marijuana and tobacco smoke condensates. J Chromatogr. 1982;238:141–150. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9673(00)82720-X. [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Tashkin DR, Baldwin GC, Sarafian T, Dubinett S, Roth MD. Respiratory and immunologic consequences of marijuana smoking. J Clin Pharmacol. 2002;42:71S–81S. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Sidney S, Beck JE, Tekawa IS, Quesenberry CP, Friedman GD. Marijuana use and mortality. Am J Public Health. 1997;87:585–590. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Hashibe M, Straif K, Tashkin DP, Morgenstern H, Greenland S, Zhang ZF. Epidemiologic review of marijuana use and cancer risk. Alcohol. 2005;35:265–275. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2005.04.008. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Tashkin DP. Smoked marijuana as a cause of lung injury. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2005;63:93–100. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Munson AE, Harris LS, Friedman MA, Dewey WL, Carchman RA. Antineoplastic activity of cannabinoids. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1975;55:597–602. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Sanchez C, de Ceballos ML, del Pulgar TG, Rueda D, Corbacho C, Velasco G, Galve-Roperh I, Huffman JW, Ramon y, Cajal S, Guzman M. Inhibition of glioma growth in vivo by selective activation of the CB(2) cannabinoid receptor. Cancer Res. 2001;61:5784–5789. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * McKallip RJ, Lombard C, Fisher M, Martin BR, Ryu S, Grant S, Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M. Targeting CB2 cannabinoid receptors as a novel therapy to treat malignant lymphoblastic disease. Blood. 2002;100:627–634. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-01-0098. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Sanchez C, Galve-Roperh I, Canova C, Brachet P, Guzman M. Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol induces apoptosis in C6 glioma cells. FEBS Lett. 1998;436:6–10. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(98)01085-0. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Casanova ML, Blazquez C, Martinez-Palacio J, Villanueva C, Fernandez-Acenero MJ, Huffman JW, Jorcano JL, Guzman M. Inhibition of skin tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo by activation of cannabinoid receptors. J Clin Invest. 2003;111:43–50. doi: 10.1172/JCI200316116. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Sarker KP, Obara S, Nakata M, Kitajima I, Maruyama I. Anandamide induces apoptosis of PC-12 cells: involvement of superoxide and caspase-3. FEBS Lett. 2000;472:39–44. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(00)01425-3. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Hart S, Fischer OM, Ullrich A. Cannabinoids induce cancer cell proliferation via tumor necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme (TACE/ADAM17)-mediated transactivation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Res. 2004;64:1943–1950. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-03-3720. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Godschalk R, Nair J, van Schooten FJ, Risch A, Drings P, Kayser K, Dienemann H, Bartsch H. Comparison of multiple DNA adduct types in tumor adjacent human lung tissue: effect of cigarette smoking. Carcinogenesis. 2002;23:2081–2086. doi: 10.1093/carcin/23.12.2081. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Watson SJ, Benson JAJ, Joy JE. Marijuana and medicine: assessing the science base: a summary of the 1999 Institute of Medicine report. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000;57:547–552. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.57.6.547. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Wu TC, Tashkin DP, Djahed B, Rose JE. Pulmonary hazards of smoking marijuana as compared with tobacco. N Engl J Med. 1988;318:347–351. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Grotenhermen F. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of cannabinoids. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2003;42:327–360. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Nebert DW, Gonzalez FJ. P450 genes: structure, evolution, and regulation. Annu Rev Biochem. 1987;56:945–993. doi: 10.1146/annurev.bi.56.070187.004501. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Hecht SS, Carmella SG, Murphy SE, Foiles PG, Chung FL. Carcinogen biomarkers related to smoking and upper aerodigestive tract cancer. J Cell Biochem Suppl. 1993;17F:27–35. doi: 10.1002/jcb.240531005. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Tretyakova N, Matter B, Jones R, Shallop A. Formation of benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide-DNA adducts at specific guanines within K-ras and p53 gene sequences: stable isotope-labeling mass spectrometry approach. Biochemistry. 2002;41:9535–9544. doi: 10.1021/bi025540i. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Roth MD, Marques-Magallanes JA, Yuan M, Sun W, Tashkin DP, Hankinson O. Induction and regulation of the carcinogen-metabolizing enzyme CYP1A1 by marijuana smoke and delta (9)-tetrahydrocannabinol. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2001;24:339–344. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Price RJ, Renwick AB, Walters DG, Young PJ, Lake BG. Metabolism of nicotine and induction of CYP1A forms in precision-cut rat liver and lung slices. Toxicol In Vitro. 2004;18:179–185. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2003.08.012. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Nebert DW, Russell DW. Clinical importance of the cytochromes P450. Lancet. 2002;360:1155–1162. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11203-7. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Devane WA, Hanus L, Breuer A, Pertwee RG, Stevenson LA, Griffin G, Gibson D, Mandelbaum A, Etinger A, Mechoulam R. Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. Science. 1992;258:1946–1949. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * West KA, Brognard J, Clark AS, Linnoila IR, Yang X, Swain SM, Harris C, Belinsky S, Dennis PA. Rapid Akt activation by nicotine and a tobacco carcinogen modulates the phenotype of normal human airway epithelial cells. J Clin Invest. 2003;111:81–90. doi: 10.1172/JCI200316147. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Woo RA, Poon RY. Cyclin-Dependent Kinases and S Phase Control in Mammalian Cells. Cell Cycle. 2003;2:316–324. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Bockaert J, Pin JP. Molecular tinkering of G protein-coupled receptors: an evolutionary success. EMBO J. 1999;18:1723–1729. doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.7.1723. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Howlett AC, Barth F, Bonner TI, Cabral G, Casellas P, Devane WA, Felder CC, Herkenham M, Mackie K, Martin BR, Mechoulam R, Pertwee RG. International Union of Pharmacology. XXVII. Classification of cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacol Rev. 2002;54:161–202. doi: 10.1124/pr.54.2.161. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Itier V, Bertrand D. Neuronal nicotinic receptors: from protein structure to function. FEBS Lett. 2001;504:118–125. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(01)02702-8. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Gomez del Pulgar T, Velasco G, Guzman M. The CB1 cannabinoid receptor is coupled to the activation of protein kinase B/Akt. Biochem J. 2000;347:369–373. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3470369. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Minna JD. Nicotine exposure and bronchial epithelial cell nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expression in the pathogenesis of lung cancer. J Clin Invest. 2003;111:31–33. doi: 10.1172/JCI200317492. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Panikashvili D, Simeonidou C, Ben-Shabat S, Hanus L, Breuer A, Mechoulam R, Shohami E. An endogenous cannabinoid (2-AG) is neuroprotective after brain injury. Nature. 2001;413:527–531. doi: 10.1038/35097089. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Leker RR, Shohami E, Abramsky O, Ovadia H. Dexanabinol; a novel neuroprotective drug in experimental focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurol Sci. 1999;162:114–119. doi: 10.1016/S0022-510X(98)00301-3. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Iuvone T, Esposito G, Esposito R, Santamaria R, Di Rosa M, Izzo AA. Neuroprotective effect of cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive component from Cannabis sativa, on beta-amyloid-induced toxicity in PC12 cells. J Neurochem. 2004;89:134–141. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Kihara T, Shimohama S, Sawada H, Honda K, Nakamizo T, Shibasaki H, Kume T, Akaike A. alpha 7 nicotinic receptor transduces signals to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to block A beta-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:13541–13546. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Heeschen C, Jang JJ, Weis M, Pathak A, Kaji S, Hu RS, Tsao PS, Johnson FL, Cooke JP. Nicotine stimulates angiogenesis and promotes tumor growth and atherosclerosis. Nat Med. 2001;7:833–839. doi: 10.1038/89961. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Galve-Roperh I, Sanchez C, Cortes ML, del Pulgar TG, Izquierdo M, Guzman M. Anti-tumoral action of cannabinoids: involvement of sustained ceramide accumulation and extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation. Nat Med. 2000;6:313–319. doi: 10.1038/73171. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Blazquez C, Gonzalez-Feria L, Alvarez L, Haro A, Casanova ML, Guzman M. Cannabinoids inhibit the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway in gliomas. Cancer Res. 2004;64:5617–5623. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-03-3927. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Sarafian TA, Magallanes JA, Shau H, Tashkin D, Roth MD. Oxidative stress produced by marijuana smoke. An adverse effect enhanced by cannabinoids. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1999;20:1286–1293. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Chung HY, Kim HJ, Kim JW, Yu BP. The inflammation hypothesis of aging: molecular modulation by calorie restriction. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001;928:327–335. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Raha S, Robinson BH. Mitochondria, oxygen free radicals, and apoptosis. Am J Med Genet. 2001;106:62–70. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1398. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Halliwell B. Role of free radicals in the neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic implications for antioxidant treatment. Drugs Aging. 2001;18:685–716. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Drew B, Leeuwenburgh C. Aging and the role of reactive nitrogen species. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002;959:66–81. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
  * Yuan M, Kiertscher SM, Cheng Q, Zoumalan R, Tashkin DP, Roth MD. Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol regulates Th1/Th2 cytokine balance in activated human T cells. J Neuroimmunol. 2002;133:124–131. doi: 10.1016/S0165-5728(02)00370-3. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
  * Mirken B. Vaporizers for medical marijuana. Aids Treat News No 327 1999; Sect 1, 5. [PubMed]
  * Gieringer D, St Laqurent J, Goodrich S. Cannabis Vaporizer Combines Efficient Delivery of THC with Effective Suppression of Pyrolytic Compounds. In: Dr. Ethan Russo, editor. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics. 4. Binghamton, New York: Haworth Press; 2004. pp. 7–27. [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

* * *

Articles from Harm Reduction Journal are provided here courtesy of **BioMed
Central**

## Formats:

  * Article |

  * PubReader |

  * ePub (beta) |

  * PDF (244K) |

  * Citation

## Share

  * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
  * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
  * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+ 

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=harmred&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC1277837/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

