

![logo](/healthplusassets/images/mobile-menu.png)

#### Brought to you by Mount Elizabeth Hospitals

__

  * Home
  * Featured
  * Recent
  * Trending
  * Videos
  * Popular Tags
  * A to Z

  * Languages

  * Home
  * Featured
  * Recent
  * Trending
  * Videos
  * Popular Tags
  * A to Z

  * Back

  * Lifestyle
  * Pregnancy
  * Food
  * Diabetes
  * Cholesterol
  * Sport
  * Shoulder
  * Foot
  * Leg
  * Fracture
  * Digestive Disorders
  * Heart
  * Cancer
  * Minimally Invasive Surgery
  * Vascular Disease
  * Women
  * Breast Cancer
  * Liver Cancer
  * Liver
  * Elderly
  * Kidney
  * Obesity
  * Fertility
  * Cervical Cancer
  * Liver Transplant
  * Injury
  * Accident and Emergency
  * Abdomen
  * Colorectal Cancer
  * Gynaecological Disorders
  * Arthritis
  * Osteoporosis
  * Colon
  * Eye
  * Cataract
  * Women's Cancers
  * Prostate Cancer
  * Hand
  * Thyroid
  * Men
  * Children
  * Ear
  * Infectious Disease
  * Bones
  * Dementia

  * Back

  * Abdomen
  * Accident and Emergency
  * Arthritis
  * Bones
  * Breast Cancer
  * Cancer
  * Cataract
  * Cervical Cancer
  * Children
  * Cholesterol
  * Colon
  * Colorectal Cancer
  * Dementia
  * Diabetes
  * Digestive Disorders
  * Ear
  * Elderly
  * Eye
  * Fertility
  * Food
  * Foot
  * Fracture
  * Gynaecological Disorders
  * Hand
  * Heart
  * Infectious Disease
  * Injury
  * Kidney
  * Leg
  * Lifestyle
  * Liver
  * Liver Cancer
  * Liver Transplant
  * Men
  * Minimally Invasive Surgery
  * Obesity
  * Osteoporosis
  * Pregnancy
  * Prostate Cancer
  * Shoulder
  * Sport
  * Thyroid
  * Vascular Disease
  * Women
  * Women's Cancers

  * Back

  * English
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Tiếng Việt

###### Brought to you by Mount Elizabeth Hospitals

English ****

  * English
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Tiếng Việt

  * Follow us

  * __Orchard ****
  * __Novena ****

![Health plus logo](/images/default-source/Health-Common/health-

plus.png?sfvrsn=2d4bea1a_2)

######

__

* * *

  * Share
  * __
  * __
  * __

##### __See articles relevant to me

#### Thank you for your input! You will see a selection of articles relevant

to your profile. Click the Redo button to reset your choices or see all
articles.

Redo

Cookie Policy

__

# How Smoking and Drinking Affect the Body

**Image:** Shutterstock

_19.APR.2017_ _5 MIN READ_ _|_ _5 MIN READ_

Most people are aware that smoking and heavy drinking are unhealthy habits,
but not many realise just how much harm they can cause.

Dr Stanley Chia, cardiologist at Mount Elizabeth Hospitals, explains the
effects of smoking and drinking on our health.

Growing up, many children may view drinking and smoking as privileges of
adults and therefore ‘cool’ activities to engage in. Media portrayal of
smoking and alcohol use has certainly helped to perpetuate the appeal of these
social habits. The importance of public awareness about the dangers of heavy
smoking and drinking has never been greater.

## The danger of smoking

Cigarettes contain more than 4,000 chemical compounds and 400 toxic chemicals
that include tar, carbon monoxide, DDT, arsenic and formaldehyde. The nicotine
in cigarettes, in particular, makes them highly addictive. There are so many
diseases caused by smoking that it’s hard to decide where to begin.

Any amount and type of smoking is bad for your health. Besides being a
notorious risk factor for lung cancer, coronary artery disease, heart attack
and stroke, smoking can damage almost any organ in our body, leading to
leukaemia and cancers of the kidney, pancreas, bladder, throat, mouth and
uterus. It can damage the airways and air sacs of our lungs to cause chronic
bronchitis and breathing difficulties. It can also raise our blood pressure
and cholesterol levels, reduce bone density in women and increase the risk of
infertility, preterm delivery, stillbirth and sudden infant death syndrome.

## The danger of heavy drinking

Most people like to have a drink or two, be it beer, wine or spirits. Light
drinking is acceptable and may even be beneficial for the heart. Heavy and
binge drinking, on the other hand, can lead to serious medical problems.

A healthy limit for drinking is usually no more than 2 drinks (3 units of
alcohol) a day for men and 1 drink (2 units) a day for women. Binge drinking
means having 5 or more drinks for men and 4 or more drinks for women on one
occasion.

Certain groups of people should not drink alcohol at all. These include young
people under the age of 18, pregnant women, people with certain health
conditions, patients on medication that will interact with alcohol, recovering
alcoholics, and people who intend to drive or do activities that require
attention and coordination.

Heavy drinking can lead to many serious health conditions. Binge drinking can
cause immediate problems such as acute intoxication, nausea and vomiting,
blurred vision, impaired judgment and alcohol poisoning.

In the long term, heavy alcohol consumption can cause high blood pressure,
gastric problems, liver cirrhosis, liver cancer, pancreatitis, memory
impairment, alcohol dependence and various psychological conditions. Excessive
alcohol drinking can also result in accidental injuries and even death.
Pregnant women who drink heavily can harm their babies.

## Effects of smoking and drinking on the heart

Both tobacco and alcohol share similar effects on the heart. While the
deleterious effect of smoking on the risk of cardiovascular disease is well-
recognised and straightforward (the risk of heart disease increases with the
amount of smoking), the impact of drinking is more complex.

Some evidence suggests that moderate drinking (3 – 14 drinks a week) may be
associated with a lower risk of heart attack, while heavier drinking may well
increase the risk of heart attack, heart failure, stroke and high blood
pressure.

As smoking is also common among alcohol drinkers, and smokers and drinkers
frequently share similar behavioural and lifestyle patterns, it is currently
unclear whether it is the combined or independent effects of smoking and
alcohol that greatly raises cardiovascular risk.

Nonetheless, the health problems associated with excessive smoking and
drinking are extensive. Public health efforts to minimise the dangers of both
smoking and drinking may significantly improve the well-being of society.

## Benefits of kicking the habit

It is important to realise that quitting smoking can improve your quality of
life – physically, emotionally and financially. It can help you and those
around you breathe better and live longer.

People who stop smoking generally have an improved sense of smell and taste,
feel less stressed and become more energetic. They will usually have younger
looking skin and improved fertility. Their loved ones will be healthier as
passive smoking is reduced.

For people who drink too much, alcohol tolerance can lead to false reassurance
that they are drinking within limits, since they do not feel drunk. Health
benefits of reducing alcohol intake include weight loss, a reduced risk of
many forms of cancer, less anxiety, clearer skin, no hangovers and better
self-esteem.

## How to quit

Smokers who quit smoking with support are more likely to succeed than those
who do it on their own. Hence, it is helpful for those trying to stop to
consult a health professional on engage a smoking cessation programme.

For regular, very heavy drinkers, stopping alcohol consumption abruptly can be
dangerous. They should therefore consult their doctors to manage the
withdrawal symptoms.

Always remember that our health is important to us and our families, and we
should take care to safeguard it.

19.APR.2017

![img](/images/default-source/doctor/chia-

stanley4651df7749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.png?sfvrsn=befbc1e_4)

##### Chia Stanley

###### Cardiologist

Mount Elizabeth Hospital

Dr Stanley Chia is an interventional cardiologist and physician at Mount
Elizabeth Hospital and Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital, Singapore.

View Profile | See Articles

### In this article

### Is this article helpful?

  * Yes
  * No

### Article Tags

  * Heart 
  * Cancer 
  * Lung 
  * Liver 
  * Smoking 
  * Alcohol 

#### Suggested Articles

  * ![ndp-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/ndp-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=360b01e_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### 10 Unique Health Facts about the Average Singaporean

As we celebrate our country this National Day, let’s not forget to celebrate
the great strides we’ve made in healthcare!

  * ![Stress and your heart](/images/default-source/default-album/stress-heart-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=501b61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How Does Stress Affect Your Heart?

Evidence shows that stress is a risk factor for heart disease, but how exactly
does stress affect your heart?

  * ![doc-patient-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/doc-patient-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=499fb01e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 10 Secrets You Need to Stop Hiding from Your Doctor

When it comes to discussing more personal issues with doctors, it’s tempting
to hide certain details. Yet, by doing so, you may be putting your health at
risk.

  * ![chest-pain-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/chest-pain-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e934b11e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What Could Chest Pain Mean?

The good news is that not all chest pain signals a heart problem. Dr Ooi Yau
Wei explains the possible causes of chest pain and how to tell if the pain is
heart-related.

  * ![senior-couple-jogging-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/senior-couple-jogging-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b2fde91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Prevent a Stroke

Most strokes are preventable. Dr Michael Lim, cardiologist, talks about the
importance of prevention and what you should do.

  * ![PH 380 \(Desktop\) Singles NEW4](/images/default-source/default-album/ph-380-\(desktop\)-singles-new4.jpg?sfvrsn=27f0a51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #4: Quit Smoking!

Smokers are up to 3 times more likely to suffer heart attacks. The sooner you
quit, the more you can reduce your chances of getting sick.

  * ![red-wine-tn2](/images/default-source/default-album/red-wine-tn2.jpg?sfvrsn=e25fea1a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Price of Overindulgence: Alcohol and Liver Damage

Dr Desmond Wai explains how drinking too much alcohol can cause serious liver
damage.

  * ![man-with-chest-pain-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/man-with-chest-pain-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=7fffe91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How Can I Stop a Heart Attack?

Heart attacks are the 2nd most common cause of death after cancer in Singapore
– but help is available for if you are diagnosed and treated early.

  * ![Endoscopic ultrasound](/images/default-source/default-album/endoscopic-ultrasound-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=c89e8a1e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Endoscopic Ultrasound: What You Need to Know

Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS) can help pinpoint the exact cause of your symptoms
for a more accurate diagnosis. Continue reading to find out more.

  * ![Surgery for prostate cancer](/images/default-source/default-album/prostate-gland-removal-singapore-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=f40a871e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Surgery for Prostate Cancer – Treatment Options

If your doctor has recommended removing your cancerous prostate, ease your
concerns over complications and treatment costs with advanced robotic
treatment method and insurance coverage.

  * ![All about Arrhythmias](/images/default-source/default-album/arrhythmia-guide-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=2cb7801e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Did Your Heart Skip a Beat? All about Arrhythmia

An irregular heartbeat is common and can be harmless, but it may also signal a
more serious heart problem.

  * ![What is Minimally Invasive Prostatectomy?](/images/default-source/default-album/minimally-invasive-prostatectomy-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=a059811e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What is Minimally Invasive Prostatectomy?

Are you a suitable candidate for minimally invasive prostatectomy? Here’s
everything you need to know about this robot-assisted procedure.

  * ![Change your lifestyle and reduce cancer risk](/images/default-source/default-album/lifestyle-reduce-cancer-risk-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=4880811e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Change Your Lifestyle and Reduce Cancer Risk

Your food choices and level of physical activity are important factors for
lowering your cancer risk.

  * ![10 common heart conditions](/images/default-source/default-album/common-heart-conditions-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=737a821e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 10 Common Heart Conditions in Singapore

What is CAD? Is a heart attack the same as a heart failure? What is
arrhythmia? Here’s a guide to everything you need to know about common heart
conditions.

  * ![Foods for those with fatty liver](/images/default-source/default-album/fatty-liver-diet-tn2a41e17749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=338c821e_6)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 10 Common Food Choices for People with Fatty Liver Disease

Here are 10 food choices to help lower the risk of liver failure.

  * ![Cancer diet myths debunked](/images/default-source/default-album/cancer-diet-myths-debunked-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=1b5831e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 4 Common Cancer Diet Myths Debunked

Are these myths about cancer-causing foods true or false?

  * ![pulse-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/pulse-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=7479b71e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What is Your Pulse Trying to Tell You?

Your heart rate could give you helpful information about your current health
and clue you in on potential health problems.

  * ![What does a heart attack feel like ](/images/default-source/default-album/what-does-a-heart-attack-feel-like-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=9e2b51e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What Does a Heart Attack Feel Like?

Here, we explain all the facts you need to know about heart attacks, as well
as the symptoms to look out for – from the obvious (eg. chest pain) to the
less obvious (eg. fatigue).

  * ![Fasting after heart surgery](/images/default-source/default-album/fasting-after-heart-surgery-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=503bbd1e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Fasting After Heart Surgery

What happens when you’ve had a heart surgery just before Ramadan?

  * ![6 common scans to check your heart](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-scopes-scans-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=99eabd1e_6)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Common Scans to Check Your Heart

Dr Ong Hean Yee, cardiologist, shares 5common scans your doctor may perform to
scope out your heart health.

  * ![Stents - how they help your heart](/images/default-source/default-album/angioplasty-stents-guide-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=978bbd1e_6)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Angioplasty & Stents: What You Need to Know

What is a stent and how does it treat heart disease?

  * ![Help your dad stay healthy](/images/default-source/default-album/dads-health-ageing-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=3ea7bd1e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Help Your Dad Stay Healthy as He Ages

Is your father going for regular health screening?

  * ![Can watching sports cause a heart attack?](/images/default-source/default-album/watching-sports-heart-attack-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=104dbe1e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Can Watching the World Cup Cause Heart Attacks?

Is watching the big game giving you too much stress and excitement? Can
watching sports increase your risk of a heart attack?

  * ![Screening heart disease](/images/default-source/health-articles/heart-xray-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=3880e91a_6)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### What are the Screening Options for Heart Disease?

Dr Paul Chiam, cardiologist at Mount Elizabeth Hospital, discusses the tests
used to screen for heart disease.

  * ![Getting tested for prostate cancer](/images/default-source/default-album/getting-tested-prostate-cancer-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=9a62be1e_6)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Why Should You Take a Prostate Exam?

You shouldn’t fear having your prostate checked, as early discovery and
treatment of prostate cancer can lead to promising results.

  * ![Health conditions linked to stress](/images/default-source/default-album/conditions-linked-to-stress-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e26ebe1e_8)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Conditions Linked to Stress

Tired? Irritable? Heart racing? Can’t sleep? Feel sick? You could be stressed…

  * ![Exercising my heart safely](/images/default-source/default-album/safe-heart-exercise-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=7eabbe1e_6)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How Far Can I Safely Push My Heart When Exercising?

Listen to your body and understand your limits before attempting to go past
your maximum heart rate during a workout.

  * ![Is it Colorectal Cancer or Haemorrhoids](/images/default-source/default-album/colorectal-cancer-or-haemorrhoids-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=1c56b81e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Bleeding Bottom: Is It Piles or Colorectal Cancer?

Dr Mark Wong, general surgeon, explains the differences, symptoms and
treatments for piles and colorectal cancer.

  * ![Colorectal Cancer Prevention Tips](/images/default-source/default-album/colorectal-cancer-facts-myths-tn2f39dc7749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=9e86bf1e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Prevent Colorectal Cancer with these Tips

Colorectal cancer is mostly a very slow-growing disease and highly curable if
caught early. Getting screened and catching polyps before they turn cancerous
is a simple measure to take. We speak to Dr Mark Wong to get the facts.

  * ![Hidden Causes of Stomach Cancer](/images/default-source/default-album/stomach-cancer-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=7256ba1e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Hidden Causes of Stomach (Gastric) Cancer

Stomach cancer is the 4th most common cancer worldwide. But what causes it? Dr
Melvin Look explains the causes, risks and symptoms of stomach cancer.

  * ![How to Treat High Blood Pressure](/images/default-source/default-album/treating-high-blood-pressure-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=39eba1e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Treat High Blood Pressure

Officially, high blood pressure affects 27.3% of the population in Singapore.
But there are many more people who don’t know they have it. So, how can we go
about treating this silent killer?

  * ![Women’s health myths busted](/images/default-source/default-album/womens-health-myths-busted-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=8950ba1e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 8 Women’s Health Myths Busted

True or false? We break down 8 common myths surrounding women’s health.

  * ![What is a heart attack?](/images/default-source/default-album/what-is-a-heart-attack-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=af30b41e_0)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### How Heart Attack Signs Differ in Men & Women

Is there ‘gender equality’ in heart attacks? The short answer is no. Here’s
what you need to know about the gender differences in heart attack risk and
symptoms.

  * ![5 Heart-Healthy Diet Tips](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-healthy-diet-tips-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=ed1cb51e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Heart-Healthy Diet Tips

As heart disease could lead to a heart attack or stroke, it is important to
make healthy lifestyle changes sooner rather than later. Here are 5 eating
tips for a healthier heart.

  * ![Your guide to a strong and healthy heart](/images/default-source/default-album/guide-to-strong-healthy-heart-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=eb3bb51e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Your Guide to a Strong and Healthy Heart

Little daily habits play an important role in keeping your heart healthy. Dr
Kenneth Guo gives tips on how to strengthen your heart.

  * ![What you need to know about kidney cysts.](/images/default-source/default-album/what-you-need-to-know-about-kidney-cysts-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=ea8db51e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Bubble Trouble: What You Need to Know About Kidney Cysts

It can be worrying to find out you have a kidney cyst, especially as the
condition does not always come with symptoms. Dr Tan Yau Min clarifies what
you need to know.

  * ![Will a Holiday Binge Ruin Your Healthy Diet?](/images/default-source/default-album/will-a-holiday-binge-ruin-your-healthy-diet-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b794b51e_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Will a Holiday Binge Ruin Your Healthy Diet?

Many people feel guilty for eating too much, or even dread stepping on the
scales after the holidays. But occasional overeating is unlikely to have a
long-term impact on your health – and here’s why.

  * ![checking-blood-pressure-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/checking-blood-pressure-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e585e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Why Blood Pressure Control is Important: Dangers of High Blood Pressure

Dr Paul Chiam discusses the dangers of high blood pressure and the different
treatment options to reduce it.

  * ![High Blood Pressure: How high is too high?](/images/default-source/default-album/high-blood-pressure-how-high-is-too-high-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b4b1b51e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### High Blood Pressure: How High is Too High?

When is blood pressure considered too high? Find out why blood pressure
guidelines have recently changed in the United States, and what it means for
you.

  * ![what-is-causing-your-heartburn-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/gerd-causing-heartburn-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e4bb61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What is Causing Your Heartburn?

Suffering from that familiar burning pain in your chest more than twice a
week? Dr Poh Choo Hean explains what may be causing your pain.

  * ![wholegrains-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/wholegrains-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=126db61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Why is it Important to Eat Whole Grains?

You have heard time and again that eating whole grains is the healthy way to
go. But why? Dietitians tell us how exactly whole grains are beneficial for
our health.

  * ![heart-valve-surgery-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-valve-surgery-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=856eb61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Keyhole Surgery to Repair Heart Valves

Minimally invasive surgery can improve treatment and recovery time for
patients with damaged heart valves.

  * ![Asthma attack](/images/default-source/default-album/asthma-attack-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=fa7eb61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Help Someone Survive an Asthma Attack

Someone around you starts wheezing and coughing vigorously. What should you
do?

  * ![breast cancer risk](/images/default-source/default-album/breast-cancer-risk-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=c39bb61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How Likely Will You Get Breast Cancer?

Less than 10% of breast cancers are due to genetic predisposition. Dr Tan Yah
Yuen explains how doctors calculate your risk of breast cancer, and what
preventive options you have based on your risk.

  * ![tavi-heart-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/tavi-heart-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=d8bab61e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### TAVI: A Game Changer in Heart Surgery

Any heart surgery comes with risks, thus the transcatheter aortic valve
implantation (TAVI) to improve the treatment of deadly heart diseases has been
a welcomed effort.

  * ![gynaecology-mis-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/gynaecology-mis-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=95db71e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Minimally Invasive Surgery: Improving Treatment of Women’s Cancers

Dr Lisa Wong, gynaecologist, explains how minimally invasive surgery improves
treatment of gynaecological cancers.

  * ![obesity-diabetes-heart-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/obesity-diabetes-heart-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=5603b71e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Relationship Between Obesity, Diabetes and the Heart

We have been told one too many times that being overweight or obese is bad,
but did you know the extent of damage obesity has on your health?

  * ![prostate cancer](/images/default-source/default-album/prostate-cancer-tn-\(1\).jpg?sfvrsn=2c12b71e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Can Prostate Cancer Be Cured?

Prostate cancer is widespread but can be kept at bay through early screening
and treatment. Dr Gerald Tan, urologist, explains how.

  * ![heart-rate-zone-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-rate-zone-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=7c19b71e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Truth of the Fat Burning Zone: What is the Best Heart Rate to Lose

Fat?

If you’re looking to lose weight and keep fit, you might have heard of the fat
burning zone theory. But what is the assumption behind this theory, and is it
valid?

  * ![coffee-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/coffee-tn6585d37749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=ea3ab01e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Coffee, Yay or Nay? Here’s What Caffeine really Does to Your Heart and

Brain

Your morning cup does way more than boost your energy. Dr Ooi Yau Wei talks
about how caffeine affects your health.

  * ![allergies-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/allergies-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=93a6b01e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Could You be Allergic to these Common Foods? Here's How to Tell

Allergies are at best annoying, and at worst life-threatening. Here’s how to
identify an allergy when you have one, and what to do when an allergy acts up.

  * ![food-choke-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/food-choke-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=1fd3b11e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Common Choking Hazards and What to Do if You Choke

Dr Dennis Chua explains what happens when food goes down the wrong pipe, and
the most common scenarios where it happens.

  * ![woman-arm-pain-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/woman-arm-pain-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=a0deb11e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Know if You are Having a Silent Heart Attack

Silent heart attacks are more common than we think, and they can happen
without the victim realising it. Cardiologist Dr Leslie Tay talks about the
subtle signs you should watch out for.

  * ![mri-radiology-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/mri-radiology-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=8884b11e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Advances in Prostate Cancer Screening and Detection

Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers in men but it is a difficult
cancer to diagnose. Dr Eugene Ong and Dr Ng Chee Kwan talks about how advances
in imaging technology benefits patients at risk of prostate cancer.

  * ![fathers-day-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/fathers-day-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=c005b21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 6 Father's Day Gift Ideas to Keep Dad Healthy

This Father's Day, celebrate dad by giving him the gift of health.

  * ![woman-thyroid-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/woman-thyroid-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=8528b21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Heal Your Thyroid

Dr Dennis Chua talks about the thyroid and the common conditions associated
with it.

  * ![mom-daughter-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/mom-daughter-tn.jpg?Status=Master&sfvrsn=e8d6b21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Will You Inherit Your Mother's Health?

Like mother, like child. It is no news that your mum has played a huge role in
shaping who you are – but when it comes to your health, don’t be too quick to
blame her genes.

  * ![surgery-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/surgery-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=3e0b21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Advantages of Robotic Surgery for Colorectal Cancer

Dr Dean Koh, colorectal surgeon at Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital, talks
about the advancements in the surgical treatment of colorectal cancer.

  * ![colon-cancer-doctor-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/colon-cancer-doctor-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=ab82b21e_0)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### What are the Current Treatment Options Available for Colorectal Cancer?

Dr Dean Koh gives updates on the current treatment options available for
colorectal cancer.

  * ![colonoscopy-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/colonoscopy-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e483b21e_0)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### How is Colonoscopy Performed?

Dr Dean Koh, colorectal surgeon, talks about colonoscopy and how the procedure
is done.

  * ![colorectal-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/colorectal-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=ca84b21e_0)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### What is Colorectal Cancer?

Colorectal cancer is the most common cancer in Singapore. Dr Dean Koh helps us
to understand more.

  * ![cholesterol-drugs-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/cholesterol-drugs-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=ee88b21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Developments that Help You Manage Your Cholesterol Level

Cardiologist Dr Nandakumar Ramasami talks about what cholesterol is, and the
latest developments in managing cholesterol levels.

  * ![boy-asthma-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/boy-asthma-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=5d8eb21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 7 Ways to Prevent Asthma Attacks

Asthma attacks are essentially signs that your asthma is not well controlled.
Here are 7 steps you can take to keep asthma attacks at bay.

  * ![mis-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/mis-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=4599b21e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Benefits of Minimally Invasive Surgery in Treating Colorectal Cancer

Dr Ooi Boon Swee, colorectal surgeon, explains the benefits of minimally
invasive and robot-assisted surgery for colorectal diseases.

  * ![mature-man-smile-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/mature-man-smile-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=97b9b31e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 3 Steps to Prevent Colorectal Cancer

Dr Dennis Koh, general surgeon at Mount Elizabeth Hospital, explains the
importance of screening in preventing colorectal cancer.

  * ![mature-doctor-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/mature-doctor-tn5604d07749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=fbbbb31e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What is a Colonoscopy and How to Prepare for It?

A colonoscopy every 10 years can help to prevent colon cancer. Learn about
procedure, how you can prepare for it, the risks involved, and who should go
for one.

  * ![young-woman-smile-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/young-woman-smile-tnb4acce7749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=1d13ad1e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How You Can Prevent Cervical Cancer

Dr Fong Kah Leng, obstetrician and gynaecologist, talks about the relationship
between HPV and cervical cancer, and why the HPV vaccine can help protect you.

  * ![mother-and-daughter](/images/default-source/default-album/mother-and-daughter845dce7749bf63eeab9aff0b00dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=cde2ad1e_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Understanding a Woman's Heart

Women's hearts are different from men's hearts, and require special attention.
Dr Stanley Chia explains the unique heart disease symptoms in women and how
women can care for their hearts.

  * ![runners2-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/runners2-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=57fee91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### How to Win the Race Against Sudden Cardiac Arrest

Even the fittest athletes can succumb to heart disease. Dr Leslie Tay,
cardiologist, advises on reducing the risk of sudden cardiac arrest during
sports.

  * ![happy-girl-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/happy-girl-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=26b1bc1c_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Laughter is Not the Best Medicine – Happy Heart Syndrome

The age-old adage – laughter is the best medicine – may not be accurate after
all. Dr Julian Tan explains happy heart syndrome.

  * ![heart-checkup-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-checkup-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=bb81e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### My Pounding Heart: Is it Anxiety or Atrial Fibrillation?

A fast, irregular heart beat can be triggered by anxiety or emotional stress,
but it may also be a symptom of a condition atrial fibrillation. Dr Kenneth
Ng, cardiologist, explains.

  * ![gastric-pain-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/gastric-pain-tn.jpg?Status=Master&sfvrsn=beeaa21d_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Gallstones: When Upper Tummy Pain Isn't Just Gastric Pain

The painful symptoms of gallstones are very often mistaken as gastric pain. Dr
Stephen Chang explains gallstone disease and its treatment options.

  * ![doctor-patient-consultation-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/doctor-patient-consultation-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=c284e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Ovarian Cancer: A Disease on the Rise

Ovarian cancer has been dubbed a silent killer as it often presents at a late
stage, resulting in low survival rates. Dr Elisa Koh explains the current
statistics and treatment methods for ovarian cancer.

  * ![operating-theatre-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/operating-theatre-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e41c7d1d_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Your Questions Answered: Living Donor Liver Transplant FAQ

Dr Stephen Chang, general surgeon specialising in liver transplant, answers
frequently asked questions by liver donors and recipients.

  * ![BC 3rd-Article Tile 260x300pixel](/images/default-source/default-album/bc-3rd-article-tile-260x300pixel.jpg?sfvrsn=f1cc781d_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### What if Something is Detected on My Mammogram?

Being told that something suspicious was found in your mammogram can be scary.
We guide you on what to expect on your follow-up tests.

  * ![man-abdomen-pain-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/man-abdomen-pain-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=9a287a1d_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Bare Truth of Pancreatic Cancer

Dr Tan Yu-Meng, general surgeon at Mount Elizabeth Hospitals, gives us the
stark facts about pancreatic cancer and the treatment options available for
patients.

  * ![patient-doctor-hands-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/patient-doctor-hands-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=146ff91a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### New Hope with Evolving Treatments for Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Cancer

(PNETs)

Dr Liau Kui Hin explains pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (PNETs) and the
newer, effective treatments for this uncommon cancer.

  * ![pregnant-woman-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/pregnant-woman-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=26d0711d_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Saving Your Chances for a Baby: Fertility Hope for Women with Cancer

If you are a woman of childbearing age who's battling cancer, know your
options. Dr Ann Tan explains fertility preservation in cancer patients.

  * ![sports-injury-over-40-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/sports-injury-over-40-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=aafce91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Hope for Late-Stage Ovarian Cancer Patients

Dr Lim Hwee Yong, senior consultant oncologist at Mount Elizabeth Novena
Hospital, sheds light on the symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of ovarian
cancer.

  * ![pink-ribbon3-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/pink-ribbon3-tn6976ce7349bf63eeab9aff0500dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=dfc9ad1a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Unexpected Ways Plastic Surgery is Used to Help Breast Cancer Victims

For women who have lost their breasts to cancer, reconstruction may help
restore confidence and emotional well-being. Dr Felicia Tan talks to us about
breast reconstruction surgery.

  * ![260-compressor](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/infographics-desktop/260-compressor.jpg?sfvrsn=4aef901a_2)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### What's Key to Surviving Breast Cancer?

Still hesitating to go for that life-saving mammogram? Conquer your hurdles by
remembering these truths.

  * ![pink-ribbon-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/pink-ribbon-tn41adf17349bf63eeab9aff0500dba087.jpg?sfvrsn=f712921a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Surviving Breast Cancer: Should I Save My Breast?

Dr Wee Siew Bock, breast surgeon at Mount Elizabeth Hospital, address your
questions and concerns about breast conserving surgery (lumpectomy).

  * ![patient-and-nurse-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/patient-and-nurse-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=3234921a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Simple, Radical, Nipple Sparing? Making Sense of Mastectomy (Breast

Removal) Surgery

Dr Tan Yah Yuen, breast surgeon at Mount Elizabeth Hospitals, answers the
questions you may have about mastectomies.

  * ![heart-truth-8-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-truth-8-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=51aea51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #8: Heart Issues in the Family

A history of heart disease in the family is a risk factor, so go for a heart
screening to identify any problems early.

  * ![Are heart murmurs harmless?](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-murmurs-harmless-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=39abbd1e_4)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Are Your Heart Murmurs Harmless?

Dr Dinesh Nair shares when heart murmurs can become a cause of concern.

  * ![heart-truth-6-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/ph-380-\(desktop\)-singles-new6.jpg?sfvrsn=5090a51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #6: Go Easy on Yourself

Emotional stress has been shown to trigger heart attacks. Sometimes known as
broken heart syndrome, it may be triggered by episodes of grief, anger or
fear.

  * ![heart-truth-2-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/ph-380-\(desktop\)-singles-new2.jpg?sfvrsn=348ba51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #2: Everything in Moderation

Eat and drink well. Like a car, your body needs good quality fuel to run
smoothly.

  * ![heart-truth-7-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/ph-380-\(desktop\)-singles-new7.jpg?sfvrsn=fc86a51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #7: All Take Note!

Guys – listen up. Men generally face a higher risk of heart disease than
women. Yet, cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death for women.

  * ![heart-truth-5](/images/default-source/default-album/ph-380-\(desktop\)-singles-new5.jpg?sfvrsn=ec84a51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #5: Get Moving!

Any form of aerobic exercise is good for the heart. Aim to exercise for at
least 30 minutes, 5 times a week.

  * ![heart-truth-1-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-truth-1-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=58b6a51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #1: Know Your Risk

Knowing your risks is the first step towards preventing heart disease.

  * ![heart-truth-3-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/heart-truth-3-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=9c89a51a_0)VIEW INFOGRAPHIC

__Infographic

#### Heart Truth #3: Weighing the Risks

Being overweight increases your risk of heart attack by 3 times.

  * ![colon-cancer-awareness-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/colon-cancer-awareness-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=a569f31a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### New Hope for Colon Cancer Patients

Dr Ho Kok Sun, general surgeon at Mount Elizabeth Hospital, talks about
preventing and treating colorectal cancer.

  * ![girl-fever-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/girl-fever-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=21bbc01a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Lesser Known Facts About Pneumonia

According to the WHO, pneumonia is the single largest infectious cause of
death in children worldwide. Dr Philip Eng shares 5 things you might not know
about it.

  * ![liver-surgery-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/liver-surgery-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=a00cf01a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Is My Liver Abnormal?

Many patients with liver disease often may not discover it until it is too
late. Know the signs so you can seek help earlier.

  * ![patient-happy-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/patient-happy-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e3fee91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Shedding Light on Breast Conserving Surgery

A breast cancer diagnosis does not mean having to lose your breast, now that
many treatment options are available.

  * ![stomach-problem-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/stomach-problem-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=5a78f91a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### What You Should Know About Fibroids and Fertility

Dr Kelly Loi discusses fibroids, how they affect fertility in women, and the
ways to identify, evaluate and manage fibroids.

  * ![doctor-and-senior-patient-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/doctor-and-senior-patient-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e784e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Advanced Techniques for the Treatment of Kidney Cancer

****Kidney cancer is a silent killer, with symptoms usually only showing up in
its late stage. Learn about its causes and treatment.

  * ![swimmer-couple-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/swimmer-couple-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=a7fbe91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Swimmers are the Best Lovers: What Your Preferred Exercise Says About You

Your sporting preference can say a lot about your personality. Here are the
exercises that best suit your character – and how they can help your heart
health.

  * ![woman-thinking-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/woman-thinking-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=4387e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 6 Insurance Questions to Ask Before Your Heart Procedure

When it comes to heart procedures, the last thing you need is for the
treatment to burn a hole in your wallet. Talk to your insurance agent and find
out how to get yourself covered.

  * ![healthy-man-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/healthy-man-tn.jpg?Status=Master&sfvrsn=8d82e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Cancer Prevention Theories: Myths & Facts

There’s a lot of information out there about what causes cancer and what you
can do to prevent it. Dr Dean Koh weighs the evidence for 6 common theories on
cancer prevention.

  * ![haze-singapore-tnail](/images/default-source/default-album/haze-singapore-tnail.jpg?sfvrsn=2417f31a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Effects of Haze on Your Health

Dr Ong Kian Chung, respiratory specialist, explains the health effects of haze
and how you should protect yourself.

  * ![heart-assistant-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-assistant-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=e882e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### The Mechanical Heart Assistant

The left ventricular assist device is increasingly becoming a viable option
for heart failure patients around the world.

  * ![headache-woman-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/headache-woman-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=ad5cea1a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Understanding a Vasovagal Episode (Fainting Spell) and its Causes

Recognise the symptoms of a fainting spell and know how you can help those
around you. _  
_

  * ![heart-surgeon-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-surgeon-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b480e91a_2) READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Coronary Artery Disease: How Stents Prevent Heart Attacks

Heart stents open blocked arteries (that can cause heart attacks) and lessen
the risk of clogged arteries in the future. A senior cardiologist talks us
through the procedure and how it prevents heart disease.

  * ![checking-heart-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/checking-heart-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=bb85e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Heart Screening Checklist for a Healthy Heart

The problem with heart disease – aside from the fact that it’s heart disease –
is that, without health screenings, it’s unlikely you will know there is
anything wrong until it is too late.

  * ![swimming-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/swimming-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b3e6f01a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 4 Reasons Swimmers Have Great Heart Health

Here are the top 4 reasons why swimmers have some of the fittest hearts.

  * ![shortness-of-breath-runner-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/shortness-of-breath-runner-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=fcfde91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Heart Attacks, Sudden Deaths and Athletes

An active lifestyle may not guarantee your immunity to heart attacks. We
explore the increasing occurrence of heart attacks among athletes and why they
happen.

  * ![blood-pressure-measuring-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/blood-pressure-measuring-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=9ffae91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Causes of High Blood Pressure

High blood pressure is a problem, but what’s causing it? Here are 5 common
reasons.

  * ![happy-family-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/happy-family-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=3a83e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Easy Ways to Strengthen the Heart

The price of high blood pressure means you shouldn't ignore making healthy
lifestyle choices. These simple changes to your habits can do wonders for your
heart.

  * ![doctor-patient-heart-diagnosis-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/doctor-patient-heart-diagnosis-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=2184e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Aortic Aneurysm Symptoms and Treatments

Aortic aneurysms can be silent killers. Learn about its signs and how to treat
it.

  * ![patient-and-heart-doctor-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/patient-and-heart-doctor-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b9fee91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### A Heart Surgery that Does Not Cut Your Chest Open

A pioneering surgery for heart disease is proving quicker and safer than
conventional alternatives.

  * ![patient-after-surgery-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/patient-after-surgery-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=5affe91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Your Guide to Heart Bypass Surgery

Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) can remove blockages in the arteries
that severely restrict the flow of blood to the heart, helping you lead a more
active life.

  * ![heart-surgeons2-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-surgeons2-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=6981e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Coronary Angiogram, Stenting and Heart Bypass: What to Expect

Coronary angiograms, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and heart stenting
are 3 common procedures for detecting and treating coronary heart disease.

  * ![patient-doctor-hands-tn](/images/default-source/default-album/patient-doctor-hands-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=146ff91a_0)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Diabetes and Heart Disease: How Cardiologists can Help

For a diabetic, the problem doesn’t stop there. In fact, the leading cause of
death by far among diabetics is heart disease.

  * ![healthcare-money-saving-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/healthcare-money-saving-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=6483e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Money-Saving Ways to Help Your Heart

Heart health screening may cost you some money. But maintaining a healthy
heart can help to save your life. Here are a few suggestions.

  * ![surgeons-make-heart-shape-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/surgeons-make-heart-shape-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=58fce91a_2)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### TAVI/TAVR: New Hope for Elderly Heart Patients

TAVI is a minimally invasive procedure that offers hope to patients too old or
too ill for conventional aortic valve replacement operations.

  * ![cardiologist-and-patient-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/cardiologist-and-patient-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=8685e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 5 Questions to Ask Your Cardiologist

Going for a heart procedure can be a nerve-racking experience – but it doesn’t
have to be. Know exactly what to expect by asking your cardiologist these 5
questions.

  * ![heart-surgery-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-surgery-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=9380e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Top Heart Operations to Beat Heart Disease

We recommend the most common heart operations to beat heart disease.

  * ![basketball-athlete-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/basketball-athlete-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=55fbe91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Sports Heart Expert Tells All

It’s not unusual to hear of professional athletes suffering a heart attack at
the peak of their game. Cardiologists can provide expert advice to athletes.

  * ![heart-doctor-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-doctor-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=8681e91a_2)WATCH VIDEO

__Video

#### What is Your Advice for General Heart Health?

Dr Paul Chiam looks at lifestyle changes that promote a healthy cardiovascular
system.

  * ![job-stress-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/job-stress-tn.jpg?Status=Master&sfvrsn=6280e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Is Your Job Bad for Your Heart?

Various kinds of jobs create different types of stress, and whether the stress
becomes harmful depends on the individual.

  * ![patient-in-wheelchair-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/patient-in-wheelchair-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=cefee91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Diabetes and Amputation: How to Save Your Leg

Complications arising from diabetes and Peripheral Arterial Disease often
result in patients losing a limb, but it does not have to be that way.

  * ![runners-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/runners-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=8fee91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### Sudden Cardiac Death in Modern Day Athletes

This is a phenomenon that has been rearing its head much more in recent years.
Athlete or not, it is important to understand its possible causes.

  * ![calculating-bills-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/calculating-bills-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=b0fae91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 4-Step Guide to Paying for a Heart Procedure in Singapore

Your 4-step guide to using your Integrated Shield Plan or Medisave to pay for
a coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), coronary angiogram or heart
stenting.

  * ![heart-attack-woman3-tn](/images/default-source/Health-Articles/thumbnail/heart-attack-woman3-tn.jpg?sfvrsn=7182e91a_2)READ ARTICLE

__Article

#### 6 Signs of Heart Attacks in Women

Heart attack symptoms in women are often 'silent' but the consequences of not
noticing them can be life threatening. Besides frequent heart screenings,
knowing the signs can help prevent heart attacks.

##### Browse other categories

Lifestyle

Pregnancy

Food

Diabetes

Cholesterol

Sport

Shoulder

Foot

Leg

Fracture

Digestive Disorders

Heart

Cancer

Minimally Invasive Surgery

Vascular Disease

Women

Breast Cancer

Liver Cancer

Liver

Elderly

Kidney

Obesity

Fertility

Cervical Cancer

Liver Transplant

Injury

Accident and Emergency

Abdomen

Colorectal Cancer

Gynaecological Disorders

Arthritis

Osteoporosis

Colon

Eye

Cataract

Women's Cancers

Prostate Cancer

Hand

Thyroid

Men

Children

Ear

Infectious Disease

Bones

Dementia

  * Share
  * __
  * __
  * __

### Talk to us

Consult a specialist to learn more about your condition

Find a Doctor Find a Doctor

##### __Send me health tips & articles

Please enter a valid email address.

By clicking Submit, I agree to Parkway Group’s Terms & Conditions & Privacy
Policy and understand that I may opt out of Parkway Group’s subscriptions at
any time.

### About Mount Elizabeth

Mount Elizabeth has been serving Asia Pacific for over 30 years as a leading
medical hub, earning the trust of patients with its strategic pairing of
exceptional medical talents with advanced technology.

Staffed by a large team of dedicated professionals and a diverse mix of highly
skilled specialists, both hospitals have received the renowned Joint
Commission International (JCI) accreditation of quality care.

Whatever your health concern may be, our specialists and nurses are here to
help you achieve the best possible quality of life.

### Mount Elizabeth Hospital

3 Mount Elizabeth  
Singapore 228510  
Appointment & Enquiry:  
+65 6250 0000

Make an Appointment

### Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital

38 Irrawaddy Road  
Singapore 329563  
Appointment & Enquiry:  
+65 6898 6898

Make an Appointment

©2018 Mount Elizabeth Hospitals

  * About Us
  * Medical Reviewers
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Service

  * Share

  * __
  * __
  * __

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

