

![Marijuana Moment](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/marijuana-moment-logo-banner-4.png)

  * Politics
  * Science & Health
  * Culture
  * Business
  * Video
  * Newsletter
    * Subscribe
  * Bill Tracking
    * About
    * Login Instructions
    * All 2019 Cannabis Bills ðŸ”’
    * Bill Hearing Calendar ðŸ”’
  * About Marijuana Moment
    * Support Marijuana Moment

Connect with us

  *     * 

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/CRTV-323-970X90.png)

![Marijuana Moment](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/marijuana-moment-logo-banner-2.png) ![Marijuana

Moment](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/marijuana-

moment-logo-banner-4.png)

## Marijuana Moment

#### Researchers Injected People With THC To Test Their Motor Skills

  * Politics
  * Science & Health
  * Culture
  * Business
  * Video
  * Newsletter
    * Subscribe
  * Bill Tracking
    * About
    * Login Instructions
    * All 2019 Cannabis Bills ðŸ”’
    * Bill Hearing Calendar ðŸ”’
  * About Marijuana Moment
    * Support Marijuana Moment

### Science & Health

# Researchers Injected People With THC To Test Their Motor Skills

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3b71d81faa493372a683c777756df1f4?s=46&d=mm&r=g)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3b71d81faa493372a683c777756df1f4?s=46&d=mm&r=g)

Published

9 months ago

on

September 27, 2018

By

Kyle Jaeger __

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/marijuana-

plants-9.jpg)

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

  * __Share

  * __Tweet
  * __

  * __

  * __

__

Scientists injected people with pure THC and gave them a series of tests to
learn how marijuana affects basic motor functions.

What, you don't normally consume cannabis intravenously? Moving onâ€¦

With a majority of states having passed laws legalizing marijuana in some
form, there's strong interest in determining how its components impact motor
skills. To that end, researchers at Yale School of Medicine recruited 23
former cannabis consumers, administered low- and high-THC infusions and and
had them perform several psychomotor tests.

The results, released online on Wednesday, are set to be published in the
Journal of Psychopharmacology.

What the researchers found is generally consistent with earlier studies: the
THC infusion "resulted in robust and significant deficits in motor
performance" in a dose-dependent manner.

There was one testâ€”where participants were asked to recognize a numeric
sequence displayed on a screen and then press a response padâ€”that showed no
significant difference in performance with or without THC. But when it comes
to fine motor skills and response time, the study showed evidence that THC
impaired the participants. The higher dose (0.03 mg/kg) led to poorer
performance compared to the low dose (0.015 mg/kg).

The dosing was based on previous research into the blood plasma concentration
of THC after smoking a standard joint. The higher dose is roughly equivalent
to three-quarters of a joint and the lower dose is equivalent to one-quarter
of a joint, according to the study.

Impairment from THC has been soundly established in earlier research. But what
stood out to the researchers wasn't that THC seemed to impair psychomotor
skills; it was that participants who received the low and high dose THC
reported feeling equally high.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Screen-

Shot-2018-09-27-at-10.17.56-AM-794x1024.png)![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/Screen-Shot-2018-09-27-at-10.17.56-AM-794x1024.png)

Via the Journal of Psychopharmacology.

"Perhaps even more concerning is the fact that even though the high dose of
THC produced greater psychomotor deficits, subjects were not able to
distinguish between levels of intoxication across the low- and high-dose
conditions. This suggests that it may be difficult for individuals to gauge
their level of psychomotor impairment based upon subjective feelings of
intoxication, which could lead to greater risk during psychomotor-dependent
behaviors."

The subjective self-reports seemed to reinforce the idea that the "high"
effects "plateau with increased doses of THC, while subjective alertness and
postural sway continue to worsen."

"Taken together, these data suggest that while several domains of motor
function are disrupted by THC, subjective feelings of intoxication are
dissociable from cannabinoid-induced psychomotor effects," the researchers
wrote.

There were a couple limitations to the study. First, it was designed to test
how THC alone impacts motor function, whereas most consumers are exposed to
numerous cannabinoids, including CBD, when they use marijuana. Second, the
participants hadn't used cannabis in at least the past three months, which
means the effects were likely more pronounced than they would be in a frequent
users whose developed a tolerance.

"These limitations notwithstanding, to our knowledge, this is the first
controlled study examining a range of psychomotor functions in humans during
the administration of several doses of IV THC," the researchers wrote.

"These results suggest that THC exhibits robust effects on fine motor control
and motor timing in a dose-dependent manner, which have implications for real
world psychomotor-dependent behaviors such as driving, weapon use, operating
machinery, work-related tasks, and skilled labor."

(The researchers each reported potential conflicts of interest, including
receiving grants from major pharmaceutical companies.)

> Jeff Sessions Breaks Cannabis Silence To Spread Fake News About A Marijuana
'Myth'

_Photo courtesy of Chris Wallis/Side Pocket Images._

Marijuana Moment is made possible with support from readers. If you rely on
our cannabis advocacy journalism to stay informed, please consider a monthly
Patreon pledge.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/plugins/patron-button-and-

widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/plugins/patron-button-and-widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)

Related Topics:

Up Next

A Complete History of Marijuana, According To Scientists

Don't Miss

Youth Marijuana Use Isn't Increasing After States Legalize, Meta-Analysis Of
55 Studies Concludes

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3b71d81faa493372a683c777756df1f4?s=60&d=mm&r=g)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3b71d81faa493372a683c777756df1f4?s=60&d=mm&r=g)

Kyle Jaeger

Kyle Jaeger is Marijuana Moment's Los Angeles-based associate editor. His work
has also appeared in High Times, VICE and attn.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/marijuana-

moment-logo-banner-2.png)

#### You may like

### Politics

# Congressional Report Raises Questions About Whether Marijuana Impairs

Driving

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3b71d81faa493372a683c777756df1f4?s=46&d=mm&r=g)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3b71d81faa493372a683c777756df1f4?s=46&d=mm&r=g)

Published

7 days ago

on

June 4, 2019

By

Kyle Jaeger __

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/car-keys-

marijuana.jpg)

Concerns expressed by lawmakers that marijuana legalization will make the
roads more dangerous might not be totally founded, a congressional research
body said in a recent report. In fact, the experts tasked by the House and
Senate with looking into the issue found that evidence about cannabis's
ability to impair driving is currently inconclusive.

While law enforcement has well-established tools to identify impaired driving
from alcohol, developing technology to do the same for cannabis has proved
difficult. Not only is the technology lacking, but questions remain as to how
THC affects driving skills in the first place and what levels of THC should be
considered safe.

"Although laboratory studies have shown that marijuana consumption can affect
a personâ€™s response times and motor performance, studies of the impact of
marijuana consumption on a driverâ€™s risk of being involved in a crash have
produced conflicting results, with some studies finding little or no increased
risk of a crash from marijuana usage," the Congressional Research Service
(CRS) wrote.

> What's more, "studies have been unable to consistently correlate levels of
marijuana consumption, or THC in a personâ€™s body, and levels of impairment."

Both advocates and opponents of marijuana reform strongly support finding a
resolution to the impaired driving detection issue. But experts aren't so
confident that researchers will be able to develop something akin to an
alcohol breathalyzer, as the most promising attempts have only been able to
determine whether a person has smoked within recent hours.

What's striking about the report from Congress's official research arm is that
it repeatedly states it's not clear that cannabis consumption is associated
with an increased risk of traffic accidents. In general, the issue has been
treated as something of a given in congressional hearings, with some lawmakers
arguing that loosening federal cannabis laws would lead to a spike in traffic
deaths.

That argument was echoed in a separate House Appropriations Committee report
that was released on Monday. A section of the document described ongoing
concerns about drugged driving "due to the increase in States legalizing
marijuana use" and designated funds to help law enforcement identify impaired
driving from cannabis.

The CRS report, which was published last month, signals that the problem isn't
quite as cut and dry as lawmakers might think.

Researchers have found on several occasions that traffic fatalities do not
increase after a state legalizes marijuana.

Of course, that doesn't change the fact that both opponents and supporters of
legalization generally caution against driving under the influence.

"Cannabis inhalation in a dose-response manner may influence certain aspects
of psychomotor performance, particularly in those who are more naive to its
effect," Paul Armentano, deputy director of NORML, told Marijuana Moment. "But
this influence is typically short-lived and is far less acute than the
psychomotor effects associate with alcohol."

"By contrast, THCâ€™s unique absorption profile and prolonged detection window
in blood makes it so thatâ€”unlike as is the case with alcoholâ€”the detection of
THC in blood is not necessarily indicative of either recency of use or
behavioral impairment," he said.

The congressional report discusses the limitations of technology in detecting
active impairment from cannabis and details previous studies on traffic trends
in states that have reformed their cannabis laws. It also lays out legislative
options for Congress to "aid policymaking around the issue of marijuana and
impairment."

As it stands, states have generally enforced impaired driving laws through one
of two processes. Some states "require that the state prove that a driverâ€™s
impairment was caused by the substance or behavior at issue" while others have
per se laws asserting that "a driver is automatically guilty of driving while
impaired if specified levels of a potentially impairing substance are found in
his or her body."

But it's significantly easier to prove impairment for alcohol however you cut
it, the report explains.

"Detecting impairment due to use of marijuana is more difficult. The body
metabolizes marijuana differently from alcohol," the authors wrote. "The level
of THC (the psychoactive ingredient of marijuana) in the body drops quickly
within an hour after usage, yet traces of THC (nonpsychoactive metabolites)
can still be found in the body weeks after usage of marijuana."

Further there is "as yet no scientifically demonstrated correlation between
levels of THC and degrees of impairment of driver performance, and
epidemiological studies disagree as to whether marijuana use by a driver
results in increased crash risk."

Detecting impairment from cannabis is additionally complicated by another
extraneous circumstance: variation in THC potency. The THC concentration
conundrum is exacerbated by the fact that the only source of federal,
research-grade cannabis "is considered by some researchers to be low quality,"
the report stated, referring to studies showing that the government's
marijuana supply does not chemically reflect what's available in state-legal
commercial markets.

CRS also looked at the "inconsistent" results of studies examining the effects
of cannabis use on traffic incidents. While some have indicated that
consumption poses an increased risk on the road, the report argues that some
may be conflating correlation and causation.

> "Relatively few epidemiological studies of marijuana usage and crash risk
have been conducted, and the few that have been conducted have generally found
low or no increased risk of crashes from marijuana use," CRS wrote.

After going through several other related issues, CRS laid out a couple of
choices for Congress when it comes to dealing with the impaired driving issue.
Those options include "continued research into whether a quantitative standard
can be established that correlates the level of THC in a personâ€™s body and the
level of impairment" and compiling "better data on the prevalence of marijuana
use by drivers, especially among drivers involved in crashes and drivers
arrested for impaired driving."

One of the last elements the report specifically focused on was federally
mandated drug testing for individuals in "safety sensitive" jobs in the
transportation sector. Interestingly, CRS seemed to suggest that, given the
issues they outlined with respect to difficulties identifying active
impairment from THC, the government should reevaluate whether suspensions for
testing positive should be permanent.

"CRS could not identify any data on how many safety-sensitive transportation
employees have lost their jobs as a result of positive tests for marijuana
use," the report states. "Considering the length of time that marijuana is
detectable in the body after usage, and the uncertainty about the impairing
effect of marijuana on driving performance, Congress and other federal
policymakers may elect to reexamine the rationale for testing all safety-
sensitive transportation workers for marijuana usage."

"Alternatively, Congress and federal policymakers may opt to maintain the
status quo until more research results become available," the report advised.

Armentano, of NORML, said that legislators should be way of enacting policies
focused on levels of THC or metabolites in drivers.

"As more states consider amending their cannabis consumption laws, lawmakers
would best served to avoid amending traffic safety laws in a manner that
relies solely on the presence of THC or its metabolites as determinants of
driving impairment," he said. "Otherwise, the imposition of traffic safety
laws may inadvertently become a criminal mechanism for law enforcement and
prosecutors to punish those who have engage in legally protected behavior and
who have not posed any actionable traffic safety threat."

> Marijuana Legalization Not Linked To Increased Traffic Deaths, Study Finds

Marijuana Moment is made possible with support from readers. If you rely on
our cannabis advocacy journalism to stay informed, please consider a monthly
Patreon pledge.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/plugins/patron-button-and-

widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/plugins/patron-button-and-widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)

Continue Reading

### Science & Health

# Legal Medical Marijuana Tied To Lower Opioid Use, Another Study Finds

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7ec118873f8ae787f77ede3d0d3ecc7b?s=46&d=mm&r=g)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7ec118873f8ae787f77ede3d0d3ecc7b?s=46&d=mm&r=g)

Published

2 weeks ago

on

May 29, 2019

By

Kimberly Lawson __

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/marijuana-

stethoscope-prescription-pad-rx.jpg)

Adding to the ever-growing body of research that suggests legal access to
marijuana may help mitigate the opioid crisis, a new study found that states
with medical cannabis laws have seen a drop in opioid prescriptions for people
aged 55 and younger.

Researchers from the University of Texas investigated prescription opioid use
among people with private insurance (as opposed to those on publicly funded
Medicare or Medicaid), and compared those rates in states with and without
medical marijuana.

"When results were examined within each individual age cohort, opioid
prescription rate varied depending on the stringency of state cannabis laws,"
the study states. "In particular, in states which implemented medical cannabis
use laws (but not other categories of cannabis liberalization laws), lower
rates of opioid prescription were seen in the younger age cohorts (18â€“25,
26â€“35, 36â€“45 and 46â€“54 years)."

The findings were published last week in the journal Preventive Medicine.

Building on previous studiesâ€”including one that found opioid-related overdose
deaths fell in states with legal marijuana dispensariesâ€”the researchers used
information from the database of one of the largest private health insurance
providers in the country. This was important, the study's authors write,
because this subset of people "may exhibit different behaviors from Medicare
and Medicaid subpopulations with regards to cannabis use."

Past research has shown states with medical marijuana laws have issued fewer
opioid prescriptions to people with government-funded health coverage.

The study population spanned more than four million individuals, which
researchers broke down by age group in their analysis.

In 2016, when the research was being conducted, five states had fully
legalized marijuana, 21 states had approved only medical cannabis and four
other states had simply decriminalized possession. At the time, 1,770,081
people were enrolled in private insurance in states with legal medical
marijuana access.

According to the study's results, the states with the lowest prescription
rates were those that had approved access to medical marijuana. When the
results were examined by age group, researchers found that these lower rates
were only seen in people ages 18 to 54.

> "Overall, age-stratified adjusted analysis showed lowest rate of opioid
prescription in states that allowed for medical cannabis use."

While the authors admit there may be "a public health benefit associated with
medical cannabis laws," they point out this decrease in opioid prescriptions
may also have to do with the fact that many states have implemented monitoring
programs and other legislation designed to restrict access to opioids.

But, as the study states, "These findings suggest a difference between the
privately insured versus Medicaid or Medicare insured populations, especially
those who are older adults. Research has shown that Medicaid and Medicare
beneficiaries generally have greater disability than those with commercial
insurance, perhaps because a proportion of beneficiaries qualify for Medicare
coverage based on a disability." As a result, it's possible that more patients
with public insurance have been prescribed opioids compared to the privately
insured.

Also, as the authors note, it's not surprising that older people have more
prescriptionsâ€”that just comes with age. They do wonder, however, if "these
patients are more likely to use cannabis as an adjunct therapeutic agent for
pain control."

"Baby Boomers, who are now in their mid- 50s and 60s, represent demographic
cohort who experienced illicit drug use, including cannabis, as a societal
norm, resulting from societal pressures and stresses in their youth," the
study states. "While younger adults appear to use cannabis with greater
frequency than older adults (aged 50 and above), studies reveal that cannabis
use among older adults may be increasing."

In fact, one recent study found that 3 percent of adults 65 and older reported
using cannabis in the past year. That's seven times the rate of Baby Boomers
who reported use a decade ago.

> Legal Medical Marijuana Associated With Lower Opioid Use Rates, Another
Study Finds

Marijuana Moment is made possible with support from readers. If you rely on
our cannabis advocacy journalism to stay informed, please consider a monthly
Patreon pledge.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/plugins/patron-button-and-

widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/plugins/patron-button-and-widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)

Continue Reading

### Science & Health

# CBD Might Help You Cut Back On Drinking Alcohol And Reduce Its Damaging

Effects, Study Says

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7ec118873f8ae787f77ede3d0d3ecc7b?s=46&d=mm&r=g)![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7ec118873f8ae787f77ede3d0d3ecc7b?s=46&d=mm&r=g)

Published

3 weeks ago

on

May 22, 2019

By

Kimberly Lawson __

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/kimzy-

nanney-1562047-unsplash.jpg)

CBD, the widely available cannabinoid touted for various health benefits, may
have the potential to help people with serious alcohol issues, according to a
new review of current scientific evidence.

Not only does cannabidiol appear to "facilitate drinking reduction," the
paper's authors write, but research also shows the compound "may provide
idiosyncratic protection to the liver and brain, which could reduce the
development and impact of alcohol-related liver disease and alcohol-related
brain injury."

The review, which is awaiting publication in the journal Frontiers in
Pharmacology, offers a comprehensive look at how promising the data is so far
regarding the effectiveness of CBD on alcohol use disorders (AUD). The
authors, however, also call for human clinical trials, of which none have been
published to date, to "pave the way for testing new harm reduction approaches
in AUD."

Researchers in France and Belgium reviewed 26 previous studies published
between 1974 and June 2018 that explored the effects of CBD on animal subjects
dosed with ethanol. They found several studies that showed CBD can reduce
alcohol consumption. In one, for example, researchers discovered that mice
administered CBD were less motivated to work (in this case, push a lever) for
access to a liquid solution that included 8 percent of ethanol.

> "Experimental studies converge to find that CBD reduces the overall level of
alcohol drinking in animal models of AUD by reducing ethanol intake,
motivation for ethanol, relapse, and by decreasing anxiety and impulsivity."

Other studies found that mice regularly dosed with the non-intoxicating
marijuana compound were also less likely to relapse after they'd been weaned
off alcohol, even when they were stressed.

Because of its impact on various aspects of the disease (including "intake,
motivation, relapse, anxiety and impulsivity"), CBD "could have a significant
action on drinking levels in human subjects with AUD" the review's authors
write. They add, however, that it would be useful to have data using binge-
drinking models and models that focus on long-term exposure to alcohol.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Screen-

Shot-2019-05-22-at-4.13.52-PM-1024x767.png)![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/Screen-Shot-2019-05-22-at-4.13.52-PM-1024x767.png)

Via Frontiers in Pharmacology.

The review also highlighted evidence showing CBD could affect alcohol-related
liver inflammation. In one study, researchers found that the livers of mice
that'd been given the compound prior to being force-fed alcohol every 12 hours
for five days were less damaged than those of mice not exposed to CBD.

"CBD seems to have valuable therapeutic properties for ethanol-induced liver
damage, through multiple mechanisms," including the reduction of oxidative
stress, inflammation control, and the death of certain cells responsible for
large amounts of scar tissue, the authors write.

Finally, CBD may also offer added protection to specific areas in the brain
susceptible to alcohol-related damage. In one study, the brains of rats who'd
binged on alcohol and given CBD were found to have lost "significantly" fewer
brain cells in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. In those rats, CBD acted
as a "neuroprotective antioxidant," the review states. In another experiment,
CBD also appeared to restore the neurological and cognitive functions of rats
in acute liver failure.

> "CBD has been found to reduce alcohol-related brain damage, preventing
neuronal loss by its antioxidant and immunomodulatory properties."

The authors suggest these overall benefits of CBD regarding problematic
alcohol use may be due to the "complex" way the cannabinoid interacts with CB2
receptors, which are located throughout the body.

Currently, the review states, the pharmaceuticals available to help people
with AUD stop drinking are "insufficiently effective at a population level,
and new therapeutic prospects are needed. Moreover, no drug for reducing
alcohol-related harms, either on the brain or the liver, has ever been
studied."

Plus, the authors conclude, "CBD could have many more positive effects in
subjects with AUD, including antiepileptic, cardioprotective, anxiolytic, or
analgesic ones. Human studies are thus crucially needed to explore the many
prospects of CBD in AUD and related conditions."

Meanwhile, there's still time to submit public comments to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration on how the federal government should regulate CBD
products, including supplements and foods. So far, hundreds of people have
submitted information. The public comment period ends July 2.

> FDA Is Taking Public Comments On CBD. Here's How To Make Your Voice Heard

_Photo byKimzy Nanney._

Marijuana Moment is made possible with support from readers. If you rely on
our cannabis advocacy journalism to stay informed, please consider a monthly
Patreon pledge.

![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-content/plugins/patron-button-and-

widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/plugins/patron-button-and-widgets-by-

codebard/images/become_a_patron_button.png)

Continue Reading

Advertisement ![](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/CRTV-323-300X2502.png)

#### Stay Up To The Moment

## Marijuana News In Your Inbox

Email address:

Leave this field empty if you're human:

#### Support Marijuana Moment

Become a Patron!

![Marijuana Moment](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/marijuana-moment-logo-banner-white-1.png)

  *     *   * About Marijuana Moment

  * Subscribe
  * Sponsorship and Advertising
  * Privacy Policy

Copyright Â© 2017-2019 Marijuana Moment LLC (TM) and Tom Angell

__

## Marijuana News In Your Inbox

Email address:

Leave this field empty if you're human:

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

