

__

You are the owner of this article.

__Edit Article __Add New Article

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ LinkedIn
  * __ Pinterest
  * __ Instagram

Become a member

  * Sign Up
  * Log In 

  * Dashboard

  * Logout

* * *
    
    
    * My Account
    * __Dashboard
    * __Profile
    * __Saved items
    *     * __Logout
    

__News

  * Local
  * Crime
  * State & Regional
  * Government & Politics
  * SIU
  * National

__Obituaries

  * Share a story
  * Recent Obituaries
  * Find an Obituary
  * Archives

__Opinion

  * Submit a letter
  * Letters
  * Editorial
  * Guest/Columnists

__Sports

  * College
  * High School
  * National

__Entertainment

  * Event Calendar
  * Music
  * Arts & Theatre
  * Dining
  * Movies
  * TV Guide

__Lifestyles

  * Magazine
  * Outdoors
  * Food & Cooking
  * Celebrate

__Print Edition

  * E-edition
  * Archives
  * Weekly Ads

__Buy & Sell

  * Place an Ad
  * Jobs
  * Homes
  * Cars
  * Classifieds
  * Business Directory
  * Today's Deal

__Customer Service

  * Manage My Account
  * Newsletter sign-up
  * Subscribe
  * Contact us

Mobile Apps

© 2019 Lee Enterprises

Terms of Service | Privacy Policy

Toggle navigation Menu

![](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/thesouthern.com/content/tncms/custom/image/06ca4018-361a-11e9-adbf-a389d2a698ed.png?resize=200%2C42)

  *     * Search 
  * Members Become a member

  *     * Search
  *     * #### Log In Using Your Account

Log In

**Don't have an account?** Sign Up Today

* * *
    
    
    * My Account
    * __Dashboard
    * __Profile
    * __Saved items
    *     * __Logout
    

  * __

  * 73°

    * #### __Carbondale, IL (62901)

##### Today

Partly cloudy. Low 54F. Winds light and variable..

##### Tonight

Partly cloudy. Low 54F. Winds light and variable.

__Updated: June 11, 2019 @ 7:54 pm

    
    
    *     * __Full Forecast
    

  * News
  * Obituaries
  * Sports
  * E-edition
  * Buy & Sell

Share This __

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ SMS
  * __ Email

#### Breaking

### Floodwaters force residents from their homes in East Cape Girardeau

Close

1 of 2

__

![Heather

Steans](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/thesouthern.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/9/79/97970b01-7745-5475-90ae-1770ae9313f6/5c7035971bbd9.image.jpg)

__

Heather Steans

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ SMS
  * __ Email
  * __ Print
  * __ Save

__

![Kelly

Cassidy](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/thesouthern.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/5/44/544bed06-be7e-5a1c-9fd1-36eb17c0f91e/5c70359732051.image.jpg)

__

Kelly Cassidy

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ SMS
  * __ Email
  * __ Print
  * __ Save

alert

STATE

# Illinois marijuana industry will have to expand to meet legalization demand

  * JERRY NOWICKI Capitol News Illinois
  * Mar 1, 2019
  * 1

  * __ Facebook

  * __ Twitter
  * __ SMS
  * __ Email

+1

![Heather

Steans](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Heather Steans

+1

![Kelly

Cassidy](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Kelly Cassidy

{{featured_button_text}}

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ SMS
  * __ Email
  * __ Print
  * __ Save

SPRINGFIELD — A fully-matured adult-use marijuana program in Illinois could
produce between $440 million and $676 million in annual revenue, and the
expected demand would be far greater than the state’s current supply,
according to a demand study released Friday.

The study was conducted by Freedman and Koski, a Colorado consulting firm
which advises local governments on the implementation of marijuana
legalization. It was commissioned by state Rep. Kelly Cassidy and state Sen.
Heather Steans, both Chicago Democrats who have been working on legalization
efforts for the past two years.

Illinois would have to produce 350,000 to 550,000 pounds in dried cannabis
plants each year to meet the expected demand, the study said. The state’s
existing industry could supply between only 35 percent and 54 percent of that
number. The bill’s sponsors said the expansion of the industry will help
increase minority-owned business inclusion.

__+2

![First Illinois bill proposed to legalize pot 'more in line with how we treat

alcohol'](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### First Illinois bill proposed to legalize pot 'more in line with how we

treat alcohol'

SPRINGFIELD — Attention at the Statehouse is expected to begin focusing on one
of Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s top priorities — legalizing …

“We’re contemplating additional license categories such as craft cultivation,
transportation and processing to ensure that everyone is at the table,”
Cassidy said. “These will create space for more innovation and
entrepreneurship in the industry, but more importantly, provide opportunity
for more diversity in an industry with a pressing need for it.”

The revenue and usage estimates were determined by using other states with
legalized marijuana as a baseline, while factoring in Illinois’ usage and
tourism rates among other demographic factors. Illinois would become the
second-largest of the 11 states to legalize adult-use cannabis and the third-
largest jurisdiction in the world after Canada and California.

The tax revenue estimates were based on a total mature-market marijuana
industry revenue number of $1.69 billion to $2.58 billion, which was
determined by medicinal prices and the usage estimates. These revenues, taxed
at an assumed rate of 26.5 percent, would produce between $443,690,100 and
$676,481,400 annually.

The study’s authors warned that revenue estimates are an inexact science, and
it was not clear in the report how much of the assumed tax revenue would be
offset by increased costs of state regulation.

“Choices made by Illinois regulators will have significant effects on price
and revenue, and until such choices are made, revenue estimates will be
challenging to estimate,” it said.

__+4

![Pritzker offers $38.7 billion ‘balanced’ budget in first address; plan

includes legalizing marijuana, raising tobacco taxes, more

borrowing](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Pritzker offers $38.7 billion ‘balanced’ budget in first address; plan

includes legalizing marijuana, raising tobacco taxes, more borrowing

SPRINGFIELD — Gov. J.B. Pritzker made clear Wednesday that he believes solving
the state’s long-term financial problems will require a new, gr…

The estimates could shrink if users grow their own marijuana or purchase it
illegally, the study said. This could happen, because illegal marijuana is
likely to remain cheaper than what is legally purchased, at least until
initial regulatory costs decrease and economies of scale push prices down.

×

![](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/central.leetemplates.com/content/tncms/live/global/resources/images/logos/ds/thesouthern.com.png?_dc=1)

Continue reading your article with a digital subscription.

**Already a subscriber?** Log in or Activate your account.

__

Loading&hellp;

  * ### {{title}}

{{start_at_rate}}

{{format_dollars}} {{start_price}} {{format_cents}}

{{term}}

{{promotional_format_dollars}}{{promotional_price}}{{promotional_format_cents}}
{{term}}

  * {{html}}
  * More Close __

{{action_button}}

## Thanks for being a subscriber.

#### Sorry, your subscription does not include this content.

Please call 866.735.5912 to upgrade your subscription.

Thanks for reading.

Subscribe or log in to continue.

**{{featured_button_text}}**

Even if all users bought legally, the study said it would be some time before
the large usage and revenue estimates are realized in Illinois.

No sales tax revenues are likely to be realized anytime soon either, as
Cassidy said last week the earliest possible implementation date for
legalization would be January 2020.

Still, Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a committed legalization supporter, is banking on
$170 million in revenue from licensing fees resulting from the legalization
program. His office has not said how many licenses that would entail or how
much they would cost.

The report released Friday warned about granting too many licenses.

“States like Oregon have faced the challenges of dramatic oversupply,
encouraged by too many licensees producing far too much product for the
market,” the report said. “This has led to significant drops in prices that
have caused challenges for businesses’ ability to operate and incentivized
out-of-state diversion that has been documented as far away as the East
Coast.”

Steans said last week Illinois’ medical program has one of the better cannabis
tracking systems in the nation from seed to sale, and the reason for the
demand study was to prevent problems such as the ones seen in Oregon.

__+2

![Pritzker’s pot revenue depends on unfiled legalization

legislation](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Pritzker’s pot revenue depends on unfiled legalization legislation

SPRINGFIELD — Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s proposed budget for the 2020 fiscal year
includes $170 million in new revenue from licensing fees for legal…

Cassidy said she would like to see Illinois’ medicinal market continue to grow
as well. Between January 2017 and December 2018, the number of registered,
qualified patients rose from 15,900 to 52,365, and the number of unique
patients served rose from 10,175 to 29,954, according to the report. A recent
law allowing cannabis as an alternative to prescribed opioids is expected to
increase the market as well.

The bill’s sponsors have also been vocal about including criminal justice
reforms in their legalization efforts for those incarcerated for marijuana-
related crimes.

“For generations, government policy of mass incarceration increased racial
disparities by locking up thousands of individuals for marijuana use or
possession,” said state Sen. Toi Hutchinson, D-Chicago Heights, the
legislation’s chief co-sponsor in the Senate. “Now, as we are discussing
legalization, it is of the utmost importance that we learn from these mistakes
and acknowledge the lingering effects these policies continue to have in
neighborhoods across this state. No conversation about legalization can happen
absent that conversation.”

# Subscribe to Daily Headlines

Sign up!

  * I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

jnowicki@capitolnewsillinois.com

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ SMS
  * __ Email
  * __ Print
  * __ Save

+1

![Heather

Steans](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Heather Steans

+1

![Kelly

Cassidy](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Kelly Cassidy

### More information

![Bills aim to ease state banking regulations on marijuana

businesses](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Bills aim to ease state banking regulations on marijuana businesses

SPRINGFIELD — Supporters of legalized marijuana in Illinois have launched
efforts aimed at making it easier for legitimate businesses that sel…

__Load comments

×

#### Post a comment as

Emoticons

  * [smile]
  * [beam]
  * [wink]
  * [sad]
  * [cool]
  * [innocent]
  * [rolleyes]
  * [whistling]
  * [lol]
  * [huh]
  * [tongue]
  * [love]
  * [sleeping]
  * [yawn]
  * [unsure]
  * [angry]
  * [blink]
  * [crying]
  * [ohmy]
  * [scared]
  * [sleep]
  * [sneaky]
  * [tongue_smile]
  * [thumbdown]
  * [thumbup]
  * [censored]
  * [happybirthday]
  * [ban]
  * [spam]
  * [offtopic]
  * [batman]
  * [ninja]
  * [pirate]
  * [alien]

Comment Text

Cancel

Post comment

×

Your comment has been submitted.

__

![]()

* * *

×

#### Report

Cancel

Report Abuse

×

Reported

×

There was a problem reporting this.

×

#### Watch this discussion. Stop watching this discussion.

Watch this discussion

Get an email notification whenever someone contributes to the discussion

Notifications from this discussion will be disabled.

Cancel

Start watching Stop watching

### (1) comment

__

**Chas1** Mar 2, 2019 8:48am

No matter what one’s views are, the true intent of “medicalization” of this
drug is now revealed. The oldest motivation: GREED; ie, money.

Report __Add Reply

### Welcome to the discussion.

Log In

**Keep it Clean.** Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd, racist or sexually-
oriented language.  
**PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.**  
**Don 't Threaten.** Threats of harming another person will not be tolerated.  
**Be Truthful.** Don 't knowingly lie about anyone or anything.  
**Be Nice.** No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism that is degrading to
another person.  
**Be Proactive.** Use the 'Report' link on each comment to let us know of
abusive posts.  
**Share with Us.** We 'd love to hear eyewitness accounts, the history behind
an article.

Post a comment

Watch this discussion. Stop watching this discussion.

### Recommended

  * View All

### Promotions

![Research decades of articles the easy

way!](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAABAAAAAJCAQAAACRI2S5AAAAEklEQVR42mM8U8+AFzCOKgADAHdUC60wg0dkAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

promotion

#### Research decades of articles the easy way!

![Subscribe

now!](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAABAAAAAJCAQAAACRI2S5AAAAEklEQVR42mM8U8+AFzCOKgADAHdUC60wg0dkAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

promotion

#### Subscribe now!

### Print Ads

__

![QUATROS - Ad from

2019-06-05](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### QUATROS - Ad from 2019-06-05

  * Jun 5, 2019

![Quatros](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Quatros

218 West Freeman, Carbondale, IL 62901

__618-549-5326

Currently Open

  * __ Website

__

![HEAR 4 U INC - Ad from

2019-06-09](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Health

### HEAR 4 U INC - Ad from 2019-06-09

  * Jun 9, 2019

### Hear 4 U

702 S Logan St, West Frankfort, IL 62896

__618-932-2900

__

![FELLOWSHIP OF CHRISTIAN ATHLETES - Ad from

2019-06-09](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### FELLOWSHIP OF CHRISTIAN ATHLETES - Ad from 2019-06-09

  * Jun 9, 2019

### Memorials/thank You Ads Prepaid

710 N Illinois Ave, Carbondale, IL 62901

__618-351-5000

__

![MEDIASPACE SOLUTIONS - Ad from

2019-06-11](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### MEDIASPACE SOLUTIONS - Ad from 2019-06-11

  * 20 hrs ago

![Mediaspace

Solutions](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Mediaspace Solutions

904 Mainstreet, Ste 200, Hopkins, MN 55343

__612-253-2122

  * __ Website

__

![SI GOLF CARDS - Ad from

2019-06-05](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### SI GOLF CARDS - Ad from 2019-06-05

  * Jun 5, 2019

__

![IDEA - Ad from

2019-06-11](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### IDEA - Ad from 2019-06-11

  * 20 hrs ago

### Idea

701 S Grand Av, Springfield, IL 62704

__999-999-9999

__

![FEAGANS FURNITURE - Ad from

2019-06-06](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### FEAGANS FURNITURE - Ad from 2019-06-06

  * Jun 6, 2019

### Feagans Furniture

20685 MARION RD, FREDONIA, KY 42411

__270-545-3498

__

![STANLEY STEEMER - Ad from

2019-06-09](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### STANLEY STEEMER - Ad from 2019-06-09

  * Jun 9, 2019

![Stanley

Steemer](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Stanley Steemer

6125 Hwy 45 South, Paducah, KY 42001

__270-443-0948

  * __ Website

__

![VETERANS AIRPORT OF SO ILLINOIS - Ad from

2019-06-07](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### VETERANS AIRPORT OF SO ILLINOIS - Ad from 2019-06-07

  * Jun 7, 2019

![Williamson County Regional

Airport](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

### Williamson County Regional Airport

Highway 13 & Highway 148, Marion, IL 62959

__618-993-3353

  * __ Website

__

![2008-2.pdf](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Ad Vault

### 2008-2.pdf

  * Jun 7, 2019

  * More

### Latest Local Offers

![Burkdell

Mulch](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Burkdell Mulch

#### See us for Your Landscaping Needs in Benton, Carbondale, & Mt. Vernon –

Burkdell Mulch

__

![](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/thesouthern.com/content/tncms/custom/image/289abc10-34cb-11e7-8b59-fb16494c9852.png?resize=200%2C42)

  * __ Facebook
  * __ Twitter
  * __ YouTube
  * __ Pinterest
  * __ Instagram

  * Customer Service

  * Subscribe to The Southern
  * Activate Your Digital Access
  * Contact
  * iPhone & Android App

#### Sites & Partners

  * Southern Business Journal
  * Life & Style Magazine
  * Special Sections on ISSUU
  * Newspapers.com Archives
  * Today's Deal
  * Top 20+ Dining Card
  * Golf Card
  * Find & Save
  * Online Features

#### Services

  * eEdition Newspaper
  * Email Newsletters
  * Advertise
  * Places
  * Jobs
  * Homes
  * Be a carrier
  * Dealer returns
  * Work here

Copyright 2019 Lee Enterprises, incorporated dba The Southern Illinoisan, 710
N. Illinois Ave. Carbondale, IL | Terms of Use | Privacy Policy

Powered by BLOX Content Management System from TownNews.com.

![]({{image}})

{{title}}

{{summary}}

__

__

  * Notifications
  * Settings

You don't have any notifications.

Get up-to-the-minute news sent straight to your device.

##### Topics

#### Breaking News

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

