

# Tobacco

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For the plant genus, see Nicotiana. For the American electronic musician, see
Tobacco (musician).

Not to be confused with Tabacco or Tabasco.

## _Tobacco_

![DunhillLightFlake.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/DunhillLightFlake.jpg/220px-

DunhillLightFlake.jpg)

Tobacco flakes, sliced from pressed plugs

Product name| Tobacco  
Source plant(s)| _Nicotiana_  
Part(s) of plant| Leaf  
Geographic origin| The Americas  
Active ingredients| Nicotine, harmine  
Uses| Recreational  
Legal status|

  * AU: Unscheduled
  * CA: Unscheduled. 18+ (Federal)
  * UK: 16+ (Public Possession) 18+ (Purchase)
  * US: 18+ only in most states[1]
  * UN: Unscheduled
  * EU: Unscheduled
  * See tobacco control

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/18/A_traditional_tobacco_drying_kiln_in_Myrtleford%2C_Victoria%2C_Australia.jpg/220px-

A_traditional_tobacco_drying_kiln_in_Myrtleford%2C_Victoria%2C_Australia.jpg)

Tobacco drying kiln in Myrtleford, Victoria, Australia from 2018. This kiln
was built in 1957, and moved to Rotary Park in 2000. Kilns of this structure
were made from the early 1930s through to the late 1960s.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/32/Basma-tobacco-

drying.jpg/220px-Basma-tobacco-drying.jpg)

Basma tobacco leaves drying in the sun at Pomak village in Xanthi, Greece

**Tobacco** is a product prepared from the leaves of the tobacco plant by
curing them. The plant is part of the genus _Nicotiana_ and of the Solanaceae
(nightshade) family. While more than 70 species of tobacco are known, the
chief commercial crop is _N. tabacum_. The more potent variant _N. rustica_ is
also used around the world.

Tobacco contains the alkaloid nicotine, which is a stimulant, and harmala
alkaloids.[2] Dried tobacco leaves are mainly used for smoking in cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, and flavored shisha tobacco. They can also be consumed
as snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco and snus.

Tobacco use is a risk factor for many diseases; especially those affecting the
heart, liver, and lungs, as well as many cancers. In 2008, the World Health
Organization named tobacco as the world's single greatest preventable cause of
death.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Traditional use
    * 2.2 Popularization
    * 2.3 Contemporary
  * 3 Biology
    * 3.1 _Nicotiana_
    * 3.2 Types
  * 4 Production
    * 4.1 Cultivation
    * 4.2 Curing
    * 4.3 Global production
    * 4.3.1 Trends
    * 4.3.2 Major producers
      * 4.3.2.1 China
      * 4.3.2.2 India
      * 4.3.2.3 Brazil
    * 4.4 Problems in production
    * 4.4.1 Child labor
    * 4.4.2 Economy
    * 4.4.3 Environment
    * 4.5 Research
    * 4.6 Genetic modification
    * 4.6.1 Field trials
    * 4.6.2 Production
  * 5 Consumption
  * 6 Impact
    * 6.1 Social
    * 6.2 Demographic
    * 6.3 Harmful effects of tobacco and smoking
    * 6.4 Economic
    * 6.5 Advertising
    * 6.6 Cinema
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
    * 8.1 Further reading
  * 9 External links

## Etymology[edit]

The English word " _tobacco_ " originates from the Spanish and Portuguese word
" _tabaco_ ". The precise origin of this word is disputed, but it is generally
thought to have derived at least in part, from Taino, the Arawakan language of
the Caribbean. In Taino, it was said to mean either a roll of tobacco leaves
(according to Bartolomé de las Casas, 1552) or to _tabago_ , a kind of
L-shaped pipe used for sniffing tobacco smoke (according to Oviedo; with the
leaves themselves being referred to as _cohiba_ ).[4][5]

However, perhaps coincidentally, similar words in Spanish, Portuguese and
Italian were used from 1410 to define medicinal herbs believed to have
originated from the Arabic طُبّاق _ṭubbāq_ (also طُباق _ṭubāq_ ), a word
reportedly dating to the 9th century, as a name for various herbs.[6][7]

## History[edit]

Main article: History of tobacco

See also: History of commercial tobacco in the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/William_Michael_Harnett_%28American%2C_1848-1892%29._Still_Life_with_Three_Castles_Tobacco%2C_1880.jpg/220px-

William_Michael_Harnett_%28American%2C_1848-1892%29._Still_Life_with_Three_Castles_Tobacco%2C_1880.jpg)

William Michael Harnett (American, 1848-1892), _Still Life with Three Castles
Tobacco_ , 1880, Brooklyn Museum.

### Traditional use[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3c/Chute_tobacco.JPG/220px-

Chute_tobacco.JPG)

The earliest depiction of a European man smoking, from _Tobacco_ by Anthony
Chute, 1595.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/02/Rajput_%28Jodhpur%29_%288411728143%29.jpg/220px-

Rajput_%28Jodhpur%29_%288411728143%29.jpg)

An Indian man smoking _Tobacco_ on hookah, Rajasthan, India.

Tobacco has long been used in the Americas, with some cultivation sites in
Mexico dating back to 1400–1000 BC.[8] Many Native American tribes have
traditionally grown and used tobacco. Eastern North American tribes
historically carried tobacco in pouches as a readily accepted trade item, as
well as smoking it, both socially and ceremonially, such as to seal a peace
treaty or trade agreement.[9][10] In some populations, tobacco is seen as a
gift from the Creator, with the ceremonial tobacco smoke carrying one's
thoughts and prayers to the Creator.[11]

### Popularization[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/86/A_Smoking_Club.jpeg/220px-

A_Smoking_Club.jpeg)

An illustration from Frederick William Fairholt's _Tobacco, its History and
Association_ , 1859

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/64/KITLV_-_26868_-_Kleingrothe%2C_C.J._-_Medan_-

_Tobacco_plant_and_tobacco_leaf%2C_Deli_-_circa_1905.tif/lossy-page1-220px-

KITLV_-_26868_-_Kleingrothe%2C_C.J._-_Medan_-

_Tobacco_plant_and_tobacco_leaf%2C_Deli_-_circa_1905.tif.jpg)

Tobacco plant and tobacco leaf from the Deli plantations in Sumatra, 1905

Following the arrival of the Europeans to the Americas, tobacco became
increasingly popular as a trade item. Hernández de Boncalo, Spanish chronicler
of the Indies, was the first European to bring tobacco seeds to the Old World
in 1559 following orders of King Philip II of Spain. These seeds were planted
in the outskirts of Toledo, more specifically in an area known as "Los
Cigarrales" named after the continuous plagues of cicadas ( _cigarras_ in
Spanish). Before the development of the lighter Virginia and white burley
strains of tobacco, the smoke was too harsh to be inhaled. Small quantities
were smoked at a time, using a pipe like the _midwakh_ or _kiseru_ or smoking
newly invented waterpipes such as the bong or the hookah (see thuốc lào for a
modern continuance of this practice). Tobacco became so popular that the
English colony of Jamestown used it as currency and began exporting it as a
cash crop; tobacco is often credited as being the export that saved Virginia
from ruin.[12]

The alleged benefits of tobacco also account for its considerable success. The
astronomer Thomas Harriot, who accompanied Sir Richard Grenville on his 1585
expedition to Roanoke Island, explains that the plant "openeth all the pores
and passages of the body" so that the natives’ "bodies are notably preserved
in health, and know not many grievous diseases, wherewithal we in England are
often times afflicted." [13]

Tobacco smoking, chewing, and snuffing became a major industry in Europe and
its colonies by 1700.[14][15]

Tobacco has been a major cash crop in Cuba and in other parts of the Caribbean
since the 18th century. Cuban cigars are world-famous.[16]

In the late 19th century, cigarettes became popular. James Bonsack created a
machine that automated cigarette production. This increase in production
allowed tremendous growth in the tobacco industry until the health revelations
of the late-20th century.[17][18]

### Contemporary[edit]

See also: Tobacco control and Tobacco in the United States

Following the scientific revelations of the mid-20th century, tobacco became
condemned as a health hazard, and eventually became encompassed as a cause for
cancer, as well as other respiratory and circulatory diseases. In the United
States, this led to the Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, which settled the
lawsuit in exchange for a combination of yearly payments to the states and
voluntary restrictions on advertising and marketing of tobacco products.

In the 1970s, Brown & Williamson cross-bred a strain of tobacco to produce Y1.
This strain of tobacco contained an unusually high amount of nicotine, nearly
doubling its content from 3.2-3.5% to 6.5%. In the 1990s, this prompted the
Food and Drug Administration to use this strain as evidence that tobacco
companies were intentionally manipulating the nicotine content of
cigarettes.[19]

In 2003, in response to growth of tobacco use in developing countries, the
World Health Organization[20] successfully rallied 168 countries to sign the
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. The convention is designed to push
for effective legislation and its enforcement in all countries to reduce the
harmful effects of tobacco. This led to the development of tobacco cessation
products.

## Biology[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Tobacco" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar
**·** JSTOR _( June 2017)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

\---|---

### _Nicotiana_ [edit]

Main article: Nicotiana

See also: List of tobacco diseases

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c7/Nicotine-2D-skeletal.png/220px-

Nicotine-2D-skeletal.png)

Nicotine is the compound responsible for the addictive nature of tobacco use.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/Native_American_tobacco_flower.jpg/170px-

Native_American_tobacco_flower.jpg)

Tobacco ( _Nicotiana rustica_ ) flower, leaves, and buds

Many species of tobacco are in the genus of herbs _Nicotiana_. It is part of
the nightshade family (Solanaceae) indigenous to North and South America,
Australia, south west Africa, and the South Pacific.[21]

Most nightshades contain varying amounts of nicotine, a powerful neurotoxin to
insects. However, tobaccos tend to contain a much higher concentration of
nicotine than the others. Unlike many other Solanaceae species, they do not
contain tropane alkaloids, which are often poisonous to humans and other
animals.

Despite containing enough nicotine and other compounds such as germacrene and
anabasine and other piperidine alkaloids (varying between species) to deter
most herbivores,[22] a number of such animals have evolved the ability to feed
on _Nicotiana_ species without being harmed. Nonetheless, tobacco is
unpalatable to many species due to its other attributes. For example, although
the cabbage looper is a generalist pest, tobacco's gummosis and trichomes can
harm early larvae survival.[23] As a result, some tobacco plants (chiefly _N.
glauca_ ) have become established as invasive weeds in some places.

### Types[edit]

Main article: Types of tobacco

The types of tobacco include:

  * Aromatic fire-cured is cured by smoke from open fires. In the United States, it is grown in northern middle Tennessee, central Kentucky, and Virginia. Fire-cured tobacco grown in Kentucky and Tennessee is used in some chewing tobaccos, moist snuff, some cigarettes, and as a condiment in pipe tobacco blends. Another fire-cured tobacco is Latakia, which is produced from oriental varieties of _N. tabacum_. The leaves are cured and smoked over smoldering fires of local hardwoods and aromatic shrubs in Cyprus and Syria.
  * Brightleaf tobacco is commonly known as "Virginia tobacco", often regardless of the state where it is planted. Prior to the American Civil War, most tobacco grown in the US was fire-cured dark-leaf. Sometime after the War of 1812, demand for a milder, lighter, more aromatic tobacco arose. Ohio, Pennsylvania and Maryland all innovated with milder varieties of the tobacco plant. Farmers discovered that Bright leaf tobacco needs thin, starved soil, and those who could not grow other crops found that they could grow tobacco. Confederate soldiers traded it with each other and Union soldiers, and developed quite a taste for it. At the end of the war, the soldiers went home and a national market had developed for the local crop.
  * Burley tobacco is an air-cured tobacco used primarily for cigarette production. In the U.S., burley tobacco plants are started from pelletized seeds placed in polystyrene trays floated on a bed of fertilized water in March or April.
  * Cavendish is more a process of curing and a method of cutting tobacco than a type. The processing and the cut are used to bring out the natural sweet taste in the tobacco. Cavendish can be produced from any tobacco type, but is usually one of, or a blend of Kentucky, Virginia, and burley, and is most commonly used for pipe tobacco and cigars.
  * Criollo tobacco is primarily used in the making of cigars. It was, by most accounts, one of the original Cuban tobaccos that emerged around the time of Columbus.
  * Dokha is a tobacco originally grown in Iran, mixed with leaves, bark, and herbs for smoking in a _midwakh_.
  * Turkish tobacco is a sun-cured, highly aromatic, small-leafed variety ( _Nicotiana tabacum_ ) grown in Turkey, Greece, Bulgaria, and North Macedonia. Originally grown in regions historically part of the Ottoman Empire, it is also known as "oriental". Many of the early brands of cigarettes were made mostly or entirely of Turkish tobacco; today, its main use is in blends of pipe and especially cigarette tobacco (a typical American cigarette is a blend of bright Virginia, burley, and Turkish).
  * Perique was developed in 1824 through the technique of pressure-fermentation of local tobacco by a farmer, Pierre Chenet. Considered the truffle of pipe tobaccos, it is used as a component in many blended pipe tobaccos, but is too strong to be smoked pure. At one time, the freshly moist Perique was also chewed, but none is now sold for this purpose. It is typically blended with pure Virginia to lend spice, strength, and coolness to the blend.
  * Shade tobacco is cultivated in Connecticut and Massachusetts. Early Connecticut colonists acquired from the Native Americans the habit of smoking tobacco in pipes, and began cultivating the plant commercially, though the Puritans referred to it as the "evil weed". The Connecticut shade industry has weathered some major catastrophes, including a devastating hailstorm in 1929, and an epidemic of brown spot fungus in 2000, but is now in danger of disappearing altogether, given the increase in the value of land.
  * White burley air-cured leaf was found to be more mild than other types of tobacco. In 1865, George Webb of Brown County, Ohio planted red burley seeds he had purchased, and found a few of the seedlings had a whitish, sickly look, which became white burley.
  * Wild tobacco is native to the southwestern United States, Mexico, and parts of South America. Its botanical name is _Nicotiana rustica_.
  * Y1 is a strain of tobacco cross-bred by Brown & Williamson in the 1970s to obtain an unusually high nicotine content. In the 1990s, the United States Food and Drug Administration used it as evidence that tobacco companies were intentionally manipulating the nicotine content of cigarettes.[24]

## Production[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Tobacco" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar
**·** JSTOR _( May 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

\---|---

### Cultivation[edit]

Main article: Cultivation of tobacco

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ae/Nicotiana_Tobacco_Plants_1909px.jpg/170px-

Nicotiana_Tobacco_Plants_1909px.jpg)

Tobacco plants growing in a field in Intercourse, Pennsylvania.

Tobacco is cultivated similarly to other agricultural products. Seeds were at
first quickly scattered onto the soil. However, young plants came under
increasing attack from flea beetles ( _Epitrix cucumeris_ or _E. pubescens_ ),
which caused destruction of half the tobacco crops in United States in 1876.
By 1890, successful experiments were conducted that placed the plant in a
frame covered by thin cotton fabric. Today, tobacco is sown in cold frames or
hotbeds, as their germination is activated by light.[ _citation needed_ ]

In the United States, tobacco is often fertilized with the mineral apatite,
which partially starves the plant of nitrogen, to produce a more desired
flavor.

After the plants are about 8 inches (20 cm) tall, they are transplanted into
the fields. Farmers used to have to wait for rainy weather to plant. A hole is
created in the tilled earth with a tobacco peg, either a curved wooden tool or
deer antler. After making two holes to the right and left, the planter would
move forward two feet, select plants from his/her bag, and repeat. Various
mechanical tobacco planters like Bemis, New Idea Setter, and New Holland
Transplanter were invented in the late 19th and 20th centuries to automate the
process: making the hole, watering it, guiding the plant in — all in one
motion.[25]

Tobacco is cultivated annually, and can be harvested in several ways. In the
oldest method still used today, the entire plant is harvested at once by
cutting off the stalk at the ground with a tobacco knife. It is then speared
onto sticks, four to six plants a stick and hung in a curing barn. In the 19th
century, bright tobacco began to be harvested by pulling individual leaves off
the stalk as they ripened. The leaves ripen from the ground upwards, so a
field of tobacco harvested in this manner involves the serial harvest of a
number of "primings", beginning with the volado leaves near the ground,
working to the seco leaves in the middle of the plant, and finishing with the
potent ligero leaves at the top. Before this, the crop must be topped when the
pink flowers develop. Topping always refers to the removal of the tobacco
flower before the leaves are systematically removed, and eventually, entirely
harvested. As the industrial revolution took hold, harvesting wagons used to
transport leaves were equipped with man-powered stringers, an apparatus that
used twine to attach leaves to a pole. In modern times, large fields are
harvested mechanically, although topping the flower and in some cases the
plucking of immature leaves is still done by hand. Most tobacco in the U.S. is
grown in North Carolina, Kentucky, and Virginia.[26]

### Curing[edit]

Main article: Curing of tobacco

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/89/Tobacco_barn.JPG/220px-

Tobacco_barn.JPG)

Tobacco barn in Simsbury, Connecticut used for air curing of shade tobacco

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/Tobacco_drying_iran.jpg/220px-

Tobacco_drying_iran.jpg)

Sun-cured tobacco, Bastam, Iran

Curing and subsequent aging allow for the slow oxidation and degradation of
carotenoids in tobacco leaf. This produces certain compounds in the tobacco
leaves, and gives a sweet hay, tea, rose oil, or fruity aromatic flavor that
contributes to the "smoothness" of the smoke. Starch is converted to sugar,
which glycates protein, and is oxidized into advanced glycation endproducts
(AGEs), a caramelization process that also adds flavor. Inhalation of these
AGEs in tobacco smoke contributes to atherosclerosis and cancer.[27] Levels of
AGEs are dependent on the curing method used.

Tobacco can be cured through several methods, including:

  * **Air-cured** tobacco is hung in well-ventilated barns and allowed to dry over a period of four to eight weeks. Air-cured tobacco is low in sugar, which gives the tobacco smoke a light, mild flavor, and high in nicotine. Cigar and burley tobaccos are 'dark' air-cured.[28]
  * **Fire-cured** tobacco is hung in large barns where fires of hardwoods are kept on continuous or intermittent low smoulder, and takes between three days and ten weeks, depending on the process and the tobacco. Fire curing produces a tobacco low in sugar and high in nicotine. Pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, and snuff are fire-cured.
  * **Flue-cured** tobacco was originally strung onto tobacco sticks, which were hung from tier-poles in curing barns (Aus: kilns, also traditionally called 'oasts'). These barns have flues run from externally fed fire boxes, heat-curing the tobacco without exposing it to smoke, slowly raising the temperature over the course of the curing. The process generally takes about a week. This method produces cigarette tobacco that is high in sugar and has medium to high levels of nicotine. Most cigarettes incorporate flue-cured tobacco, which produces a milder, more inhalable smoke. It is estimated that 1 tree is cut to flue-cure every 300 cigarettes, resulting in serious environmental consequences.[29]
  * **Sun-cured** tobacco dries uncovered in the sun. This method is used in Turkey, Greece, and other Mediterranean countries to produce oriental tobacco. Sun-cured tobacco is low in sugar and nicotine and is used in cigarettes.

Some tobaccos go through a second stage of curing, known as _fermenting_ or
_sweating_.[30] Cavendish undergoes fermentation pressed in a _casing_
solution containing sugar and/or flavoring.[31]

### Global production[edit]

#### Trends[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f8/Preparando_o_tabaco_em_Balib%C3%B3.jpg/220px-

Preparando_o_tabaco_em_Balib%C3%B3.jpg)

Tobacco production in Portuguese Timor in the 1930s

Production of tobacco leaf increased by 40% between 1971, when 4.2 million
tons of leaf were produced, and 1997, when 5.9 million tons of leaf were
produced.[32] According to the Food and Agriculture organization of the UN,
tobacco leaf production was expected to hit 7.1 million tons by 2010. This
number is a bit lower than the record-high production of 1992, when 7.5
million tons of leaf were produced.[33] The production growth was almost
entirely due to increased productivity by developing nations, where production
increased by 128%.[34] During that same time, production in developed
countries actually decreased.[33] China's increase in tobacco production was
the single biggest factor in the increase in world production. China's share
of the world market increased from 17% in 1971 to 47% in 1997.[32] This growth
can be partially explained by the existence of a high import tariff on foreign
tobacco entering China. While this tariff has been reduced from 64% in 1999 to
10% in 2004,[35] it still has led to local, Chinese cigarettes being preferred
over foreign cigarettes because of their lower cost.

#### Major producers[edit]

## Top tobacco producers, 2014[36]

Country | Production (tonnes) | Note  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.png) China | 2,995,400 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/05/Flag_of_Brazil.svg/22px-

Flag_of_Brazil.svg.png) Brazil | 862,396 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/41/Flag_of_India.svg/23px-

Flag_of_India.svg.png) India | 720,725 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States | 397,535 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9f/Flag_of_Indonesia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Indonesia.svg.png) Indonesia | 196,300 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/32/Flag_of_Pakistan.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Pakistan.svg.png) Pakistan | 129,878 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d1/Flag_of_Malawi.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Malawi.svg.png) Malawi | 126,348 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Flag_of_Argentina.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Argentina.svg.png) Argentina | 119,434 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Flag_of_Zambia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Zambia.svg.png) Zambia | 112,049 |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d0/Flag_of_Mozambique.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mozambique.svg.png) Mozambique | 97,075 |  
**World** | **5,755,140** | **A**  
No note = official figure, F = FAO Estimate, A = Aggregate (may include
official, semiofficial or estimates).

Every year, about 6.7 million tons of tobacco are produced throughout the
world. The top producers of tobacco are China (39.6%), India (8.3%), Brazil
(7.0%) and the United States (4.6%).[37]

##### China[edit]

Around the peak of global tobacco production, 20 million rural Chinese
households were producing tobacco on 2.1 million hectares of land.[38] While
it is the major crop for millions of Chinese farmers, growing tobacco is not
as profitable as cotton or sugarcane, because the Chinese government sets the
market price. While this price is guaranteed, it is lower than the natural
market price, because of the lack of market risk. To further control tobacco
in their borders, China founded a State Tobacco Monopoly Administration (STMA)
in 1982. The STMA controls tobacco production, marketing, imports, and
exports, and contributes 12% to the nation's national income.[39] As noted
above, despite the income generated for the state by profits from state-owned
tobacco companies and the taxes paid by companies and retailers, China's
government has acted to reduce tobacco use.[40]

##### India[edit]

India's Tobacco Board is headquartered in Guntur in the state of Andhra
Pradesh.[41] India has 96,865 registered tobacco farmers[42] and many more who
are not registered. In 2010, 3,120 tobacco product manufacturing facilities
were operating in all of India.[43] Around 0.25% of India's cultivated land is
used for tobacco production.[44]

Since 1947, the Indian government has supported growth in the tobacco
industry. India has seven tobacco research centers, located in Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, Mysore, and West Bengal houses the core
research institute.

##### Brazil[edit]

In Brazil, around 135,000 family farmers cite tobacco production as their main
economic activity.[38] Tobacco has never exceeded 0.7% of the country's total
cultivated area.[45] In the southern regions of Brazil, Virginia, and
Amarelinho, flue-cured tobacco, as well as burley and Galpão Comum air-cured
tobacco, are produced. These types of tobacco are used for cigarettes. In the
northeast, darker, air- and sun-cured tobacco is grown. These types of tobacco
are used for cigars, twists, and dark cigarettes.[45] Brazil's government has
made attempts to reduce the production of tobacco, but has not had a
successful systematic antitobacco farming initiative. Brazil's government,
however, provides small loans for family farms, including those that grow
tobacco, through the _Programa Nacional de Fortalecimento da Agricultura
Familiar_.[46]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Tobacco_field_cuba1.jpg/220px-

Tobacco_field_cuba1.jpg)

Tobacco plantation, Pinar del Río, Cuba

### Problems in production[edit]

#### Child labor[edit]

Main article: Child labor

The International Labour Office reported that the most child-laborers work in
agriculture, which is one of the most hazardous types of work.[47][ _not in
citation given (See discussion.)_ ] The tobacco industry houses some of these
working children. Use of children is widespread on farms in Brazil, China,
India, Indonesia, Malawi, and Zimbabwe.[48] While some of these children work
with their families on small, family-owned farms, others work on large
plantations. In late 2009, reports were released by the London-based human-
rights group Plan International, claiming that child labor was common on
Malawi (producer of 1.8% of the world's tobacco[32]) tobacco farms. The
organization interviewed 44 teens, who worked full-time on farms during the
2007-8 growing season. The child-laborers complained of low pay and long
hours, as well as physical and sexual abuse by their supervisors.[49] They
also reported suffering from Green tobacco sickness, a form of nicotine
poisoning. When wet leaves are handled, nicotine from the leaves gets absorbed
in the skin and causes nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. Children were exposed
to 50-cigarettes-worth of nicotine through direct contact with tobacco leaves.
This level of nicotine in children can permanently alter brain structure and
function.[47][ _not in citation given (See discussion.)_ ]

#### Economy[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/MRO_Cuba_Harvest_01.jpg/220px-

MRO_Cuba_Harvest_01.jpg)

Tobacco harvesting, Viñales Valley, Cuba

Major tobacco companies have encouraged global tobacco production. Philip
Morris, British American Tobacco, and Japan Tobacco each own or lease tobacco-
manufacturing facilities in at least 50 countries and buy crude tobacco leaf
from at least 12 more countries.[50] This encouragement, along with government
subsidies, has led to a glut in the tobacco market. This surplus has resulted
in lower prices, which are devastating to small-scale tobacco farmers.
According to the World Bank, between 1985 and 2000, the inflation-adjusted
price of tobacco dropped 37%.[51] Tobacco is the most widely smuggled legal
product.[52]

#### Environment[edit]

Tobacco production requires the use of large amounts of pesticides. Tobacco
companies recommend up to 16 separate applications of pesticides just in the
period between planting the seeds in greenhouses and transplanting the young
plants to the field.[53] Pesticide use has been worsened by the desire to
produce larger crops in less time because of the decreasing market value of
tobacco. Pesticides often harm tobacco farmers because they are unaware of the
health effects and the proper safety protocol for working with pesticides.
These pesticides, as well as fertilizers, end up in the soil, waterways, and
the food chain.[54] Coupled with child labor, pesticides pose an even greater
threat. Early exposure to pesticides may increase a child's lifelong cancer
risk, as well as harm his or her nervous and immune systems.[55]

As with all crops, tobacco crops extract nutrients (such as phosphorus,
nitrogen, and potassium) from soil, decreasing its fertility.[56]

Furthermore, the wood used to cure tobacco in some places leads to
deforestation. While some big tobacco producers such as China and the United
States have access to petroleum, coal, and natural gas, which can be used as
alternatives to wood, most developing countries still rely on wood in the
curing process.[56] Brazil alone uses the wood of 60 million trees per year
for curing, packaging, and rolling cigarettes.[53]

In 2017 WHO released a study on the environmental effects of tobacco.[57]

### Research[edit]

Several tobacco plants have been used as model organisms in genetics. Tobacco
BY-2 cells, derived from _N. tabacum_ cultivar 'Bright Yellow-2', are among
the most important research tools in plant cytology.[58] Tobacco has played a
pioneering role in callus culture research and the elucidation of the
mechanism by which kinetin works, laying the groundwork for modern
agricultural biotechnology. The first genetically modified plant was produced
in 1982, using _Agrobacterium tumefaciens_ to create an antibiotic-resistant
tobacco plant.[59] This research laid the groundwork for all genetically
modified crops.[60]

### Genetic modification[edit]

Because of its importance as a research tool, transgenic tobacco was the first
GM crop to be tested in field trials, in the United States and France in 1986;
China became the first country in the world to approve commercial planting of
a GM crop in 1993, which was tobacco.[61]

#### Field trials[edit]

Many varieties of transgenic tobacco have been intensively tested in field
trials. Agronomic traits such as resistance to pathogens (viruses,
particularly to the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV); fungi; bacteria and
nematodes); weed management via herbicide tolerance; resistance against insect
pests; resistance to drought and cold; and production of useful products such
as pharmaceuticals; and use of GM plants for bioremediation, have all been
tested in over 400 field trials using tobacco.[62]

#### Production[edit]

Currently, only the US is producing GM tobacco.[61][62] The Chinese virus-
resistant tobacco was withdrawn from the market in China in 1997.[63]:3 From
2002 to 2010, cigarettes made with GM tobacco with reduced nicotine content
were available in the US under the market name Quest.[62][64]

## Consumption[edit]

Further information: Tobacco products

Tobacco is consumed in many forms and through a number of different methods.
Some examples are:

  * **Beedi** are thin, often flavoured cigarettes from India made of tobacco wrapped in a tendu leaf, and secured with coloured thread at one end.
  * **Chewing tobacco** is the oldest way of consuming tobacco leaves. It is consumed orally, in two forms: through sweetened strands, or in a shredded form. When consuming the long, sweetened strands, the tobacco is lightly chewed and compacted into a ball. When consuming the shredded tobacco, small amounts are placed at the bottom lip, between the gum and the teeth, where it is gently compacted, thus it can often be called dipping tobacco. Both methods stimulate the salivary glands, which led to the development of the spittoon.
  * **Cigars** are tightly rolled bundles of dried and fermented tobacco, which are ignited so their smoke may be drawn into the smokers' mouths.
  * **Cigarettes** are a product consumed through inhalation of smoke and manufactured from cured and finely cut tobacco leaves and reconstituted tobacco, often combined with other additives, then rolled into a paper cylinder.
  * **Creamy snuff** is tobacco paste, consisting of tobacco, clove oil, glycerin, spearmint, menthol, and camphor, and sold in a toothpaste tube. It is marketed mainly to women in India, and is known by the brand names Ipco (made by Asha Industries), Denobac, Tona, and Ganesh. It is locally known as _mishri_ in some parts of Maharashtra.
  * **Dipping tobaccos** are a form of smokeless tobacco. Dip is occasionally referred to as "chew", and because of this, it is commonly confused with chewing tobacco, which encompasses a wider range of products. A small clump of dip is 'pinched' out of the tin and placed between the lower or upper lip and gums. Some brands, as with snus, are portioned in small, porous pouches for less mess.
  * **Gutka** is a preparation of crushed betel nut, tobacco, and sweet or savory flavorings. It is manufactured in India and exported to a few other countries. A mild stimulant, it is sold across India in small, individual-sized packets.
  * **Heat-not-burn tobacco products** heat rather than burn tobacco to generate an aerosol that contains nicotine.
  * **Dokha** is a middle eastern tobacco with high nicotine levels grown in parts of Oman and Hatta, which is smoked through a thin pipe called a medwakh. It is a form of tobacco which is dried up and ground and contains little to no additives excluding spices, fruits, or flowers to enhance smell and flavor.
  * **Hookah** is a single- or multistemmed (often glass-based) water pipe for smoking. Hookahs were first used in India and Persia;[65] the hookah has gained immense popularity, especially in the Middle East. A hookah operates by water filtration and indirect heat. It can be used for smoking herbal fruits or moassel, a mixture of tobacco, flavouring, and honey or glycerin.
  * **Kreteks** are cigarettes made with a complex blend of tobacco, cloves, and a flavoring "sauce". They were first introduced in the 1880s in Kudus, Java, to deliver the medicinal eugenol of cloves to the lungs.
  * **Roll-your-own** , often called 'rollies' or 'roll-ups', are relatively popular in some European countries. These are prepared from loose tobacco, cigarette papers, and filters all bought separately. They are usually cheaper to make.
  * A **tobacco pipe** typically consists of a small chamber (the bowl) for the combustion of the tobacco to be smoked and a thin stem (shank) that ends in a mouthpiece (the bit). Shredded pieces of tobacco are placed into the chamber and ignited.
  * **Snuff** is a ground smokeless tobacco product, inhaled or "snuffed" through the nose. If referring specifically to the orally consumed moist snuff, see dipping tobacco.
  * **Snus** is a steam-pasteurized moist powdered tobacco product that is not fermented, and induces minimal salivation. It is consumed by placing it (loose or in little pouches) against the upper gums for an extended period of time. It is somewhat similar to dipping tobacco but does not require spitting and is significantly lower in TSNAs.
  * **Tobacco edibles** , often in the form of an infusion or a spice, have gained popularity in recent years.
  * **Topical tobacco paste** is sometimes used as a treatment for wasp, hornet, fire ant, scorpion, and bee stings.[66] An amount equivalent to the contents of a cigarette is mashed in a cup with about a half a teaspoon of water to make a paste that is then applied to the affected area.
  * **Tobacco water** is a traditional organic insecticide used in domestic gardening. Tobacco dust can be used similarly. It is produced by boiling strong tobacco in water, or by steeping the tobacco in water for a longer period. When cooled, the mixture can be applied as a spray, or 'painted' on to the leaves of garden plants, where it kills insects. Tobacco is, however, banned from use as pesticide in certified organic production by the USDA's National Organic Program.[67]

## Impact[edit]

### Social[edit]

Smoking in public was, for a long time, reserved for men, and when done by
women was sometimes associated with promiscuity; in Japan, during the Edo
period, prostitutes and their clients often approached one another under the
guise of offering a smoke. The same was true in 19th-century Europe.[68]

Following the American Civil War, the use of tobacco, primarily in cigars,
became associated with masculinity and power. Today, tobacco use is often
stigmatized; this has spawned quitting associations and antismoking
campaigns.[69][70] Bhutan is the only country in the world where tobacco sales
are illegal.[71] Due to its propensity for causing detumescence and erectile
dysfunction, some studies have described tobacco as an anaphrodisiacal
substance.[72]

### Demographic[edit]

Main article: Prevalence of tobacco consumption

Research on tobacco use is limited mainly to smoking, which has been studied
more extensively than any other form of consumption. An estimated 1.1 billion
people, and up to one-third of the adult population, use tobacco in some
form.[73] Smoking is more prevalent among men[74] (however, the gender gap
declines with age),[75][76] the poor, and in transitional or developing
countries.[77]

Rates of smoking continue to rise in developing countries, but have leveled
off or declined in developed countries.[78] Smoking rates in the United States
have dropped by half from 1965 to 2006, falling from 42% to 20.8% in
adults.[79] In the developing world, tobacco consumption is rising by 3.4% per
year.[80]

### Harmful effects of tobacco and smoking[edit]

Main article: Health effects of tobacco

See also: List of additives in cigarettes

Tobacco smoking poses a risk to health due to the inhalation of poisonous
chemicals in tobacco smoke such as carbon monoxide, cyanide, and carcinogens
which have been proven to cause heart and lung diseases and Cancer. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), tobacco is the single greatest cause
of preventable death globally.[81] The WHO estimates that tobacco caused 5.4
million deaths in 2004[82] and 100 million deaths over the course of the 20th
century.[83] Similarly, the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention describe tobacco use as "the single most important preventable risk
to human health in developed countries and an important cause of premature
death worldwide."[84]

Due to the health consequences of smoking tobacco, it is estimated that a 10
hectare field of tobacco used for cigarettes causes 30 deaths per year – 10
from lung cancer and 20 from cigarette-induced diseases like cardiac arrest,
gangrene, bladder cancer, mouth cancer, etc.[85]

The harms caused by inhalation of poisonous chemicals such as carbon monoxide
in tobacco smoke include diseases affecting the heart and lungs, with smoking
being a major risk factor for heart attacks, strokes, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (emphysema), and cancer (particularly lung cancer, cancers
of the larynx and mouth, and pancreatic cancers). Cancer is caused by inhaling
carcinogenic substances present in tobacco smoke.

Inhaling secondhand tobacco smoke can cause lung cancer in nonsmoking adults.
In the United States, about 3,000 adults die each year due to lung cancer from
secondhand smoke exposure. Heart disease caused by secondhand smoke kills
around 46,000 nonsmokers every year.[86]

The addictive alkaloid nicotine is a stimulant, and popularly known as the
most characteristic constituent of tobacco. Nicotine is known to produce
conditioned place preference, a sign of enforcement value.[87] Nicotine scores
almost as highly as opioids on drug effect questionnaire liking scales, which
are a rough indicator of addictive potential.[88] Users may develop tolerance
and dependence.[89][90] Thousands of different substances in cigarette smoke,
including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (such as benzopyrene),
formaldehyde, cadmium, nickel, arsenic, tobacco-specific nitrosamines, and
phenols contribute to the harmful effects of smoking.[91] Tobacco's overall
harm to user and self score as determined by a multi-criteria decision
analysis was determined at 3 percent below cocaine, and 13 percent above
amphetamines, ranking 6th most harmful of the 20 drugs assessed.[92]

Polonium 210 is a natural contaminant of tobacco, providing additional
evidence for the link between smoking and bronchial cancer.[93] It is also
extremely toxic, with one microgram being enough to kill the average adult
(250,000 times more toxic than hydrogen cyanide by weight).[94]

### Economic[edit]

![\[icon\]](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/Wiki_letter_w_cropped.svg/20px-

Wiki_letter_w_cropped.svg.png)|

This section **needs expansion** with: discussion of the impact on the poor,
taxation, and so forth. You can help by adding to it. _( January 2009)_

\---|---

Tobacco has a significant economic impact. The global tobacco market has been
approximated to be US$760 billion (excluding China).[95] Statistica estimates
that in the U.S. alone the tobacco industry has a market of US$121 billion[96]
despite the fact the CDC reports that US smoking rates are declining
steadily.[97] In the US, the decline in the number of smokers, the end of the
Tobacco Transition Payment Program in 2014, and competition from growers in
other countries, made tobacco farming economics more challenging.[98]

"Much of the disease burden and premature mortality attributable to tobacco
use disproportionately affect the poor", and of the 1.22 billion smokers, 1
billion of them live in developing or transitional economies.[77]

Smoking of tobacco is practised worldwide by over one billion people. However,
while smoking prevalence has declined in many developed countries, it remains
high in others and is increasing among women and in developing countries.
Between one-fifth and two-thirds of men in most populations smoke. Women's
smoking rates vary more widely but rarely equal male rates.[99]

In Indonesia, the lowest income group spends 15% of its total expenditures on
tobacco. In Egypt, more than 10% of households' expenditure in low-income
homes is on tobacco. The poorest 20% of households in Mexico spend 11% of
their income on tobacco.[100]

### Advertising[edit]

Main article: Tobacco advertising

Tobacco advertising of tobacco products by the tobacco industry is through a
variety of media, including sponsorship, particularly of sporting events. It
is now one of the most highly regulated forms of marketing. Some or all forms
of tobacco advertising are banned in many countries.

### Cinema[edit]

  * _Thank You for Smoking_
  * _The Insider_

## See also[edit]

  *     * List of tobacco-related topics
  * Research about cure of asthma and Bronchodilatation

## References[edit]

  1. **^** "Youth Tobacco Prevention: Underage Prevention Laws". _Transform Tobacco_. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2016. "As of August 2014, all but eight states had laws prohibiting minors from purchasing tobacco: Alaska, Colorado, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, and West Virginia. All but eleven states had youth tobacco possession laws in place. These are Delaware, Hawaii, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Tennessee and Pennsylvania. There are still six states which prohibit youth from possessing tobacco, but allow for an exemption where parents or guardians give permission for that possession: Delaware, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Ohio, and Texas."
  2. **^** Rudgley, Richard. "Tobacco: from The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Substances". _Biopsychiatry_. Little, Brown and Company (1998). Retrieved 26 November 2017.
  3. **^** "WHO Report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2008 (foreword and summary)" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2008: 8. "Tobacco is the single most preventable cause of death in the world today."
  4. **^** "World Association of International Studies, Stanford University".
  5. **^** Ernst, A. (1889). "On the etymology of the word tobacco". _The American Anthropologist_. **A2** (2): 133–142. doi:10.1525/aa.1889.2.2.02a00020.
  6. **^** Lane's Lexicon. page 1879.
  7. **^** The word _ṭubāq_ no longer refers to various herbs, but has come to refer, in some dialects, specifically to tobacco. _See_ Hans Wehr's Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic. page 647.
  8. **^** Goodman, Jordan. _Tobacco in History and Culture: An Encyclopedia_ (Detroit: Thomson Gale, 2005).
  9. **^** e.g. Heckewelder, _History, Manners and Customs of the Indian Nations who Once Inhabited Pennsylvania_ , p. 149 ff.
  10. **^** "They smoke with excessive eagerness ... men, women, girls and boys, all find their keenest pleasure in this way." - Dièreville describing the Mi'kmaq, _circa_ 1699 in _Port Royal_.
  11. **^** Jack Jacob Gottsegen, _Tobacco: A Study of Its Consumption in the United States_ , 1940, p. 107.
  12. **^** Appleby, Joyce (2010). _The Relentless Revolution: A History of Capitalism_. W.W. Norton  & Company. p. 131.
  13. **^** Harriot, Thomas, A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia, 1590, http://www.gutenberg.org/files/4247/4247-h/4247-h.htm
  14. **^** Eric Burns, _The Smoke of the Gods: A Social History of Tobacco_ (2006), A popular history focused on the US.
  15. **^** Jordan Goodman, _Tobacco in History: The Cultures of Dependence_ (1993), A scholarly history worldwide.
  16. **^** Charlotte Cosner, _The Golden Leaf: How Tobacco Shaped Cuba and the Atlantic World_ (Vanderbilt University Press; 2015)
  17. **^** Richard Kluger, _Ashes to Ashes: America's Hundred-Year Cigarette War_ (1996)
  18. **^** Allan Brandt, _The Cigarette Century: The Rise, Fall, and Deadly Persistence of the Product That Defined America_ (2007)
  19. **^** Pringle, Peter (22 February 1998). "Tobacco giant bred high-nicotine crop in attempt to keep smokers hooked". _Proquest.com_. Retrieved 2019-06-10.
  20. **^** "WHO | WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC)". Who.int. Retrieved 2008-09-18.
  21. **^** Lewis, Albert (1931). "Tobacco in New Guinea". _The American Anthropologist_. **33** (1): 134–139. doi:10.1525/aa.1931.33.1.02a00290.
  22. **^** Panter, KE; Keeler, RF; Bunch, TD; Callan, RJ (1990). "Congenital skeletal malformations and cleft palate induced in goats by ingestion of Lupinus, Conium and Nicotiana species". _Toxicon_. **28** (12): 1377–1385. doi:10.1016/0041-0101(90)90154-Y. PMID 2089736.
  23. **^** Elsey, K. D.; Rabb, R. L. (1967-12-01). "Biology of the Cabbage Looper on Tobacco In North Carolina1". _Journal of Economic Entomology_. **60** (6): 1636–1639. doi:10.1093/jee/60.6.1636. ISSN 0022-0493.
  24. **^** "Inside the Tobacco Deal - interview with David Kessler". PBS. 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-11.
  25. **^** van Willigen, John; Eastwood, Susan (2015). _Tobacco Culture: Farming Kentucky's Burley Belt_. University Press of Kentucky. p. 91. ISBN 9780813148083. Retrieved 2 February 2018.
  26. **^** "Tobacco-growing states in the USA" (PDF). Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids.
  27. **^** Cerami C, Founds H, Nicholl I, Mitsuhashi T, Giordano D, Vanpatten S, Lee A, Al-Abed Y, Vlassara H, Bucala R, Cerami A (1997). "Tobacco smoke is a source of toxic reactive glycation products". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America_. **94** (25): 13915–20. Bibcode:1997PNAS...9413915C. doi:10.1073/pnas.94.25.13915. PMC 28407. PMID 9391127.
  28. **^** "tobacco curing." The Hutchinson Unabridged Encyclopedia with Atlas and Weather guide. Abington: Helicon, 2010. Credo Reference. Web. 26 September 2012.
  29. **^** _Tobacco and its environmental impact: an overview_. World Health Organization,. [Geneva, Switzerland?]. ISBN 9789241512497. OCLC 988541317.CS1 maint: others (link)
  30. **^** "Tobacco Leaf Harvesting, Curing, and Fermenting". _Leaf Only_. Retrieved 20 April 2017.
  31. **^** "Pipe Tobacco". Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved April 20, 2017.
  32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. "Projection of tobacco production, consumption and trade for the year 2010." Rome, 2003.
  33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. _Higher World Tobacco use expected by 2010-growth rates slowing down." (Rome, 2004)._
  34. **^** Rowena Jacobs; et al. (2000). "The Supply-Side Effects Of Tobacco Control Policies". In Prabhat Jha; Frank J. Chaloupka (eds.). _Tobacco Control in Developing Countries_. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 311ff. ISBN 978-0-19-263250-0.
  35. **^** Hu, T-W; Mao, Z; et al. (2006). "China at the Crossroads: The Economics of Tobacco and Health". _Tobacco Control_. **15** : i37–i41. doi:10.1136/tc.2005.014621. PMC 2563551. PMID 16723674.
  36. **^** "FAOSTAT". Food And Agriculture Organization Of The United Nations. Retrieved 28 February 2017.
  37. **^** US Census Bureau-Foreign Trade Statistics, (Washington DC; 2005)
  38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. "Issues in the Global Tobacco Economy."
  39. **^** "People's Republic of China. " _State Tobacco Monopoly Administration_ ". Gov.cn. 2005-09-15. Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  40. **^** USC U.S.-China Institute, "Talking Points, February 3–17, 2010: http://china.usc.edu/ShowArticle.aspx?articleID=1992
  41. **^** "Tobacco Board, Guntur". Tobaccoboard.com. Retrieved 2014-04-21.
  42. **^** Shoba, John and Shailesh Vaite. Tobacco and Poverty: Observations from India and Bangladesh. Canada, 2002.
  43. **^** "Tobacco Manufacturing in India".
  44. **^** 3.Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. "Issues in the Global Tobacco Economy."
  45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ International Tobacco Growers' Association (n.d.). _Tobacco farming: sustainable alternatives? Volume 2_ (PDF). East Sussex: ITGA. ISBN 978-1872854021.
  46. **^** High Level Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor. "Report from South America." 2006.
  47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ILO. International Hazard Datasheets on Occupations: Field Crop Worker
  48. **^** UNICEF, The State of the World's Children 1997 (Oxford, 1997); US Department of Agriculture By the Sweat and Toil of Children Volume II: The Use of Child Labor in US Agricultural Imports  & Forced and Bonded Child Labor (Washington, 1995); ILO Bitter Harvest: Child Labour in Agriculture (Geneva, 1997); ILO Child Labour on Commercial Agriculture in Africa (Geneva 1997)
  49. **^** Plan International. _Malawi Child Tobacco Pickers' '50-a-day habit_ http://plan-international.org/about-plan/resources/media-centre/press-releases/malawi-child-tobacco-pickers-50-a-day-habit/?searchterm=tobacco
  50. **^** "International Cigarette Manufacturers," Tobacco Reporter, March 2001
  51. **^** The Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids (November 2001). "Golden Leaf, Barren Harvest: The Costs of Tobacco Farming" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-04-06.
  52. **^** "Tobacco Underground". _The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists_. Retrieved November 26, 2012.
  53. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Taylor, Peter (September 1994). _Smoke Ring: The Politics of Tobacco_. London: Panos Briefing Paper.
  54. **^** _FAO Yearbook, Production, Volume 48_. 1995.
  55. **^** National Research Council (1995). _Pesticides in the Diets of Infants and Children_. National Academy Press.
  56. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ World Health Organization. "Tobacco Free Initiative: Environmental issues".
  57. **^** Tobacco and its environmental impact: an overview World Health Organization, 2017
  58. **^** Ganapathi TR; et al. (2004). "Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) – A model system for tissue culture interventions and genetic engineering" (PDF). _Indian Journal of Biotechnology_. **3** : 171–184.
  59. **^** Fraley RT; et al. (1983). "Expression of bacterial genes in plant cells". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **80** (15): 4803–4807. Bibcode:1983PNAS...80.4803F. doi:10.1073/pnas.80.15.4803. PMC 384133. PMID 6308651.
  60. **^** "Science of Transgenic Cotton". Cottoncrc.org.au. Archived from the original on 2012-03-21. Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ James, Clive (1996). "Global Review of the Field Testing and Commercialization of Transgenic Plants: 1986 to 1995" (PDF). The International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications. Retrieved 17 July 2010.
  62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Tobacco". GMO Compass. Archived from the original on 2013-10-02. Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  63. **^** Conner AJ, Glare TR, Nap JP (Jan 2003). "The release of genetically modified crops into the environment. Part II. Overview of ecological risk assessment". _Plant J_. **33** (1): 19–46. doi:10.1046/j.0960-7412.2002.001607.x. PMID 12943539.
  64. **^** Rubin, Rita. "If You Took The Nicotine Out Of Cigarettes, Would Fewer People Want To Smoke?". _Forbes_. Retrieved 2019-05-03.
  65. **^** American Lung Association. February 2007 An Emerging Deadly Trend: Waterpipe Tobacco Use
  66. **^** Beverly Sparks, "Stinging and Biting Pests of People" Archived 2007-02-14 at the Wayback Machine Extension Entomologist of the University of Georgia College of Agricultural  & Environmental Sciences Cooperative Extension Service.
  67. **^** "Generic Materials Search | Organic Materials Review Institute". Omri.org. Archived from the original on 2015-07-23. Retrieved 2014-10-03.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  68. **^** Timon Screech, "Tobacco in Edo Period Japan" in _Smoke_ , pp. 92-99
  69. **^** Durkin Sarah; Brennan Emily; Wakefield Melanie (2012). "Mass media campaigns to promote smoking cessation among adults: an integrative review" (PDF). _Tobacco Control_. **21** (2): 127–138. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050345. PMID 22345235.
  70. **^** Mullin Sandra (2011). "Global anti-smoking campaigns urgently needed". _The Lancet_. **378** (9795): 970–971. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(11)61058-1. PMID 21741699.
  71. **^** The First Nonsmoking Nation, Slate.com
  72. **^** Verze, Paolo, et al. "The link between cigarette smoking and erectile dysfunction: a systematic review." European urology focus 1.1 (2015): 39-46.
  73. **^** Saner L. Gilman and Zhou Xun, "Introduction" in _Smoke_ ; p. 26
  74. **^** "Guindon  & Boisclair" 2004, pp. 13-16.
  75. **^** _Women and the Tobacco Epidemic: Challenges for the 21st Century_ 2001, pp.5-6.
  76. **^** _Surgeon General's Report — Women and Smoking_ 2001, p.47.
  77. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "WHO/WPRO-Tobacco". World Health Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific. 2005. Archived from the original on 2009-02-11. Retrieved 2009-01-01.
  78. **^** "Who Fact Sheet: Tobacco". Who.int. 2013-07-26. Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  79. **^** "Cigarette Smoking Among Adults - United States, 2006". Cdc.gov. Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  80. **^** "WHO/WPRO-Smoking Statistics". Wpro.who.int. 2002-05-27. Retrieved 2014-04-21.
  81. **^** World Health Organization (2008). _WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic 2008: The MPOWER Package_ (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-159628-2.page 14
  82. **^** "WHO global burden of disease report 2008" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  83. **^** "WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2008" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-10-03.
  84. **^** "Nicotine: A Powerful Addiction." Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Archive
  85. **^** Proctor, Robert N (2012-02-16). "The history of the discovery of the cigarette–lung cancer link: evidentiary traditions, corporate denial, global toll: Table 1". _Tobacco Control_. **21** (2): 87–91. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050338. ISSN 0964-4563.
  86. **^** Secondhand Smoke Archived 2014-09-20 at the Wayback Machine by BeTobaccoFree.gov
  87. **^** Le Foll, Bernard; Goldberg, Steven R. (1 April 2005). "Nicotine induces conditioned place preferences over a large range of doses in rats". _Psychopharmacology_. **178** (4): 481–492. doi:10.1007/s00213-004-2021-5. ISSN 0033-3158. PMID 15765262.
  88. **^** Fischman, N; Mello, N. _Testing for Abuse Liability of Drugs in Humans_ (PDF). 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Public Health Service Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration National Institute on Drug Abuse. p. 79. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-12-22.
  89. **^** "Tobacco Facts - Why is Tobacco So Addictive?". Tobaccofacts.org. Archived from the original on 2007-03-14. Retrieved 2008-09-18.
  90. **^** "Philip Morris Information Sheet". Stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 2008-04-05. Retrieved 2008-09-18.
  91. **^** Proctor Robert N (2012). "The history of the discovery of the cigarette-lung cancer link: evidentiary traditions, corporate denial, global toll" (PDF). _Tobacco Control_. **21** (2): 87–91. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050338. PMID 22345227.
  92. **^** Nutt, David J.; King, Leslie A.; Phillips, Lawrence D. (6 November 2010). "Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis". _Lancet_. **376** (9752): 1558–1565. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.690.1283. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61462-6. ISSN 1474-547X. PMID 21036393.
  93. **^** Radford, Edward P.; Hunt, Vilma R. (1964). "Polonium-210: A Volatile Radioelement in Cigarettes". _Science_. **143** (3603): 247–249. doi:10.1126/science.143.3603.247. JSTOR 1712451.
  94. **^** Sublette, Carey. "Polonium Poisoning".
  95. **^** "British American Tobacco - The global market". _www.bat.com_. Retrieved 2018-03-15.
  96. **^** "Tobacco: U.S. market value 2012-2017 | Statistic". _Statista_. Retrieved 2018-03-15.
  97. **^** Health, CDC's Office on Smoking and. "CDC - Trends in Current Cigarette Smoking - Smoking  & Tobacco Use". _Smoking and Tobacco Use_. Archived from the original on 2018-03-07. Retrieved 2018-03-15.
  98. **^** Bomey, Nathan (September 2, 2015). "Thousands of farmers stopped growing tobacco after deregulation payouts". _USA Today_.
  99. **^** "Tobacco: Active and Passive Smoking". _Greenfacts.org_. Retrieved 5 July 2016.
  100. **^** World Health Organization (2008). _WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic 2008: The MPOWER Package_ (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-159628-2. page 20

### Further reading[edit]

  * "WHO REPORT on the global TOBACCO epidemic" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2008. Retrieved 2008-01-01.
  * "The Global Burden of Disease 2004 Update" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2008. Retrieved 2008-01-01.
  * G. Emmanuel Guindon; David Boisclair (2003). "Past, current and future trends in tobacco use" (PDF). Washington DC: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. Retrieved 2008-01-02.
  * The World Health Organization; The Institute for Global Tobacco Control, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health (2001). "Women and the Tobacco Epidemic: Challenges for the 21st Century" (PDF). World Health Organization. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2003-11-28. Retrieved 2009-01-02.
  * "Surgeon General's Report — Women and Smoking". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2001. Retrieved 2009-01-03.
  * Richard Peto; Alan D Lopez; Jillian Boreham; Michael Thun (2006). "Mortality from Smoking in Developed Countries 1950-2000: indirect estimates from national vital statistics" (PDF). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-02-24. Retrieved 2009-01-03.
  * Gilman, Sander L.; Zhou, Xun (2004). _Smoke: A Global History of Smoking_. Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-200-3. Retrieved 2009-01-01.
  * "Cancer Facts & Figures 2015". _American Cancer Society_. Retrieved February 23, 2015.
  * Paul Lichtenstein; Niels V. Holm; Pia K. Verkasalo; Anastasia Iliadou; Jaakko Kaprio; Markku Koskenvuo; Eero Pukkala; Axel Skytthe; Kari Hemminki (2000). "Environmental and Heritable Factors in the Causation of Cancer — Analyses of Cohorts of Twins from Sweden, Denmark, and Finland". _New England Journal of Medicine_. **343** (2): 78–85. doi:10.1056/NEJM200007133430201. PMID 10891514.
  * Montesano, R.; Hall, J. (2001). "Environmental causes of human cancers". _European Journal of Cancer_. **37** : 67–87. doi:10.1016/S0959-8049(01)00266-0.
  * Janet E. Ash; Maryadele J. O'Neil; Ann Smith; Joanne F. Kinneary (June 1997) [1996]. _The Merck Index_ (12 ed.). Merk and Co. ISBN 978-0-412-75940-6.
  * Benedict, Carol. _Golden-Silk Smoke: A History of Tobacco in China, 1550-2010_ (2011)
  * Brandt, Allan. _The Cigarette Century: The Rise, Fall, and Deadly Persistence of the Product That Defined America_ (2007)
  * Breen, T. H. (1985). _Tobacco Culture_. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-00596-6. _Source on tobacco culture in 18th-century Virginia pp. 46–55_
  * Burns, Eric. The Smoke of the Gods: A Social History of Tobacco. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2007.
  * Collins, W.K. and S.N. Hawks. "Principles of Flue-Cured Tobacco Production" 1st Edition, 1993
  * Cosner, Charlotte. _The Golden Leaf: How Tobacco Shaped Cuba and the Atlantic World_ (Vanderbilt University Press; 2015)
  * Fuller, R. Reese (Spring 2003). Perique, the Native Crop. _Louisiana Life_.
  * Gately, Iain. _Tobacco: A Cultural History of How an Exotic Plant Seduced Civilization._ Grove Press, 2003. ISBN 0-8021-3960-4.
  * Goodman, Jordan. _Tobacco in History:The Cultures of Dependence_ (1993), A scholarly history worldwide.
  * Graves, John. "Tobacco that is not Smoked" in _From a Limestone Ledge_ (the sections on snuff and chewing tobacco) ISBN 0-394-51238-3
  * Grehan, James. Smoking and "Early Modern" Sociability: The Great Tobacco Debate in the Ottoman Middle East (Seventeenth to Eighteenth Centuries). _The American Historical Review_ , Vol. III, Issue 5. 2006. 22 March 2008 online
  * Hahn, Barbara. _Making Tobacco Bright: Creating an American Commodity, 1617-1937_ (Johns Hopkins University Press; 2011) 248 pages; examines how marketing, technology, and demand figured in the rise of Bright Flue-Cured Tobacco, a variety first grown in the inland Piedmont region of the Virginia-North Carolina border.
  * Killebrew, J. B. and Myrick, Herbert (1909). _Tobacco Leaf: Its Culture and Cure, Marketing and Manufacture._ Orange Judd Company. _Source for flea beetle typology (p. 243)_
  * Kluger, Richard. _Ashes to Ashes: America's Hundred-Year Cigarette War_ (1996), Pulitzer Prize
  * Murphey, Rhoads. _Studies on Ottoman Society and Culture: 16th-18th Centuries_. Burlington, VT: Ashgate: Variorum, 2007 ISBN 978-0-7546-5931-0 ISBN 0-7546-5931-3
  * Neuburger, Mary, 2012. _Balkan Smoke: tobacco and the making of modern Bulgaria_. Cornell University Press. 0801450845, 9780801450846
  * Poche, L. Aristee (2002). _Perique tobacco: Mystery and history_.
  * Price, Jacob M. "The rise of Glasgow in the Chesapeake tobacco trade, 1707-1775." _William and Mary Quarterly_ (1954) pp: 179-199. in JSTOR
  * Tilley, Nannie May _The Bright Tobacco Industry 1860–1929_ ISBN 0-405-04728-2.
  * Schoolcraft, Henry R. Historical and Statistical Information respecting the Indian Tribes of the United States (Philadelphia, 1851–57)
  * Shechter, Relli. _Smoking, Culture and Economy in the Middle East: The Egyptian Tobacco Market 1850–2000_. New York: I.B. Tauris  & Co. Ltd., 2006 ISBN 1-84511-137-0

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Tobacco**_.  
\---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Tobacco**_  
\---|---

  * International Tobacco Growers' Association
  * Natural Resources Conservation Service Plant Sheet - Wild tobacco
  * Ottoman Back Archives and Research Centre
  * Questions on European Union partial ban on some smokeless tobacco products ( _i.e._ snus)
  * Timeline of tobacco history
  * The European tobacco growers website
  * The Legacy Tobacco Documents Library
  * UCSF Tobacco Industry Videos Collection
  * CDC - Smoking and Tobacco Use Fact Sheet
  * TobReg - WHO Study Group on Tobacco Product Regulation
  * \- Statistics and general information about the effects of secondhand-smoke
  * Scientists Search for Healthy Uses for Tobacco
  * Charlton A (2004). "Medicinal uses of tobacco in history". _J R Soc Med_. **97** (6): 292–6. doi:10.1258/jrsm.97.6.292. PMC 1079499. PMID 15173337.

  * v

  * t
  * e

Plantation agriculture in the Southeastern United States

* * *

The plantation|

  * Plantations in the American South
  * Plantation economy
  * Plantation complexes in the Southern United States

Cash crops|

  * Cotton
  * Indigo
  * Rice
  * Sugarcane
  * Tobacco
  * Hemp

Slavery|

  * Slavery in the United States
    * Slave breeding
  * Slave trade 
    * Atlantic
    * Internal
    * Interregional
  * Fugitive slave laws

Other labor|

  * Sharecropping
  * Convict leasing

Lists of plantations|

  * United States
  * Alabama
  * Florida
    * Plantations of Leon County
  * Georgia
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Mississippi
  * North Carolina
  * South Carolina
  * Virginia
  * West Virginia

  * v

  * t
  * e

Psychoactive substance-related disorder (F10–F19, 291–292; 303–305)

* * *

General|

  * SID
    * Substance intoxication / Drug overdose
    * Withdrawal
    * Substance-induced psychosis
  * SUD
    * Substance abuse / Substance use disorder / Substance-related disorders
    * Physical dependence / Psychological dependence / Substance dependence

Alcohol|

| SID|

| Neurological  
disorders|

  * Alcoholic hallucinosis
  * Alcohol withdrawal
  * Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD)
  * Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)
  * Korsakoff's syndrome
  * Korsakoff's psychosis
  * Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome
  * Wernicke's encephalopathy

\---|---  
Digestive  
system|

  * Alcoholic hepatitis
  * Alcoholic liver disease
  * Auto-brewery syndrome

Nervous  
system|

  * Alcohol-related dementia
  * Alcoholic hallucinosis
  * Hangover

Cardiovascular  
system|

  * Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
  * Alcohol flush reaction

SUD|

  * Alcoholism (alcohol use disorder)
  * Binge drinking

Caffeine|

  * SID 
    * Effect of caffeine on memory
    * Caffeine-induced sleep disorder
  * SUD 
    * Caffeine dependence

Cannabis|

  * SID 
    * Effects of cannabis
    * Long-term effects of cannabis
  * SUD 
    * Cannabis dependence

Cocaine|

  * SID 
    * Cocaine intoxication
  * SUD 
    * Cocaine dependence

Hallucinogen|

  * SID 
    * Acute intoxication from hallucinogens (bad trip)
    * Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder

Opioids|

  * SID 
    * Opioid overdose
  * SUD 
    * Opioid use disorder

Sedative /  
hypnotic|

  * _benzodiazepine:_ SID 
    * Benzodiazepine overdose
    * Benzodiazepine withdrawal
  * SUD 
    * Benzodiazepine use disorder
    * Benzodiazepine dependence
  * _barbiturate:_ SID 
    * Barbiturate overdose
  * SUD 
    * Barbiturate dependence

Stimulants|

  * SID 
    * Stimulant psychosis
  * SUD 
    * Amphetamine dependence

Tobacco|

  * SID 
    * Nicotine poisoning
    * Nicotine withdrawal
  * SUD 
    * Nicotine dependence

Volatile  
solvent|

  * Inhalant abuse: Toluene toxicity

Poly drug use|

  * SID 
    * Combined drug intoxication
  * SUD 

    * Polysubstance dependence
  * v

  * t
  * e

Recreational drug use

* * *

Major  
recreational  
drugs|

| Depressants|

  * Barbiturates
  * Benzodiazepines
  * Carbamates
  * Ethanol (alcohol)
    * Alcoholic drinks
    * Beer
    * Wine
  * Gabapentinoids
  * GHB
  * Inhalants
    * Medical 
    * Nitrous oxide
    * Hazardous solvents
    * contact adhesives
    * Gasoline
    * nail polish remover
    * Paint thinner
    * Other 
    * Freon
  * Kava
  * Nonbenzodiazepines
  * Quinazolinones

\---|---  
Opioids|

  * Buprenorphine
    * Suboxone
    * Subutex
  * Codeine
  * Desomorphine
    * Krokodil
  * Dextropropoxyphene
    * Darvocet
    * Darvon
  * Fentanyl
  * Diamorphine
    * Heroin
  * Hydrocodone
  * Hydromorphone
    * Dilaudid
  * Methadone
  * Mitragyna speciosa
    * Kratom
  * Morphine
    * Opium
  * Oxycodone
    * /paracetamol
  * Tramadol

Stimulants|

  * Amphetamine
  * Arecoline
    * Areca
  * Betel
  * Caffeine
    * Coffee
    * Energy drinks
    * Tea
  * Cathinone
    * Khat
  * Cocaine
    * Coca
    * Crack
  * Ephedrine
    * Ephedra
  * MDPV
  * Mephedrone
  * Methamphetamine
  * Methylone
  * Methylphenidate
  * Modafinil
  * Nicotine
    * Tobacco
  * Theobromine
    * Cocoa
    * Chocolate

Entactogens|

  * 2C series
  * 6-APB
    * Benzofury
  * AMT
  * MDA
  * MDMA
    * Ecstasy

Hallucinogens|

| Psychedelics|

  * Bufotenin
    * Psychoactive toads
    * Vilca
    * Yopo
  * DMT
    * Ayahuasca
  * LSA
  * LSD-25
  * Mescaline
    * Peruvian torch
    * Peyote
    * San Pedro
  * Psilocybin / Psilocin
    * Psilocybin mushrooms

\---|---  
Dissociatives|

  * DXM
  * Glaucine
  * Inhalants
    * Nitrous oxide
    * alkyl nitrites
    * poppers
    * amyl nitrite
  * Ketamine
  * MXE
  * Muscimol
    * Amanita muscaria
  * PCP
  * Salvinorin A
    * Salvia divinorum

Deliriants|

  * Atropine and Scopolamine
    * Atropa belladonna
    * Datura
    * Hyoscyamus niger
    * Mandragora officinarum
  * Dimenhydrinate
  * Diphenhydramine

Cannabinoids|

  * JWH-018
  * THC
    * Cannabis
    * Hashish
    * Hash oil
    * Marijuana

Oneirogens|

  * Calea zacatechichi
  * Silene capensis

Club drugs|

  * Cocaine
  * Quaaludes
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Nitrous oxide
  * Poppers

Drug culture|

| Cannabis culture|

  * 420
  * Cannabis cultivation
  * Cannabis smoking
  * Head shop
  * Legal history of cannabis in the United States
  * Legality of cannabis
  * Marijuana Policy Project
  * Medical cannabis
  * NORML
  * Cannabis and religion
  * Stoner film

\---|---  
Coffee culture|

  * Coffee break
  * Coffeehouse
  * Latte art
  * Tea house

Drinking culture|

  * Bartending
  * Beer culture
  * Beer festival
  * Binge drinking
  * Diethyl ether
  * Drinking games
  * Drinking song
  * Happy hour
  * Hip flask
  * Nightclub
  * Pub
  * Pub crawl
  * Sommelier
  * Sports bar
  * Tailgate party
  * Wine bar
  * Wine tasting

Psychedelia|

  * Psychonautics
  * Art
  * Drug
  * Era
  * Experience
  * Literature
  * Music
  * Microdosing
  * Therapy

Smoking culture|

  * Cigarette card
  * Fashion cigarettes
  * Cloud-chasing
  * Loosie
  * Smokeasy
  * Smoking fetishism
  * Tobacco smoking

Other|

  * Club drug
  * Counterculture of the 1960s
  * Dance party
  * Drug paraphernalia
  * Drug tourism
  * Entheogen
  * Hippie
  * Needle sharing
  * Nootropic
  * Party and play
  * Poly drug use
  * Rave
  * Religion and drugs
  * Self-medication
  * Sex and drugs
  * Whoonga

Drug  
production  
and trade|

| Drug  
production|

  * Coca production in Colombia
  * Drug precursors
  * Opium production in Afghanistan
  * Rolling meth lab

\---|---  
Drug trade|

  * Illegal drug trade
    * Colombia
  * Darknet market
  * Drug distribution
    * Beer shop
    * Cannabis shop
    * Liquor store
    * Liquor license

Issues with  
drug use|

  * Abuse
  * Date rape drug
  * Impaired driving
  * Drug harmfulness
    * Effects of cannabis
  * Addiction
  * Dependence
    * Prevention
    * Opioid replacement therapy
    * Rehabilitation
    * Responsible use
  * Drug-related crime
  * Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
  * Long-term effects of cannabis
  * Neurotoxicity
  * Overdose
  * Passive smoking
    * of tobacco or other substances

Legality of  
drug use|

| International|

  * 1961 Narcotic Drugs
  * 1971 Psychotropic Substances
  * 1988 Drug Trafficking
  * Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs

\---|---  
State level|

  * Drug policy
    * Decriminalization
    * Prohibition
    * Supply reduction
  * Policy reform
    * Demand reduction
    * Drug Policy Alliance
    * Harm reduction
    * Law Enforcement Action Partnership
    * Liberalization
    * Latin America
    * Students for Sensible Drug Policy
    * Transform Drug Policy Foundation

Drug policy  
by country|

  * Australia
  * Canada
  * Germany
  * India
  * Netherlands
  * Portugal
  * Slovakia
  * Soviet Union
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United States
    * Just Say No
    * Office of National Drug Control Policy
    * School district drug policies
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Maryland
    * Virginia

Other|

  * Arguments for and against drug prohibition
  * Capital punishment for drug trafficking
  * Cognitive liberty
  * Designer drug
  * Drug court
  * Drug possession
  * Drug test
  * Narc
  * Politics of drug abuse
  * War on Drugs
    * Mexican Drug War
    * Plan Colombia
    * Philippine Drug War
  * Zero tolerance

Lists of  
countries by...|

  * Alcohol legality
    * Alcohol consumption
  * Anabolic steroid legality
  * Cannabis legality
    * Annual use
    * Lifetime use
  * Cigarette consumption
  * Cocaine legality
    * Cocaine use
  * Methamphetamine legality
  * Opiates use
  * Psilocybin mushrooms legality
  * Salvia legality

  * v

  * t
  * e

Cigarettes

* * *

Types|

  * Fashion
  * Fire safe
  * Kretek
  * Lights
  * Menthol
  * Beedi

|

![Zwei

zigaretten.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/32/Zwei_zigaretten.jpg/120px-

Zwei_zigaretten.jpg)

Components|

  * Tobacco
  * Rolling paper
  * Filter
  * Additives

Peripherals|

  * Ashtray
  * Case
  * Holder
  * Lighter
  * Pack
  * Receptacles
  * Vending machine

Culture|

  * Cigarette card
  * Cigarette smoking among college students
  * Loosie
  * Smoking fetishism
  * Tobacco smoking

Health issues|

  * Chain smoking
  * Cigarette smoking for weight loss
  * Nicotine poisoning
  * Passive smoking
  * Third-hand smoke
  * Schizophrenia and smoking
  * Sidestream smoke
  * Smoking cessation
  * Tobacco harm reduction

Related products|

  * Electronic cigarette
    * E-liquid
  * Candy cigarette
  * Herbal cigarette
  * Heat-not-burn tobacco product
  * Nicotine patch
  * Nicotine gum
  * Nicotine inhaler
  * Nicotine lozenge

Tobacco industry|

  * Cultivation of tobacco
  * Egyptian cigarette industry
  * History of commercial tobacco in the United States
  * Tobacco advertising

Government  
and the law|

  * Cigarette smuggling
  * Illicit cigarette trade
  * Plain cigarette packaging
  * Smoking age
  * Smoking bans in private vehicles
  * Tobacco control movement
  * Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement
  * Tobacco packaging warning messages
  * Tobacco politics
  * WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
  * Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products

Lists|

  * Cigarette brands
  * Cigarette smoke carcinogens
  * Countries by cigarette consumption per capita
  * Rolling papers
  * Smoking bans

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **Category**

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**

Pharmacodynamics

* * *

|

  * v
  * t
  * e

Monoamine metabolism modulators

* * *

Non-specific|

| AAAD|

  * **Substrates→Products:** L-DOPA (levodopa)→Dopamine
  * 5-HTP→Serotonin
  * L-Histidine→Histamine
  * Phenylalanine→Phenethylamine
  * L-Tyrosine→Tyramine
  * Tryptophan→Tryptamine

  * **Inhibitors:** Benserazide

  * Carbidopa
  * DFMD
  * Genistein
  * Methyldopa

\---|---  
MAO|

|

  * **Substrates→Products (with ALDH/ALR):** Epinephrine (adrenaline)→DHMA
  * Metanephrine→MHPG/VMA
  * Norepinephrine (noradrenaline)→DHMA
  * Normetanephrine→MHPG/VMA
  * Dopamine→DOPAC
  * 3-Methoxytyramine→HVA
  * Serotonin→5-HIAA

  * **Inhibitors:** _Non-selective:_ Benmoxin

  * Caroxazone
  * Echinopsidine
  * Furazolidone
  * Guineesine
  * Hydralazine
  * Indantadol
  * Iproclozide
  * Iproniazid
  * Isocarboxazid
  * Isoniazid
  * Linezolid
  * Mebanazine
  * Metfendrazine
  * Nialamide
  * Octamoxin
  * Paraxazone
  * Phenelzine
  * Pheniprazine
  * Phenoxypropazine
  * Pivhydrazine
  * Procarbazine
  * Safrazine
  * Tranylcypromine

* * *

  * **Inhibitors:** _MAO-A-selective:_ Amiflamine
  * Bazinaprine
  * Befloxatone
  * Brofaromine
  * Cimoxatone
  * Clorgiline
  * CX157 (Tyrima)
  * Eprobemide
  * Esuprone
  * Harmala alkaloids (e.g., harmine, harmaline, harman, norharman, tetrahydroharmine)
  * Methylene blue
  * Metralindole
  * Minaprine
  * Moclobemide
  * Pirlindole
  * Sercloremine
  * Tetrindole
  * Toloxatone

  * **Inhibitors:** _MAO-B selective:_ Adarigiline

  * Almoxatone
  * D-Deprenyl
  * Ethanol
  * Ladostigil
  * Lazabemide
  * Milacemide
  * Mofegiline
  * Nicotine
  * Pargyline‡
  * Rasagiline
  * Safinamide
  * Selegiline (L-Deprenyl)
  * Sembragiline

Phenethylamines  
(dopamine, epinephrine,  
norepinephrine)|

| PAH|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Phenylalanine→Tyrosine

  * **Inhibitors:** 3,4-Dihydroxystyrene

\---|---  
TH|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Tyrosine→ L-DOPA (levodopa)

  * **Inhibitors:** 2-Hydroxyestradiol

  * 2-Hydroxyestrone
  * 3-Iodotyrosine
  * Aquayamycin
  * Bulbocapnine
  * Metirosine
  * Oudenone

DBH|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Dopamine→Norepinephrine (Noradrenaline)

  * **Inhibitors:** Bupicomide

  * Disulfiram
  * Dopastin
  * Fusaric acid
  * Nepicastat
  * Phenopicolinic acid
  * Tropolone

PNMT|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Norepinephrine (noradrenaline)→Epinephrine (adrenaline)

  * **Inhibitors:** CGS-19281A

  * SKF-64139
  * SKF-7698

COMT|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Dopamine→3-Methoxytyramine
  * DOPAC→Homovanillic acid
  * Norepinephrine→Normetanephrine
  * Epinephrine→Metanephrine
  * DOPEG→MOPEG
  * DOMA→VMA
  * 2-Hydroxyestradiol→2-Methoxyestradiol
  * 2-Hydroxyestrone→2-Methoxyestrone
  * 4-Hydroxyestradiol→4-Methoxyestradiol
  * 4-Hydroxyestrone→4-Methoxyestrone

  * **Inhibitors:** 2-Hydroxyestradiol

  * 2-Hydroxyestrone
  * Entacapone
  * Nitecapone
  * Opicapone
  * Tolcapone

Tryptamines  
(serotonin, melatonin)|

| TPH|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Tryptophan→5-HTP

  * **Inhibitors:** AGN-2979

  * Fenclonine (PCPA)
  * Telotristat ethyl

\---|---  
AANAT|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Serotonin→N-Acetylserotonin

ASMT|

  * **Substrates→Products:** N-Acetylserotonin→Melatonin

Histamine|

| HDC|

  * **Substrates→Products:** L-Histidine→Histamine

  * **Inhibitors:** Catechin

  * Alpha-Fluoromethylhistidine
  * Histidine methyl ester
  * Meciadanol
  * Naringenin
  * Tritoqualine

\---|---  
HNMT|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Histamine→N-Methylhistamine

  * **Inhibitors:** Amodiaquine

  * Diphenhydramine
  * Harmaline
  * Metoprine
  * Quinacrine
  * SKF-91488
  * Tacrine

DAO|

  * **Substrates→Products:** Histamine→Imidazole acetic acid

  * **Inhibitors:** Pimagedine (aminoguanidine)

_**See also:** Receptor/signaling modulators • Adrenergics • Dopaminergics •
Melatonergics • Serotonergics • Monoamine reuptake inhibitors • Monoamine
releasing agents • Monoamine neurotoxins_

  * v
  * t
  * e

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor modulators

* * *

nAChRs|

| Agonists  
(and PAMs)|

  * 5-HIAA
  * A-84,543
  * A-366,833
  * A-582,941
  * A-867,744
  * ABT-202
  * ABT-418
  * ABT-560
  * ABT-894
  * Acetylcholine
  * Altinicline
  * Anabasine
  * Anatoxin-a
  * AR-R17779
  * Bephenium hydroxynaphthoate
  * Butinoline
  * Butyrylcholine
  * Carbachol
  * Choline
  * Cotinine
  * Cytisine
  * Decamethonium
  * Desformylflustrabromine
  * Dianicline
  * Dimethylphenylpiperazinium
  * Epibatidine
  * Epiboxidine
  * Ethanol (alcohol)
  * Ethoxysebacylcholine
  * EVP-4473
  * EVP-6124
  * Galantamine
  * GTS-21
  * Ispronicline
  * Ivermectin
  * JNJ-39393406
  * Levamisole
  * Lobeline
  * MEM-63,908 (RG-3487)
  * Morantel
  * Nicotine (tobacco)
  * NS-1738
  * PHA-543,613
  * PHA-709,829
  * PNU-120,596
  * PNU-282,987
  * Pozanicline
  * Pyrantel
  * Rivanicline
  * RJR-2429
  * Sazetidine A
  * SB-206553
  * Sebacylcholine
  * SIB-1508Y
  * SIB-1553A
  * SSR-180,711
  * Suberyldicholine
  * Suxamethonium (succinylcholine)
  * Suxethonium (succinyldicholine)
  * TC-1698
  * TC-1734
  * TC-1827
  * TC-2216
  * TC-5214
  * TC-5619
  * TC-6683
  * Tebanicline
  * Tribendimidine
  * Tropisetron
  * UB-165
  * Varenicline
  * WAY-317,538
  * XY-4083

\---|---  
Antagonists  
(and NAMs)|

  * 18-MAC
  * 18-MC
  * α-Neurotoxins (e.g., α-bungarotoxin, α-cobratoxin, α-conotoxin, many others)
  * ABT-126
  * Alcuronium
  * Allopregnanolone
  * Amantadine
  * Anatruxonium
  * AQW051
  * Atracurium
  * Barbiturates (e.g., pentobarbital, sodium thiopental)
  * BNC-210
  * Bungarotoxins (e.g., α-bungarotoxin, κ-bungarotoxin)
  * Bupropion
  * BW-A444
  * Candocuronium iodide (chandonium iodide)
  * Chlorisondamine
  * Cisatracurium
  * Coclaurine
  * Coronaridine
  * Curare
  * Cyclopropane
  * Dacuronium bromide
  * Decamethonium
  * Dehydronorketamine
  * Desflurane
  * Dextromethorphan
  * Dextropropoxyphene
  * Dextrorphan
  * Diadonium
  * DHβE
  * Dihydrochandonium
  * Dimethyltubocurarine (metocurine)
  * Dioscorine
  * Dipyrandium
  * Dizocilpine (MK-801)
  * Doxacurium
  * Encenicline
  * Enflurane
  * Erythravine
  * Esketamine
  * Fazadinium
  * Gallamine
  * Gantacurium chloride
  * Halothane
  * Hexafluronium
  * Hexamethonium (benzohexonium)
  * Hydroxybupropion
  * Hydroxynorketamine
  * Ibogaine
  * Isoflurane
  * Ketamine
  * Kynurenic acid
  * Laudanosine
  * Laudexium (laudolissin)
  * Levacetylmethadol
  * Levomethadone
  * Malouetine
  * ME-18-MC
  * Mecamylamine
  * Memantine
  * Methadone
  * Methorphan (racemethorphan)
  * Methyllycaconitine
  * Metocurine
  * Mivacurium
  * Morphanol (racemorphan)
  * Neramexane
  * Nitrous oxide
  * Norketamine
  * Pancuronium bromide
  * Pempidine
  * Pentamine
  * Pentolinium
  * Phencyclidine
  * Pipecuronium bromide
  * Progesterone
  * Promegestone
  * Radafaxine
  * Rapacuronium bromide
  * Reboxetine
  * Rocuronium bromide
  * Sevoflurane
  * Stercuronium iodide
  * Surugatoxin
  * Thiocolchicoside
  * Toxiferine
  * Tramadol
  * Trimetaphan camsilate (trimethaphan camsylate)
  * Tropeinium
  * Tubocurarine
  * Vanoxerine
  * Vecuronium bromide
  * Xenon

Precursors  
(and prodrugs)|

  * Acetyl-coA
  * Adafenoxate
  * Choline (lecithin)
  * Citicoline
  * Cyprodenate
  * Dimethylethanolamine
  * Glycerophosphocholine
  * Meclofenoxate (centrophenoxine)
  * Phosphatidylcholine
  * Phosphatidylethanolamine
  * Phosphorylcholine
  * Pirisudanol

_**See also:** Receptor/signaling modulators • Muscarinic acetylcholine
receptor modulators • Acetylcholine metabolism/transport modulators_

  * v
  * t
  * e

TRP channel modulators

* * *

TRPA|

| Activators|

  * 4-Hydroxynonenal
  * 4-Oxo-2-nonenal
  * 4,5-EET
  * 12S-HpETE
  * 15-Deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2
  * α-Sanshool (ginger, Sichuan and melegueta peppers)
  * Acrolein
  * Allicin (garlic)
  * Allyl isothiocyanate (mustard, radish, horseradish, wasabi)
  * AM404
  * Bradykinin
  * Cannabichromene (cannabis)
  * Cannabidiol (cannabis)
  * Cannabigerol (cannabis)
  * Cinnamaldehyde (cinnamon)
  * CR gas (dibenzoxazepine; DBO)
  * CS gas (2-chlorobenzal malononitrile)
  * Curcumin (turmeric)
  * Dehydroligustilide (celery)
  * Diallyl disulfide
  * Dicentrine ( _Lindera_ spp.)
  * Farnesyl thiosalicylic acid
  * Formalin
  * Gingerols (ginger)
  * Hepoxilin A3
  * Hepoxilin B3
  * Hydrogen peroxide
  * Icilin
  * Isothiocyanate
  * Ligustilide (celery, _Angelica acutiloba_ )
  * Linalool (Sichuan pepper, thyme)
  * Methylglyoxal
  * Methyl salicylate (wintergreen)
  * N-Methylmaleimide
  * Nicotine (tobacco)
  * Oleocanthal (olive oil)
  * Paclitaxel (Pacific yew)
  * Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
  * PF-4840154
  * Phenacyl chloride
  * Polygodial (Dorrigo pepper)
  * Shogaols (ginger, Sichuan and melegueta peppers)
  * Tear gases
  * Tetrahydrocannabinol (cannabis)
  * Thiopropanal S-oxide (onion)
  * Umbellulone ( _Umbellularia californica_ )
  * WIN 55,212-2

\---|---  
Blockers|

  * Dehydroligustilide (celery)
  * Nicotine (tobacco)
  * Ruthenium red

TRPC|

| Activators|

  * Adhyperforin (St John's wort)
  * Diacyl glycerol
  * GSK1702934A
  * Hyperforin (St John's wort)
  * Substance P

\---|---  
Blockers|

  * DCDPC
  * DHEA-S
  * Flufenamic acid
  * GSK417651A
  * GSK2293017A
  * Meclofenamic acid
  * N-(p-Amylcinnamoyl)anthranilic acid
  * Niflumic acid
  * Pregnenolone sulfate
  * Progesterone
  * Pyr3
  * Tolfenamic acid

TRPM|

| Activators|

  * ADP-ribose
  * BCTC
  * Calcium (intracellular)
  * Cold
  * Coolact P
  * Cooling Agent 10
  * CPS-369
  * Eucalyptol (eucalyptus)
  * Frescolat MGA
  * Frescolat ML
  * Geraniol
  * Hydroxycitronellal
  * Icilin
  * Linalool
  * Menthol (mint)
  * PMD 38
  * Pregnenolone sulfate
  * Rutamarin ( _Ruta graveolens_ )
  * Steviol glycosides (e.g., stevioside) ( _Stevia rebaudiana_ )
  * Sweet tastants (e.g., glucose, fructose, sucrose; indirectly)
  * Thio-BCTC
  * WS-3
  * WS-12
  * WS-23

\---|---  
Blockers|

  * Capsazepine
  * Clotrimazole
  * DCDPC
  * Elismetrep
  * Flufenamic acid
  * Meclofenamic acid
  * Mefenamic acid
  * N-(p-Amylcinnamoyl)anthranilic acid
  * Nicotine (tobacco)
  * Niflumic acid
  * Ruthenium red
  * Rutamarin ( _Ruta graveolens_ )
  * Tolfenamic acid
  * TPPO

TRPML|

| Activators|

  * MK6-83
  * PI(3,5)P2
  * SF-22

\---|---

TRPP|

| Activators|

  * Triptolide ( _Tripterygium wilfordii_ )

\---|---  
Blockers|

  * Ruthenium red

TRPV|

| Activators|

  * 2-APB
  * 5',6'-EET
  * 9-HODE
  * 9-oxoODE
  * 12S-HETE
  * 12S-HpETE
  * 13-HODE
  * 13-oxoODE
  * 20-HETE
  * α-Sanshool (ginger, Sichuan and melegueta peppers)
  * Allicin (garlic)
  * AM404
  * Anandamide
  * Bisandrographolide ( _Andrographis paniculata_ )
  * Camphor (camphor laurel, rosemary, camphorweed, African blue basil, camphor basil)
  * Cannabidiol (cannabis)
  * Cannabidivarin (cannabis)
  * Capsaicin (chili pepper)
  * Carvacrol (oregano, thyme, pepperwort, wild bergamot, others)
  * DHEA
  * Diacyl glycerol
  * Dihydrocapsaicin (chili pepper)
  * Estradiol
  * Eugenol (basil, clove)
  * Evodiamine ( _Euodia ruticarpa_ )
  * Gingerols (ginger)
  * GSK1016790A
  * Heat
  * Hepoxilin A3
  * Hepoxilin B3
  * Homocapsaicin (chili pepper)
  * Homodihydrocapsaicin (chili pepper)
  * Incensole (incense)
  * Lysophosphatidic acid
  * Low pH (acidic conditions)
  * Menthol (mint)
  * N-Arachidonoyl dopamine
  * N-Oleoyldopamine
  * N-Oleoylethanolamide
  * Nonivamide (PAVA) (PAVA spray)
  * Nordihydrocapsaicin (chili pepper)
  * Paclitaxel (Pacific yew)
  * Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
  * Phorbol esters (e.g., 4α-PDD)
  * Piperine (black pepper, long pepper)
  * Polygodial (Dorrigo pepper)
  * Probenecid
  * Protons
  * RhTx
  * Rutamarin ( _Ruta graveolens_ )
  * Resiniferatoxin (RTX) ( _Euphorbia resinifera/pooissonii_ )
  * Shogaols (ginger, Sichuan and melegueta peppers)
  * Tetrahydrocannabivarin (cannabis)
  * Thymol (thyme, oregano)
  * Tinyatoxin ( _Euphorbia resinifera/pooissonii_ )
  * Tramadol
  * Vanillin (vanilla)
  * Zucapsaicin

\---|---  
Blockers|

  * α-Spinasterol ( _Vernonia tweediana_ )
  * AMG-517
  * Asivatrep
  * BCTC
  * Cannabigerol (cannabis)
  * Cannabigerolic acid (cannabis)
  * Cannabigerovarin (cannabis)
  * Cannabinol (cannabis)
  * Capsazepine
  * DCDPC
  * DHEA
  * DHEA-S
  * Flufenamic acid
  * GRC-6211
  * HC-067047
  * Lanthanum
  * Mavatrep
  * Meclofenamic acid
  * N-(p-Amylcinnamoyl)anthranilic acid
  * NGD-8243
  * Niflumic acid
  * Pregnenolone sulfate
  * RN-1734
  * RN-9893
  * Ruthenium red
  * SB-705498
  * Tivanisiran
  * Tolfenamic acid

_**See also:** Receptor/signaling modulators • Ion channel modulators_

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tobacco&oldid=901298114"

Categories:

  * Tobacco
  * Crops originating from the Americas
  * Entheogens
  * Herbal and fungal stimulants
  * Leaves
  * Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
  * Native American religion
  * Nicotinic agonists
  * IARC Group 1 carcinogens

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: others
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
  * Drugs with non-standard legal status
  * Articles containing Arabic-language text
  * Articles needing additional references from June 2017
  * All articles needing additional references
  * Articles needing additional references from May 2008
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012
  * All articles with failed verification
  * Articles with failed verification from July 2017
  * Articles to be expanded from January 2009
  * All articles to be expanded
  * Articles using small message boxes
  * Portal templates with all redlinked portals

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikinews
  * Wikiquote

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * አማርኛ
  * Ænglisc
  * العربية
  * Aragonés
  * Armãneashti
  * অসমীয়া
  * Asturianu
  * تۆرکجه
  * বাংলা
  * Bahasa Banjar
  * Bân-lâm-gú
  * Башҡортса
  * Беларуская
  * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
  * Български
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * Буряад
  * Català
  * ChiShona
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deitsch
  * Deutsch
  * डोटेली
  * Eesti
  * Ελληνικά
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Føroyskt
  * Français
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * हिन्दी
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ilokano
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Íslenska
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Jawa
  * ಕನ್ನಡ
  * ქართული
  * Қазақша
  * Kiswahili
  * Кыргызча
  * Latina
  * Latviešu
  * Lietuvių
  * Limburgs
  * Lingua Franca Nova
  * Magyar
  * मैथिली
  * മലയാളം
  * मराठी
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Mirandés
  * Монгол
  * မြန်မာဘာသာ
  * Nederlands
  * नेपाली
  * नेपाल भाषा
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Norsk nynorsk
  * Nouormand
  * Occitan
  * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
  * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
  * پنجابی
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Русский
  * Scots
  * Shqip
  * සිංහල
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Slovenščina
  * Soomaaliga
  * کوردی
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * தமிழ்
  * Татарча/tatarça
  * ไทย
  * ತುಳು
  * Türkçe
  * Українська
  * اردو
  * Vahcuengh
  * Tiếng Việt
  * Võro
  * West-Vlams
  * Winaray
  * 吴语
  * ייִדיש
  * 粵語
  * Žemaitėška
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 10 June 2019, at 23:41 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel

