

### Join Our Newsletter Now!

×

Follow Us: **___** _

  * Daily News
  * Articles
  * Health
  * How To
  * Sex & Love
  * More
    * Beauty
    * Business
    * Edibles
    * Law
    * Science
  * Cannabis 101

![Jane Street - Your Daily Resource For All Things Cannabis and Medical

Marijuana](//janest.com/wp-content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/jsj-logo-

bw.png)

## ![Jane Street - Your Daily Resource For All Things Cannabis and Medical

Marijuana](//janest.com/wp-content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/jsj-logo-
bw.png)

* * *

Join

  * Daily News
  * Articles
  * Health
  * How To
  * Sex & Love
  * More
    * Beauty
    * Business
    * Edibles
    * Law
    * Science
  * Cannabis 101

# Could Monsanto Corner the Cannabis Market?

By Madison MargolinMarch 1, 2017

2 minute Read

It was only a matter of time before Monsanto, everyone's most hated
agricultural behemoth, would get its grubby GMO fingers on cannabis.

Monsanto has denied that it's working on genetically modified strains of
marijuana, but there are rumors to the contrary.

"While Monsanto certainly isn't above criticism, we have identified incorrect
information that — after being repeated numerous times in different articles
and online communities — has now evolved into 'myths' about what we do," the
company posted on its website. "Monsanto has not and is not working on GMO
marijuana. This allegation is an Internet rumor."

The term "marijuana," however is different from "cannabis." Legally speaking,
marijuana refers to a cannabis plant with more than .03 percent THC
(tetrahydrocannabinol), the chemical compound that makes you feel high, while
hemp refers to its THC-less cousin. Cannabis can be used as an umbrella term
for the plant, including both hemp and marijuana.

While to date, no one has officially announced working on genetically modified
marijuana, the threat of corporate conquest by Monsanto or one of its peers is
a growing threat to small-time cannabis cultivators. Hemp and hemp-derived
products, such as non-psychotropic CBD (cannabidiol) oil, are currently the
most vulnerable to the Monsanto's of the world. And while few mom-and-pops are
going after U.S. patent protection yet for particular cannabis strains, when
patents become more commonplace, they'll likely first get handed out to Big
Pharma.

As the FDA comes to regulate CBD derived from hemp, cultivators and producers
will come under more scrutiny, according to Craig Brand, founder of the
international firm Ganja Law. That means tougher competition for the little
guys coming from big pharmaceutical companies.

"Monsanto is already growing various strains of hemp," Brand told
Ganjapreneur. "You don't have to be a rocket scientist to figure out their
next move and our forthcoming fight to remain on the playing field."

In a conversation with Jane Street, Brand alluded to a "bigger play at hand"
involving both big business and the FDA. While historically big pharmaceutical
companies have rallied against marijuana legalization, he suggests the tide is
changing with evidence that legal weed is a $6.7 billion industry and growing.

Today, the only cannabinoid-based medications with FDA approval employ
synthetic cannabinoids instead of those derived from actual plant material.
Dronabinol, a synthetic form of THC, for instance, is sold under the brand
name Marinol.

However, if marijuana gets descheduled one day or rescheduled as a federally
legal medication, Brand speculates pharmaceutical companies will seek FDA or
USDA approval, looking ultimately to stock the shelves of CVS or Wallgreens
with cannabis-derived medications. "Monsanto will work on its strains of hemp,
and could get FDA approval or USDA approval for those strains," Brand says.
"And if you end using those strains, you'll be subject to patent or trademark
violations."

Ralph Risch, chief operating officer at Phylos Bioscience, is also concerned.
"Like many growers and breeders, we're concerned that Monsanto or someone else
could come into this space and start filing patents in a way that would
restrict the ability of the people who already have the genetics to use the
varieties we have."

Smaller scale cannabis cultivators birthed the industry, for decades risking
their freedom to provide whole plant medicine to those in needs. "We created
this industry, we gave it life and brought it to the people," says Brand. "Now
it needs to be run by the people, not be lost to big pharmaceutical companies
and companies like Monsanto taking it away from us."

Filed Under: gmo marijuana | monsanto

__ Stay In The Know. Sign Up For Our Daily Newsletter!

![](//janest.com/wp-content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/facebook-

white-60.png) ![](//janest.com/wp-

content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/pinterest-white-60.png)
![](//janest.com/wp-content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/twitter-

white-60.png) ![](//janest.com/wp-

content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/email-white-60.png)

![](//janest.com/wp-content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/facebook-

white-60.png) ![](//janest.com/wp-

content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/pinterest-white-60.png)
![](//janest.com/wp-content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/twitter-

white-60.png) ![](//janest.com/wp-

content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/social/email-white-60.png)

![Could Monsanto Corner the Cannabis Market?](//janest.com/wp-

content/themes/EuclidAve/assets/images/blank.gif)

### Recent Articles

![](https://janest.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/period-card.jpg)

#### How Cannabis Affects Your Period Cycle

By Madison MargolinFebruary 16, 2018

![](https://janest.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/dui-card.jpg)

#### Why Weed DUI Technology is Lacking

By Madison MargolinFebruary 16, 2018

![](https://janest.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/chart-weed-card.png)

#### How Marijuana Slang is Evolving

By Madison MargolinFebruary 15, 2018

![](https://janest.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/neausea-card.jpg)

#### How to Use Cannabis to Treat the Flu

By Madison MargolinFebruary 13, 2018

![](https://janest.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/convict-card.jpg)

#### SF Clears Thousands of Pot Convictions

By Madison MargolinFebruary 13, 2018

![](https://janest.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/vday-card.jpg)

#### Valentine's Gifts for Cannabis Lovers

By Madison MargolinFebruary 13, 2018

Copyright (C) 2017 Jane Street

About Jane Street  
Contact Us

**__Stay In The Know!**  
Join

* * *

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel

