

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Drug

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Chemical substance having an effect on the body

For other uses, see Drug (disambiguation).

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/45/A_small_cup_of_coffee.JPG/220px-

A_small_cup_of_coffee.JPG)

Caffeine, contained in coffee and other beverages, is the most widely used
psychoactive drug in the world. 90% of North American adults consume the
substance on a daily basis.[1]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aspirine_macro_shot.jpg/220px-

Aspirine_macro_shot.jpg)

Uncoated aspirin tablets, consisting of about 90% acetylsalicylic acid, along
with a minor amount of inert fillers and binders. Aspirin is a pharmaceutical
drug often used to treat pain, fever, and inflammation.

A **drug** is any substance that causes a change in a person's physiology or
psychology when consumed.[2][3] Drugs are typically distinguished from food
and substances that provide nutritional support. Consumption of drugs can be
via inhalation, injection, smoking, ingestion, absorption via a patch on the
skin, or dissolution under the tongue.

In pharmacology, a drug is a chemical substance of known structure, other than
a nutrient of an essential dietary ingredient, which, when administered to a
living organism, produces a biological effect.[4] A pharmaceutical drug, also
called a medication or medicine, is a chemical substance used to treat, cure,
prevent, or diagnose a disease or to promote well-being.[2] Traditionally
drugs were obtained through extraction from medicinal plants, but more
recently also by organic synthesis.[5] Pharmaceutical drugs may be used for a
limited duration, or on a regular basis for chronic disorders.[6]

Pharmaceutical drugs are often classified into drug classes—groups of related
drugs that have similar chemical structures, the same mechanism of action
(binding to the same biological target), a related mode of action, and that
are used to treat the same disease.[7][8] The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical
Classification System (ATC), the most widely used drug classification system,
assigns drugs a unique ATC code, which is an alphanumeric code that assigns it
to specific drug classes within the ATC system. Another major classification
system is the Biopharmaceutics Classification System. This classifies drugs
according to their solubility and permeability or absorption properties.[9]

Psychoactive drugs are chemical substances that affect the function of the
central nervous system, altering perception, mood or consciousness.[10] These
drugs are divided into different groups like: stimulants, depressants,
antidepressants, anxiolytics, antipsychotics, and hallucinogens. These
psychotropic drugs have been proven useful in treating wide range of medical
conditions including mental disorders around the world. The most widely used
drugs in the world include caffeine, nicotine and alcohol,[11] which are also
considered recreational drugs, since they are used for pleasure rather than
medicinal purposes.[12] Abuse of several psychoactive drugs can cause
psychological or physical addiction[13]. It's worth noting that all drugs can
have potential side effects.[14] Excessive use of stimulants can promote
stimulant psychosis. Many recreational drugs are illicit and international
treaties such as the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs exist for the purpose
of their prohibition.

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 Medication
  * 3 Spiritual and religious use
  * 4 Smart drugs and designer drugs
  * 5 Recreational drug use
  * 6 Administration of drugs
  * 7 Control of drugs
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

## Etymology

In English, the noun "drug" is thought to originate from Old French "drogue",
possibly deriving later into "droge-vate" from Middle Dutch meaning "dry
barrels", referring to medicinal plants preserved in them.[15] The transitive
verb "to drug" (meaning intentionally administer a substance to someone, often
without their knowledge) arose later and invokes the psychoactive rather than
medicinal properties of a substance.[16]

## Medication

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/00/Nexium_%28esomeprazole_magnesium%29_pills.JPG/220px-

Nexium_%28esomeprazole_magnesium%29_pills.JPG)

Nexium (Esomeprazole) is a proton-pump inhibitor. It is used to reduce the
production of stomach acid.

Main articles: Pharmaceutical drug and Drug class

A _medication_ or _medicine_ is a drug taken to cure or ameliorate any
symptoms of an illness or medical condition. The use may also be as preventive
medicine that has future benefits but does not treat any existing or pre-
existing diseases or symptoms. Dispensing of medication is often regulated by
governments into three categories— _over-the-counter_ medications, which are
available in pharmacies and supermarkets without special restrictions;
_behind-the-counter_ medicines, which are dispensed by a pharmacist without
needing a doctor's prescription, and _prescription only medicines_ , which
must be prescribed by a licensed medical professional, usually a
physician.[17]

In the United Kingdom, behind-the-counter medicines are called pharmacy
medicines which can only be sold in registered pharmacies, by or under the
supervision of a pharmacist. These medications are designated by the letter P
on the label.[18] The range of medicines available without a prescription
varies from country to country. Medications are typically produced by
pharmaceutical companies and are often patented to give the developer
exclusive rights to produce them. Those that are not patented (or with expired
patents) are called generic drugs since they can be produced by other
companies without restrictions or licenses from the patent holder.[19]

Pharmaceutical drugs are usually categorised into drug classes. A group of
drugs will share a similar chemical structure, or have the same mechanism of
action, the same related mode of action or target the same illness or related
illnesses.[7][8] The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System
(ATC), the most widely used drug classification system, assigns drugs a unique
ATC code, which is an alphanumeric code that assigns it to specific drug
classes within the ATC system. Another major classification system is the
Biopharmaceutics Classification System. This groups drugs according to their
solubility and permeability or absorption properties.[9]

## Spiritual and religious use

Main article: Entheogen

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Chaman_amazonie_5_06.jpg/220px-

Chaman_amazonie_5_06.jpg)

An Amazonian shaman

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a2/Flowering_San_Pedro_cactus.jpg/220px-

Flowering_San_Pedro_cactus.jpg)

San Pedro, a psychoactive cactus

Some religions, particularly ethnic religions are based completely on the use
of certain drugs, known as entheogens, which are mostly
hallucinogens,—psychedelics, dissociatives, or deliriants. Some drugs used as
entheogens include kava which can act as a stimulant, a sedative, a euphoriant
and an anesthetic. The roots of the kava plant are used to produce a drink
which is consumed throughout the cultures of the Pacific Ocean.

Some shamans from different cultures use entheogens, defined as "generating
the divine within"[20] to achieve religious ecstasy. Amazonian shamans use
ayahuasca (yagé) a hallucinogenic brew for this purpose. Mazatec shamans have
a long and continuous tradition of religious use of _Salvia divinorum_ a
psychoactive plant. Its use is to facilitate visionary states of consciousness
during spiritual healing sessions.[21]

Silene undulata is regarded by the Xhosa people as a sacred plant and used as
an entheogen. Its root is traditionally used to induce vivid (and according to
the Xhosa, prophetic) lucid dreams during the initiation process of shamans,
classifying it a naturally occurring oneirogen similar to the more well-known
dream herb _Calea ternifolia_.[22]

Peyote a small spineless cactus has been a major source of psychedelic
mescaline and has probably been used by Native Americans for at least five
thousand years.[23][24] Most mescaline is now obtained from a few species of
columnar cacti in particular from San Pedro and not from the vulnerable
peyote.[25]

The entheogenic use of cannabis has also been widely practised [26] for
centuries.[27] Rastafari use marijuana (ganja) as a sacrament in their
religious ceremonies.

Psychedelic mushrooms (psilocybin mushrooms), commonly called _magic
mushrooms_ or _shrooms_ have also long been used as entheogens.

## Smart drugs and designer drugs

Main articles: Nootropic and Designer drug

Nootropics, also commonly referred to as "smart drugs", are drugs that are
claimed to improve human cognitive abilities. Nootropics are used to improve
memory, concentration, thought, mood, learning, and many other things. Some
nootropics are now beginning to be used to treat certain diseases and medical
conditions such as ADHD, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease. They
are also commonly used to regain brain function lost during aging.

Other drugs known as designer drugs are produced. An early example of what
today would be labelled a 'designer drug' was LSD, which was synthesised from
ergot.[28] Other examples include analogs of performance-enhancing drugs such
as designer steroids taken to improve physical capabilities and these are
sometimes used (legally or not) for this purpose, often by professional
athletes.[29] Other designer drugs mimic the effects of psychoactive drugs.
Since the late 1990s there has been the identification of many of these
synthesised drugs. In Japan and the United Kingdom this has spurred the
addition of many designer drugs into a newer class of controlled substances
known as a temporary class drug.

Synthetic cannabinoids have been produced for a longer period of time and are
used in the designer drug synthetic cannabis.

## Recreational drug use

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1d/Macro_cannabis_bud.jpg/220px-

Macro_cannabis_bud.jpg)

Cannabis is a commonly used recreational drug.[30]

Main article: Recreational drug use

Further information: Prohibition of drugs

Recreational drug use is the use of a drug (legal, controlled, or illegal)
with the primary intention of altering the state of consciousness through
alteration of the central nervous system in order to create positive emotions
and feelings. The hallucinogen LSD is a psychoactive drug commonly used as a
recreational drug.[31]

Some national laws prohibit the use of different recreational drugs; and
medicinal drugs that have the potential for recreational use are often heavily
regulated. However, there are many recreational drugs that are legal in many
jurisdictions and widely culturally accepted. Cannabis is the most commonly
consumed controlled recreational drug in the world (as of 2012).[32] Its use
in many countries is illegal but is legally used in several countries usually
with the proviso that it can only be used for personal use. It can be used in
the _leaf_ form of marijuana _(grass)_ , or in the resin form of hashish.
Marijuana is a more mild form of cannabis than hashish.

There may be an age restriction on the consumption and purchase of legal
recreational drugs. Some recreational drugs that are legal and accepted in
many places include alcohol, tobacco, betel nut, and caffeine products, and in
some areas of the world the legal use of drugs such as khat is common.[33]

There are a number of legal intoxicants commonly called _legal highs_ that are
used recreationally. The most widely used of these is alcohol.

## Administration of drugs

Main article: Route of administration

All drugs, can be administered via a number of routes, and many can be
administered by more than one.

  * Bolus is the administration of a medication, drug or other compound that is given to raise its concentration in blood to an effective level. The administration can be given intravenously, by intramuscular, intrathecal or subcutaneous injection.
  * Inhaled, (breathed into the lungs), as an aerosol or dry powder. (This includes smoking a substance)
  * Injection as a solution, suspension or emulsion either: intramuscular, intravenous, intraperitoneal, intraosseous.
  * Insufflation, or snorted into the nose.
  * Orally, as a liquid or solid, that is absorbed through the intestines.
  * Rectally as a suppository, that is absorbed by the rectum or colon.
  * Sublingually, diffusing into the blood through tissues under the tongue.
  * Topically, usually as a cream or ointment. A drug administered in this manner may be given to act locally or systemically.[34]
  * Vaginally as a pessary, primarily to treat vaginal infections.

## Control of drugs

There are numerous governmental offices in many countries that deal with the
control and oversee of drug manufacture and use, and the implementation of
various drug laws. The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs is an international
treaty brought about in 1961 to prohibit the use of narcotics save for those
used in medical research and treatment. In 1971, a second treaty the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances had to be introduced to deal with newer
recreational psychoactive and psychedelic drugs.

The legal status of Salvia divinorum varies in many countries and even in
states within the United States. Where it is legislated against the degree of
prohibition also varies.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States is a federal
agency responsible for protecting and promoting public health through the
regulation and supervision of food safety, tobacco products, dietary
supplements, prescription and over-the-counter medications, vaccines,
biopharmaceuticals, blood transfusions, medical devices, electromagnetic
radiation emitting devices, cosmetics, animal foods[35] and veterinary drugs.

## See also

  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/Tabletten.JPG/32px-Tabletten.JPG)Pharmacy and Pharmacology portal

  * Controlled Substances Act

  * Drug development
  * Inverse benefit law
  * Lifestyle drug
  * List of drugs
  * List of pharmaceutical companies
  * List of psychoactive plants
  * List of Schedule I drugs (US)
  * Medical cannabis
  * Pharmacognosy
  * Placebo
  * Prodrug
  * Specialty drugs (United States)
  * United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

## References

  1. **^** Richard Lovett (24 September 2005). "Coffee: The demon drink?". Archived from the original on 11 April 2014. Retrieved 2014-05-01.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Drug". _Dictionary.com Unabridged_. v 1.1. Random House. 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 14 September 2007 - via Dictionary.com.
  3. **^** "Drug Definition". _Stedman's Medical Dictionary_. Archived from the original on 2014-05-02. Retrieved 2014-05-01 - via Drugs.com.
  4. **^** H.P., Rang; M.M, Dale; J.M., Ritter; R.J., Flower; G., Henderson (2011). "What is Pharmacology". _Rang & Dale's pharmacology_ (7th ed.). Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-7020-3471-8. "a drug can be defined as a chemical substance of known structure, other than a nutrient of an essential dietary ingredient, which, when administered to a living organism, produces a biological effect"
  5. **^** Atanasov AG, Waltenberger B, Pferschy-Wenzig EM, Linder T, Wawrosch C, Uhrin P, Temml V, Wang L, Schwaiger S, Heiss EH, Rollinger JM, Schuster D, Breuss JM, Bochkov V, Mihovilovic MD, Kopp B, Bauer R, Dirsch VM, Stuppner H (December 2015). "Discovery and resupply of pharmacologically active plant-derived natural products: A review". _Biotechnol Adv_. **33** (8): 1582–614. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.08.001. PMC 4748402. PMID 26281720.
  6. **^** "Drug". _The American Heritage Science Dictionary_. Houghton Mifflin Company. Archived from the original on 14 September 2007. Retrieved 20 September 2007 - via dictionary.com.
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mahoney A, Evans J (6 November 2008). "Comparing drug classification systems". _AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings_ : 1039. PMID 18999016.
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ World Health Organization (2003). _Introduction to drug utilization research_ (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. p. 33. ISBN 978-92-4-156234-8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-01-22.
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bergström, CA; Andersson, SB; Fagerberg, JH; Ragnarsson, G; Lindahl, A (16 June 2014). "Is the full potential of the biopharmaceutics classification system reached?". _European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences_. **57** : 224–31. doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2013.09.010. PMID 24075971.
  10. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-03-28. Retrieved 2015-03-16.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  11. **^** Crocq MA (June 2003). "Alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, and mental disorders". _Dialogues Clin. Neurosci_. **5** (2): 175–185. PMC 3181622. PMID 22033899.
  12. **^** "Recreational Drug". _The Free Dictionary_. Retrieved 16 March 2015.
  13. **^** Fox, Thomas Peter; Oliver, Govind; Ellis, Sophie Marie (2013). "The Destructive Capacity of Drug Abuse: An Overview Exploring the Harmful Potential of Drug Abuse Both to the Individual and to Society". _ISRN Addiction_. **2013** : 450348. doi:10.1155/2013/450348. PMC 4392977. PMID 25938116. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 15 April 2015.
  14. **^** "MHRA Side Effects of Medicines." Archived 2014-05-02 at the Wayback Machine _MHRA Side Effects of Medicines_ ,
  15. **^** Harper, Douglas. "drug". _Online Etymology Dictionary_.
  16. **^** Tupper KW (2012). "Psychoactive substances and the English language: "Drugs," discourses, and public policy". _Contemporary Drug Problems_. **39** (3): 461–492. doi:10.1177/009145091203900306.
  17. **^** "About Registration: Medicines and Prescribing". Health and Care Professions Council. Archived from the original on 2016-01-13. Retrieved 22 January 2016.
  18. **^** "Glossary of MHRA terms – P". U.K. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Archived from the original on 2008-11-14. Retrieved 2008-11-05.
  19. **^** " "Generic Drugs", Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration" (PDF). _Fda.gov_. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2017.
  20. **^** _Entheogen_ , [dictionary.com], archived from the original on 2012-02-13 , retrieved 2012-03-13
  21. **^** Valdés, Díaz  & Paul 1983, p. 287.
  22. **^** Sobiecki, Jean-Francois (July 2012). "Psychoactive Spiritual Medicines and Healing Dynamics in the Initiation Process of Southern Bantu Diviners". _Journal of Psychoactive Drugs_. **44** (3): 216–223. doi:10.1080/02791072.2012.703101. PMID 23061321.
  23. **^** El-Seedi HR, De Smet PA, Beck O, Possnert G, Bruhn JG (October 2005). "Prehistoric peyote use: alkaloid analysis and radiocarbon dating of archaeological specimens of Lophophora from Texas". _J Ethnopharmacol_. **101** (1–3): 238–42. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2005.04.022. PMID 15990261.
  24. **^** "A Brief History of the San Pedro Cactus". _Mescaline.com_. Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2017.
  25. **^** Terry M (2013). "Lophophora williamsii". _IUCN Red List of Threatened Species_. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T151962A581420.en. Archived from the original on 2015-05-24.
  26. **^** "Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology – Jurema-Preta (Mimosa tenuiflora [Willd.] Poir.): a review of its traditional use, phytochemistry and pharmacology". scielo.br. Archived from the original on 2009-03-07. Retrieved 2009-01-14.
  27. **^** Bloomquist, Edward (1971). _Marijuana: The Second Trip_. California: Glencoe.
  28. **^** "Discovery And Synthesis Of LSD: What You Probably Did Not Know About It - Chemistry Hall". 2017-06-13. Archived from the original on 2017-06-13. Retrieved 2017-06-13.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
  29. **^** Teale P, Scarth J, Hudson S (2012). "Impact of the emergence of designer drugs upon sports doping testing". _Bioanalysis_. **4** (1): 71–88. doi:10.4155/bio.11.291. PMID 22191595.
  30. **^** Lingeman. _Drugs from A–Z: A Dictionary_. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-7139-0136-8.
  31. **^** "DrugFacts: Hallucinogens - LSD, Peyote, Psilocybin, and PCP". National Institute on Drug Abuse. December 2014. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2015.
  32. **^** "World Drug Report 2012" (PDF). UNODC. 2012. p. 69. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2016.
  33. **^** Al-Mugahed, Leen (2008). "Khat Chewing in Yemen: Turning over a New Leaf: Khat Chewing Is on the Rise in Yemen, Raising Concerns about the Health and Social Consequences". _Bulletin of the World Health Organization_. **86** (10): 741–2. doi:10.2471/BLT.08.011008. PMC 2649518. PMID 18949206. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016.
  34. **^** "The administration of medicines". _Nursing Times_. EMAP Publishing Limited. 19 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 June 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
  35. **^** "Animal Food  & Feeds". _Fda.gov_. Archived from the original on 22 March 2015. Retrieved 14 March 2015.

## Further reading

  * Richard J. Miller (2014). _Drugged: the science and culture behind psychotropic drugs_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-995797-2.

## External links

  * DrugBank, a database of 4800 drugs and 2500 protein drug targets
  * "Drugs", BBC Radio 4 discussion with Richard Davenport-Hines, Sadie Plant and Mike Jay ( _In Our Time_ , May 23, 2002)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Drugs**_.  
\---|---

  * v
  * t
  * e

Pharmacology: major drug groups

* * *

Gastrointestinal tract/  
metabolism (A)|

  * _stomach acid_
    * Antacids
    * H 2 antagonists
    * Proton pump inhibitors
  * Antiemetics
  * Laxatives
  * Antidiarrhoeals/Antipropulsives
  * Anti-obesity drugs
  * Anti-diabetics
  * Vitamins
  * Dietary minerals

Blood and blood  
forming organs (B)|

  * Antithrombotics
    * Antiplatelets
    * Anticoagulants
    * Thrombolytics/fibrinolytics
  * Antihemorrhagics
    * Platelets
    * Coagulants
    * Antifibrinolytics

Cardiovascular  
system (C)|

  * _cardiac therapy/antianginals_
    * Cardiac glycosides
    * Antiarrhythmics
    * Cardiac stimulants
  * Antihypertensives
  * Diuretics
  * Vasodilators
  * Beta blockers
  * Calcium channel blockers
  * _renin–angiotensin system_
    * ACE inhibitors
    * Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
    * Renin inhibitors
  * Antihyperlipidemics
    * Statins
    * Fibrates
    * Bile acid sequestrants

Skin (D)|

  * Emollients
  * Cicatrizants
  * Antipruritics
  * Antipsoriatics
  * Medicated dressings

Genitourinary  
system (G)|

  * Hormonal contraception
  * Fertility agents
  * SERMs
  * Sex hormones

Endocrine  
system (H)|

  * Hypothalamic–pituitary hormones
  * Corticosteroids
    * Glucocorticoids
    * Mineralocorticoids
  * Sex hormones
  * Thyroid hormones/Antithyroid agents

Infections and  
infestations (J, P, QI)|

  * Antimicrobials: Antibacterials (Antimycobacterials)
  * Antifungals
  * Antivirals
  * Antiparasitics
    * Antiprotozoals
    * Anthelmintics
    * Ectoparasiticides
  * IVIG
  * Vaccines

Malignant disease  
(L01–L02)|

  * Anticancer agents
    * Antimetabolites
    * Alkylating
    * Spindle poisons
    * Antineoplastic
    * Topoisomerase inhibitors

Immune disease  
(L03–L04)|

  * Immunomodulators
    * Immunostimulants
    * Immunosuppressants

Muscles, bones,  
and joints (M)|

  * Anabolic steroids
  * Anti-inflammatories
    * NSAIDs
  * Antirheumatics
  * Corticosteroids
  * Muscle relaxants
  * Bisphosphonates

Brain and  
nervous system (N)|

  * Analgesics
  * Anesthetics
    * General
    * Local
  * Anorectics
  * Anti-ADHD agents
  * Antiaddictives
  * Anticonvulsants
  * Antidementia agents
  * Antidepressants
  * Antimigraine agents
  * Antiparkinson agents
  * Antipsychotics
  * Anxiolytics
  * Depressants
  * Entactogens
  * Entheogens
  * Euphoriants
  * Hallucinogens
    * Psychedelics
    * Dissociatives
    * Deliriants
  * Hypnotics/Sedatives
  * Mood Stabilizers
  * Neuroprotectives
  * Nootropics
  * Neurotoxins
  * Orexigenics
  * Serenics
  * Stimulants
  * Wakefulness-promoting agents

Respiratory  
system (R)|

  * Decongestants
  * Bronchodilators
  * Cough medicines
  * H 1 antagonists

Sensory organs (S)|

  * Ophthalmologicals
  * Otologicals

Other ATC (V)|

  * Antidotes
  * Contrast media
  * Radiopharmaceuticals
  * Dressings
  * Senotherapeutics

  * v

  * t
  * e

Recreational drug use

* * *

Major  
recreational  
drugs|

| Depressants|

  * Barbiturates
  * Benzodiazepines
  * Carbamates
  * Ethanol (alcohol)
    * Alcoholic drinks
    * Beer
    * Wine
  * Gabapentinoids
  * GHB
  * Inhalants
    * Medical 
    * Nitrous oxide
    * Hazardous solvents
    * contact adhesives
    * Gasoline
    * nail polish remover
    * Paint thinner
    * Other 
    * Freon
  * Kava
  * Nonbenzodiazepines
  * Quinazolinones

\---|---  
Opioids|

  * Buprenorphine
    * Suboxone
    * Subutex
  * Codeine
  * Desomorphine
    * Krokodil
  * Dextropropoxyphene
    * Darvocet
    * Darvon
  * Fentanyl
  * Diamorphine
    * Heroin
  * Hydrocodone
  * Hydromorphone
    * Dilaudid
  * Methadone
  * Mitragyna speciosa
    * Kratom
  * Morphine
    * Opium
  * Oxycodone
    * /paracetamol
  * Tramadol

Stimulants|

  * Amphetamine
  * Arecoline
    * Areca
  * Betel
  * Caffeine
    * Coffee
    * Energy drinks
    * Tea
  * Cathinone
    * Khat
  * Cocaine
    * Coca
    * Crack
  * Ephedrine
    * Ephedra
  * MDPV
  * Mephedrone
  * Methamphetamine
  * Methylone
  * Methylphenidate
  * Modafinil
  * Nicotine
    * Tobacco
  * Theobromine
    * Cocoa
    * Chocolate

Entactogens|

  * 2C series
  * 6-APB
    * Benzofury
  * AMT
  * MDA
  * MDMA
    * Ecstasy

Hallucinogens|

| Psychedelics|

  * Bufotenin
    * Psychoactive toads
    * Vilca
    * Yopo
  * DMT
    * Ayahuasca
  * LSA
  * LSD-25
  * Mescaline
    * Peruvian torch
    * Peyote
    * San Pedro
  * Psilocybin / Psilocin
    * Psilocybin mushrooms

\---|---  
Dissociatives|

  * DXM
  * Glaucine
  * Inhalants
    * Nitrous oxide
    * alkyl nitrites
    * poppers
    * amyl nitrite
  * Ketamine
  * MXE
  * Muscimol
    * Amanita muscaria
  * PCP
  * Salvinorin A
    * Salvia divinorum

Deliriants|

  * Atropine and Scopolamine
    * Atropa belladonna
    * Datura
    * Hyoscyamus niger
    * Mandragora officinarum
  * Dimenhydrinate
  * Diphenhydramine

Cannabinoids|

  * JWH-018
  * THC
    * Cannabis
    * Hashish
    * Hash oil
    * Marijuana

Oneirogens|

  * Calea zacatechichi
  * Silene capensis

Club drugs|

  * Cocaine
  * Quaaludes
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Nitrous oxide
  * Poppers

Drug culture|

| Cannabis culture|

  * 420
  * Cannabis cultivation
  * Cannabis smoking
  * Head shop
  * Legal history of cannabis in the United States
  * Legality of cannabis
  * Marijuana Policy Project
  * Medical cannabis
  * NORML
  * Cannabis and religion
  * Stoner film

\---|---  
Coffee culture|

  * Coffee break
  * Coffeehouse
  * Latte art
  * Tea house

Drinking culture|

  * Bartending
  * Beer culture
  * Beer festival
  * Binge drinking
  * Diethyl ether
  * Drinking games
  * Drinking song
  * Happy hour
  * Hip flask
  * Nightclub
  * Pub
  * Pub crawl
  * Sommelier
  * Sports bar
  * Tailgate party
  * Wine bar
  * Wine tasting

Psychedelia|

  * Psychonautics
  * Art
  * Drug
  * Era
  * Experience
  * Literature
  * Music
  * Microdosing
  * Therapy

Smoking culture|

  * Cigarette card
  * Fashion cigarettes
  * Cloud-chasing
  * Loosie
  * Smokeasy
  * Smoking fetishism
  * Tobacco smoking

Other|

  * Club drug
  * Counterculture of the 1960s
  * Dance party
  * Drug paraphernalia
  * Drug tourism
  * Entheogen
  * Hippie
  * Needle sharing
  * Nootropic
  * Party and play
  * Poly drug use
  * Rave
  * Religion and drugs
  * Self-medication
  * Sex and drugs
  * Whoonga

Drug  
production  
and trade|

| Drug  
production|

  * Coca production in Colombia
  * Drug precursors
  * Opium production in Afghanistan
  * Rolling meth lab

\---|---  
Drug trade|

  * Illegal drug trade
    * Colombia
  * Darknet market
  * Drug distribution
    * Beer shop
    * Cannabis shop
    * Liquor store
    * Liquor license

Issues with  
drug use|

  * Abuse
  * Date rape drug
  * Impaired driving
  * Drug harmfulness
    * Effects of cannabis
  * Addiction
  * Dependence
    * Prevention
    * Opioid replacement therapy
    * Rehabilitation
    * Responsible use
  * Drug-related crime
  * Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
  * Long-term effects of cannabis
  * Neurotoxicity
  * Overdose
  * Passive smoking
    * of tobacco or other substances

Legality of  
drug use|

| International|

  * 1961 Narcotic Drugs
  * 1971 Psychotropic Substances
  * 1988 Drug Trafficking
  * Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs

\---|---  
State level|

  * Drug policy
    * Decriminalization
    * Prohibition
    * Supply reduction
  * Policy reform
    * Demand reduction
    * Drug Policy Alliance
    * Harm reduction
    * Law Enforcement Action Partnership
    * Liberalization
    * Latin America
    * Students for Sensible Drug Policy
    * Transform Drug Policy Foundation

Drug policy  
by country|

  * Australia
  * Canada
  * Germany
  * India
  * Netherlands
  * Portugal
  * Slovakia
  * Soviet Union
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United States
    * Just Say No
    * Office of National Drug Control Policy
    * School district drug policies
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Maryland
    * Virginia

Other|

  * Arguments for and against drug prohibition
  * Capital punishment for drug trafficking
  * Cognitive liberty
  * Designer drug
  * Drug court
  * Drug possession
  * Drug test
  * Narc
  * Politics of drug abuse
  * War on Drugs
    * Mexican Drug War
    * Plan Colombia
    * Philippine Drug War
  * Zero tolerance

Lists of  
countries by...|

  * Alcohol legality
    * Alcohol consumption
  * Anabolic steroid legality
  * Cannabis legality
    * Annual use
    * Lifetime use
  * Cigarette consumption
  * Cocaine legality
    * Cocaine use
  * Methamphetamine legality
  * Opiates use
  * Psilocybin mushrooms legality
  * Salvia legality

  * v

  * t
  * e

Receptor/signaling modulators

* * *

Amino acids and  
similar/related|

List Of Amino Acids

  * _Amino acids and related:_ GABA receptor modulators
  * GABAA receptor positive modulators
  * GABA metabolism and transport modulators
  * GHB receptor modulators
  * Glutamate metabolism and transport modulators
  * Glycine receptor modulators
  * Ionotropic glutamate receptor modulators
  * Metabotropic glutamate receptor modulators

  * _Monoamines:_ Adrenergic receptor modulators

  * Dopamine receptor modulators
  * Histamine receptor modulators
  * Melatonin receptor modulators
  * Monoamine metabolism modulators
  * Monoamine neurotoxins
  * Monoamine releasing agents
  * Monoamine reuptake inhibitors
  * Serotonin receptor modulators
  * hTAAR modulators

  * _Acetylcholine:_ Acetylcholine metabolism and transport modulators

  * Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor modulators
  * Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor modulators

  * _Others:_ Imidazoline receptor modulators

  * Purine receptor modulators
  * Sigma receptor modulators
  * Thyroid hormone receptor modulators

Lipids|

  * _Eicosanoids:_ Cannabinoid receptor modulators
  * Leukotriene signaling modulators
  * Prostanoid signaling modulators

  * _Phospholipids:_ Lysophospholipid signaling modulators

  * PAF receptor modulators

  * _Steroids:_ Androgen receptor modulators

  * Estrogen receptor modulators
  * Glucocorticoid receptor modulators
  * Mineralocorticoid receptor modulators
  * Progesterone receptor modulators
  * Steroid metabolism modulators

  * _Other nuclear receptors:_ Nuclear receptor modulators

  * PPAR modulators
  * Retinoid receptor modulators
  * Vitamin D receptor modulators
  * Xenobiotic-sensing receptor modulators

Peptides/proteins|

  * _General:_ Signaling peptide/protein receptor modulators

  * _Peptides:_ Angiotensin receptor modulators

  * GH/IGF-1 axis signaling modulators
  * GnRH and gonadotropin receptor modulators
  * Melanocortin receptor modulators
  * Neurokinin receptor modulators
  * Opioid receptor modulators
  * Oxytocin and vasopressin receptor modulators

  * _Cytokines:_ Cytokine receptor modulators

  * Chemokine receptor modulators
  * Interleukin receptor modulators
  * TNF receptor superfamily modulators

  * _Growth factors:_ Growth factor receptor modulators

  * TGFβ receptor superfamily modulators

Others and  
non-receptor|

  * _Enzymes:_ Cytochrome P450 modulators
  * Histone deacetylase inhibitors
  * Phosphodiesterase inhibitors

  * _Ion channels:_ Ion channel modulators

  * TRP channel modulators

  * _Transporters:_ Sodium-glucose transporter modulators

  * Symporter inhibitors

  * _Others:_ Nitric oxide signaling modulators

See also

    
    
    Pharmacomodulation
    Cell signaling
    Neurotransmitters'
    

  * v
  * t
  * e

Pharmacomodulation

* * *

Types|

  * ♦ Enzyme: Inducer
  * Inhibitor

  * ♦ Ion channel: Opener

  * Blocker

  * ♦ Receptor: Agonist

  * Partial agonist
  * Antagonist
  * Inverse agonist
  * Positive allosteric modulator (PAM)
  * Negative allosteric modulator (NAM)

  * ♦ Transporter [Reuptake vs Efflux]: Enhancer (RE)

  * Inhibitor (RI)
  * Releaser (RA)

  * ♦ Miscellaneous: Precursor

  * Cofactor

Classes|

| Enzyme|

see _Enzyme inhibition_

\---|---  
Ion channel|

See Ion channel modulators

Receptor &  
transporter|

| BA/M|

| Adrenergic|

  * Adrenergic receptor agonist (α
  * β (1
  * 2))
  * Adrenergic receptor antagonist (α (1
  * 2)
  * β)
  * Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NRI)

\---|---  
Dopaminergic|

  * Dopamine receptor agonist
  * Dopamine receptor antagonist
  * Dopamine reuptake inhibitor (DRI)

Histaminergic|

  * Histamine receptor agonist
  * Histamine receptor antagonist (H1
  * H2
  * H3)

Serotonergic|

  * Serotonin receptor agonist
  * Serotonin receptor antagonist (5-HT3)
  * Serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI)

AA|

| GABAergic|

  * GABA receptor agonist
  * GABA receptor antagonist
  * GABA reuptake inhibitor (GRI)

\---|---  
Glutamatergic|

  * Glutamate receptor agonist (AMPA)
  * Glutamate receptor antagonist (NMDA)
  * Glutamate reuptake inhibitor

Cholinergic|

  * Acetylcholine receptor agonist (Muscarinic
  * Nicotinic)
  * Acetylcholine receptor antagonist (Muscarinic
  * Nicotinic (Ganglionic
  * Muscular))

Cannabinoidergic|

  * Cannabinoid receptor agonist
  * Cannabinoid receptor antagonist
  * Endocannabinoid enhancer (eCBE)
  * Endocannabinoid reuptake inhibitor (eCBRI)

Opioidergic|

  * Opioid modulator
  * Opioid receptor agonist
  * Opioid receptor antagonist
  * Enkephalinase inhibitor

Other|

  * Adenosine reuptake inhibitor (AdoRI)
  * Angiotensin II receptor antagonist
  * Endothelin receptor antagonist
  * NK1 receptor antagonist
  * Vasopressin receptor antagonist

Miscellaneous|

  * Cofactor (see _Enzyme cofactors_ )
  * Precursor (see _Amino acids_ )

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drug&oldid=901223598"

Categories:

  * Drugs

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
  * Articles with short description
  * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
  * Commons category link is on Wikidata

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikiquote

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * አማርኛ
  * العربية
  * Asturianu
  * تۆرکجه
  * বাংলা
  * Bân-lâm-gú
  * Български
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * Català
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Føroyskt
  * Français
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * ಕನ್ನಡ
  * ქართული
  * Kiswahili
  * Kreyòl ayisyen
  * Kurdî
  * Latina
  * Latviešu
  * Lumbaart
  * Македонски
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Baso Minangkabau
  * Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
  * မြန်မာဘာသာ
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Occitan
  * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
  * Patois
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Русский
  * Scots
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * සිංහල
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Basa Sunda
  * Svenska
  * Тоҷикӣ
  * Українська
  * Tiếng Việt
  * 吴语
  * ייִדיש
  * 粵語
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 10 June 2019, at 13:23 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential

