

  * Dictionary.com
  * Thesaurus.com
  * Everything After Z
    * Word of the Day
    * Video
    * Word Facts
    * Grammar
    * Crossword Solver
    * Daily Crossword
  * All The Words

    * Slang
    * Emoji
    * Gender & Sexuality
    * Acronyms
  * Dictionary.com

  * Thesaurus.com

Try Our Apps

![Dictionary.com](https://www.dictionary.com/assets/dictionary_logo_white-90c1e2eaf84c6abcb80d08d6eb0b6c60.svg)

definitions

Search

  * synonyms

# legitimate

[ adjective, noun li-jit-uh-mit; verb li-jit-uh-meyt ]SHOW IPA

/ adjective, noun lɪˈdʒɪt ə mɪt; verb lɪˈdʒɪt əˌmeɪt /PHONETIC RESPELLING

SYNONYMS|EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGIN

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR legitimate ON THESAURUS.COM

* * *

### adjective

according to law; lawful: the property's legitimate owner.

in accordance with established rules, principles, or standards.

born in wedlock or of legally married parents: legitimate children.

in accordance with the laws of reasoning; logically inferable; logical: a
legitimate conclusion.

resting on or ruling by the principle of hereditary right: a legitimate
sovereign.

not spurious or unjustified; genuine: It was a legitimate complaint.

of the normal or regular type or kind.

Theater. of or relating to professionally produced stage plays, as
distinguished from burlesque, vaudeville, television, motion pictures, etc.:
an actor in the legitimate theater.

SEE MORESEE LESS

### verb (used with object), le·git·i·mat·ed, le·git·i·mat·ing.

to make lawful or legal; pronounce or state as lawful: Parliament legitimated
his accession to the throne.

to establish as lawfully born: His bastard children were afterward legitimated
by law.

to show or declare to be legitimate or proper: He was under obligation to
legitimate his commission.

to justify; sanction or authorize: His behavior was legitimated by custom.

SEE MORESEE LESS

### noun

the legitimate, the legitimate theater or drama.

a person who is established as being legitimate.

## RELATED CONTENT

The Origin Of Cyber Monday’s Name Is From The 1940sFor many, Cyber Monday
provides the perfect shopping solution: all the holiday deals with none of the
holiday crowds. But, where did the name Cyber Monday come from?

READ MORE

Deep StateRead more in this article about some frequently asked questions and
fun facts related to our definitions.

READ MORE

## RELATED WORDS

real, sensible, genuine, fair, normal, certain, consistent, justifiable,
natural, logical, statutory, appropriate, reasonable, lawful, proper, well-
founded, correct, reliable, rightful, true

## Nearby words

  1. legislature, 
  2. legist, 
  3. legit, 
  4. legitim, 
  5. legitimacy, 
  6. legitimate government, 
  7. legitimation, 
  8. legitimatize, 
  9. legitime, 
  10. legitimism

## Origin of legitimate

First recorded in 1485–95, legitimate is from the Medieval Latin word
lēgitimātus (past participle of lēgitimāre to make lawful). See legitim, -ate1

SYNONYMS FOR legitimate

1 legal, licit.

2 sanctioned.

4 valid.

9 legalize.

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR legitimate ON THESAURUS.COM

ANTONYMS FOR legitimate

1 illegitimate.

SEE MORE ANTONYMS FOR legitimate ON THESAURUS.COM

Related forms

le·git·i·mate·ly, adverble·git·i·mate·ness, nounle·git·i·ma·tion,
nounde·le·git·i·mate, verb (used with object), de·le·git·i·mat·ed,
de·le·git·i·mat·ing.

de·le·git·i·ma·tion, nounnon·le·git·i·mate, adjectivepost·le·git·i·ma·tion,
nounqua·si-le·git·i·mate, adjectivequa·si-le·git·i·mate·ly, adverb

**SEE MORE RELATED FORMS** **SEE FEWER RELATED FORMS**



Can be confusedlegitimate legitimize

Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, ©
Random House, Inc. 2019

## Examples from the Web for legitimate

  * There are limits to the painting of banditry and extortion as the legitimate raising of taxes.

ISIS’s Futile Quest to Go Legit|Jamie Dettmer|January 5, 2015|DAILY BEAST

  * In 2012, as a 10th grader, Lean says he recorded his first legitimate song, “Hurt.”

The Cult of Yung Lean: ‘I’m Building An Anarchistic Society From the Ground
Up’|Marlow Stern|January 4, 2015|DAILY BEAST

  * He was courteous, explained the legitimate reason we were briefly pulled over, and then let us continue on our way.

Obama Is Right on Race. The Media Is Wrong.|Keli Goff|December 29, 2014|DAILY
BEAST

  * There are legitimate criticisms of the study, but not because it includes “attempted forced kissing,” as Lowry suggested.

Fact-Checking the Sunday Shows: Dec. 7|PunditFact.com|December 7, 2014|DAILY
BEAST

  * Williams sold hardware manufactured by a legitimate company, said Sargent, who took a 25 to 30 percent commission.

Patients Screwed in Spine Surgery ‘Scam’|The Center for Investigative
Reporting|November 3, 2014|DAILY BEAST

  * Our object is to check by every legitimate means the spread of tommyrot in this country and the world generally.

Lalage's Lovers|George A. Birmingham

  * But he is ready to respect the dame, if she proves to deserve it, as a legitimate connection.

The Atlantic Monthly, Volume 15, No. 89, March, 1865|Various

  * He has seen so much done by energy and money that he probably thought the one as legitimate a lever into Parliament as the other.

Mr. Punch's History of Modern England Vol. II (of IV),--1857-1874|Charles L.
Graves

  * Legitimate government can be formed only by the voluntary association of all who contribute to its support.

An Essay on the Trial by Jury|Lysander Spooner

  * In fact there can be, and there is, no escape from the legitimate conclusion.

Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume 64, No. 397, November 1848|Various

**SEE MORE EXAMPLES** **SEE FEWER EXAMPLES**



Explore Dictionary.com

  * ![It’s OK To Use “They” To Describe One Person: Here’s Why](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/1000x700-they-150x150.jpg)

It’s OK To Use “They” To Describe One Person: Here’s Why

  * ![9 Different Ways To Say “Stupid”](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/dork_dweeb_nerd4-150x150.jpg)

9 Different Ways To Say “Stupid”

  * ![Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1000x700-empathy-vs-sympathy-150x150.jpg)

Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When

  * ![Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-bisexual-150x150.jpg)

Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?

  * ![Become A \(Dungeon\) Master Of These D&D Slang Terms](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/default_logo_800x800-150x150.jpg)

Become A (Dungeon) Master Of These D&D; Slang Terms

  * ![Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-redefine-black-v2-150x150.jpg)

Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition

## British Dictionary definitions for legitimate

## legitimate

* * *

### adjective (lɪˈdʒɪtɪmɪt)

born in lawful wedlock; enjoying full filial rights

conforming to established standards of usage, behaviour, etc

based on correct or acceptable principles of reasoning

reasonable, sensible, or valida legitimate question

authorized, sanctioned by, or in accordance with law

of, relating to, or ruling by hereditary righta legitimate monarch

of or relating to a body of famous long-established plays as distinct from
films, television, vaudeville, etcthe legitimate theatre

SEE MORESEE LESS

### verb (lɪˈdʒɪtɪˌmeɪt)

(tr) to make, pronounce, or show to be legitimate

Derived Formslegitimacy or legitimateness, nounlegitimately,
adverblegitimation, noun

## Word Origin for legitimate

C15: from Medieval Latin lēgitimātus made legal, from lēx law

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition ©
William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998,
2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012

## Word Origin and History for legitimate (1 of 2)

## legitimate

* * *

adj.

mid-15c., "lawfully begotten," from Middle French legitimer and directly from
Medieval Latin legitimatus, past participle of legitimare "make lawful,
declare to be lawful," from Latin legitimus "lawful," originally "fixed by
law, in line with the law," from lex (genitive legis) "law" (see legal).
Transferred sense of "genuine, real" is attested from 1550s. Related:
Legitimately.

## Word Origin and History for legitimate (1 of 2)

## legitimate

* * *

v.

1590s, from Medieval Latin legitimatus, past participle of legitimare (see
legitimate (adj.)). Related: Legitimated; legitimating.

Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2010 Douglas Harper

**SEE MORE ORIGINS** **SEE FEWER ORIGINS**



Others Are Reading

  * ![Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-misunderstood-emoji-1-150x150.jpg)

Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?

  * ![The Greatest Language Hits Of Black Music](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-universal-music-1-150x150.jpg)

The Greatest Language Hits Of Black Music

WORD OF THE DAY

esprit de l'escalier _noun_ | [es-pree duh le-skahl-yey]SEE DEFINITION

  * ![This Week’s Quiz Will Fuel Your Inner Fictioneer](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/wotd_1-150x150.gif)

This Week’s Quiz Will Fuel Your Inner Fictioneer

  * ![What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ie-eg-video_v3-1000x700-150x150.jpg)

What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?

  * Browse the Dictionary:
  * # 

  * A
  * B
  * C
  * D
  * E
  * F
  * G
  * H
  * I
  * J
  * K
  * L
  * M
  * N
  * O
  * P
  * Q
  * R
  * S
  * T
  * U
  * V
  * W
  * X
  * Y
  * Z

  * Browse by Category:

  * Slang
  * Emoji
  * Acronyms
  * Pop Culture
  * More

  * About

  * Careers
  * Contact Us
  * Cookies, Terms, & Privacy

© 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

