

Skip to main content

![National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

\(NIAAA\)](https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/sites/all/themes/niaaa/logo.png)

## National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)

Main Menu

Search

  * Alcohol & Your Health
    * Overview of Alcohol Consumption
    * Alcohol's Effects on the Body
    * Alcohol Use Disorder
    * Fetal Alcohol Exposure
    * Support & Treatment
    * Alcohol Policy
    * Special Populations & Co-occurring Disorders
  * Publications & Multimedia
    * Brochures & Fact Sheets
    * NIAAA Journal
    * Alcohol Alert Bulletin
    * Professional Education Materials
    * Publicaciones en Español
    * Presentations and Videocasts
  * Research
    * Major Initiatives
    * Guidelines & Resources
    * Extramural Research
    * Intramural Research Program
    * Alcohol Research Resource Awards
    * Biosensor Challenge Prize
    * NESARC-III
  * Research Training
    * Centers and Training Working Group Roster
    * Research Training & Career Development Opportunities by Education Level
    * Research Training & Career Development Opportunities by Grant Mechanism
    * Training Resources
    * Archive - Training Highlights
  * Grants Funding
    * Funding Opportunities
    * Application Process
    * Management & Reporting
  * News & Events
    * News
    * Events
    * Press Room
    * NIAAA Spectrum Webzine
    * Get Updates
  * About NIAAA
    * Advisory Council
    * Strategic Plan 2017-2021
    * Our Work
    * Our Funding
    * Our Staff
    * Jobs & Training
    * Our Location
    * Contact Us

## Search form

Search

## You are here

Home » Alcohol & Your Health » Alcohol's Effects on the Body

# Alcohol's Effects on the Body

Drinking too much – on a single occasion or over time – can take a serious
toll on your health. Here’s how alcohol can affect your body:

**Brain:**  
Alcohol interferes with the brain’s communication pathways, and can affect the
way the brain looks and works. These disruptions can change mood and behavior,
and make it harder to think clearly and move with coordination.

**Heart:**  
Drinking a lot over a long time or too much on a single occasion can damage
the heart, causing problems including:

  * Cardiomyopathy – Stretching and drooping of heart muscle
  * Arrhythmias – Irregular heart beat
  * Stroke
  * High blood pressure 

**Liver:**  
Heavy drinking takes a toll on the liver, and can lead to a variety of
problems and liver inflammations including:

  * Steatosis, or fatty liver
  * Alcoholic hepatitis
  * Fibrosis
  * Cirrhosis

**Pancreas:**  
Alcohol causes the pancreas to produce toxic substances that can eventually
lead to pancreatitis, a dangerous inflammation and swelling of the blood
vessels in the pancreas that prevents proper digestion.

**Cancer:**  
Source: National Cancer Institute -- see https://www.cancer.gov/about-
cancer/causes-prevention/risk/alcohol/alcohol-fact-sheet:

Based on extensive reviews of research studies, there is a strong scientific
consensus of an association between alcohol drinking and several types of
cancer. In its Report on Carcinogens, the National Toxicology Program of the
US Department of Health and Human Services lists consumption of alcoholic
beverages as a known human carcinogen. The research evidence indicates that
the more alcohol a person drinks—particularly the more alcohol a person drinks
regularly over time—the higher his or her risk of developing an alcohol-
associated cancer. Based on data from 2009, an estimated 3.5 percent of all
cancer deaths in the United States (about 19,500 deaths) were alcohol related.

Clear patterns have emerged between alcohol consumption and the development of
the following types of cancer:

  * **Head and neck cancer** : Alcohol consumption is a major risk factor for certain head and neck cancers, particularly cancers of the oral cavity (excluding the lips), pharynx (throat), and larynx (voice box). People who consume 50 or more grams of alcohol per day (approximately 3.5 or more drinks per day) have at least a two to three times greater risk of developing these cancers than nondrinkers. Moreover, the risks of these cancers are substantially higher among persons who consume this amount of alcohol and also use tobacco.

  * **Esophageal cancer** : Alcohol consumption is a major risk factor for a particular type of esophageal cancer called esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. In addition, people who inherit a deficiency in an enzyme that metabolizes alcohol have been found to have substantially increased risks of alcohol-related esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

  * **Liver cancer** : Alcohol consumption is an independent risk factor for, and a primary cause of, liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma). (Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus are the other major causes of liver cancer.)

  * **Breast cancer** : More than 100 epidemiologic studies have looked at the association between alcohol consumption and the risk of breast cancer in women. These studies have consistently found an increased risk of breast cancer associated with increasing alcohol intake. A meta-analysis of 53 of these studies (which included a total of 58,000 women with breast cancer) showed that women who drank more than 45 grams of alcohol per day (approximately three drinks) had 1.5 times the risk of developing breast cancer as nondrinkers (a modestly increased risk). The risk of breast cancer was higher across all levels of alcohol intake: for every 10 grams of alcohol consumed per day (slightly less than one drink), researchers observed a small (7 percent) increase in the risk of breast cancer. 

The Million Women Study in the United Kingdom (which included more than 28,000
women with breast cancer) provided a more recent, and slightly higher,
estimate of breast cancer risk at low to moderate levels of alcohol
consumption: every 10 grams of alcohol consumed per day was associated with a
12 percent increase in the risk of breast cancer.

  * **Colorectal cancer:** Alcohol consumption is associated with a modestly increased risk of cancers of the colon and rectum. A meta-analysis of 57 cohort and case-control studiesthat examined the association between alcohol consumption and colorectal cancer risk showed that people who regularly drank 50 or more grams of alcohol per day (approximately 3.5 drinks) had 1.5 times the risk of developing colorectal cancer as nondrinkers or occasional drinkers. For every 10 grams of alcohol consumed per day, there was a small (7 percent) increase in the risk of colorectal cancer.

**Immune System:**  
Drinking too much can weaken your immune system, making your body a much
easier target for disease. Chronic drinkers are more liable to contract
diseases like pneumonia and tuberculosis than people who do not drink too
much. Drinking a lot on a single occasion slows your body’s ability to ward
off infections – even up to 24 hours after getting drunk.

  * Instagram
  * Follow
  * Get Updates
  * Share
  * Donations
  * Join a Clinical Study
  * Alcohol Treatment Navigator

  * Site Map

  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Contact Us
  * Disclaimer
  * Material en Español

  * USA.gov--Government Made Easy

  * U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
  * National Institutes of Health

NIAAA: Understanding the impact of alcohol on human health and well-being

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

