

### Editions

Africa Australia Canada Canada (français) España France Global Perspectives
Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States

### Sections

        
                  * Home
          * Arts + Culture
          * Business + Economy
          * Cities
          * Education
          * Environment + Energy
          * FactCheck
          * Health + Medicine
          * Politics + Society
          * Science + Technology
        

### Search

### Services

        
                  * Events
          * Job board
          * Newsletter
          * Read on Play Newsstand
          * Read on Apple News
          * Read on Flipboard
        

### Information

        
                  * Who we are
          * Our charter
          * Our team
          * Our audience
          * Partners and funders
          * Republishing guidelines
          * Contact us
          * Donate
          * Friends of The Conversation
          * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
          * Privacy policy
          * Terms and conditions
          * Corrections
        

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)

        
                  * __
          * Edition:
        

Available editions

Australia __

        
                  * Africa
          * Canada
          * Canada (français)
          * España
          * France
          * Global Perspectives
          * Indonesia
          * New Zealand
          * United Kingdom
          * United States
          * Job Board
          * Donate
          * Become an author
          * Sign up as a reader
          * Sign in
          * __ Get newsletter 
          * __
          * __
          * __
        

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)
Search

__

Academic rigour, journalistic flair

        
                  1. Arts  + Culture
          2. Business + Economy
          3. Cities
          4. Education
          5. Environment + Energy
          6. FactCheck
          7. Health + Medicine
          8. Politics + Society
          9. Science + Technology
        

### __Follow Topics

        
                  1. Health Check
          2. Weekly Dose
          3. Science or Snake Oil
          4. Research Check
          5. Indigenous health
          6. Cancer
          7. Health policy
          8. Skin
          9. Sugar
        

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

# **Banning piercings for under 18s may be medically a good idea, but it

takes away choice and self-esteem **

February 2, 2018 10.15pm AEDT

Shutterstock

# **Banning piercings for under 18s may be medically a good idea, but it

takes away choice and self-esteem **

February 2, 2018 10.15pm AEDT

____ Michael Richards, _Edge Hill University_

### Author

        
                  1. ![](/assets/author/width170_default-19ec5bd0b0425d75df0ad1707d18c36b.jpg) Michael Richards
        

Lecturer in Applied Health and Social Care, Edge Hill University

### Disclosure statement

Michael Richards does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding
from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has
disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment.

### Partners

![Edge Hill

University](https://images.theconversation.com/partners/828/logos/logo-1459376933.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=170&h=170)

Edge Hill University provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK.

View all partners

Republish this article

![](/assets/call-to-actions/republish-ca547a7c5135cc6d1a28933dc8b6823c.png)
Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under Creative Commons
licence.

        
                  * __ Email
          * __ Twitter
          * __ Facebook
          * __ LinkedIn
          * __ WhatsApp
          * __ Messenger
        

It is now an offence for under-18s in Wales to get any intimate piercings –
meaning tongue, genitals and nipples. One of the main arguments for this ban
is that young people under 18 are still physically developing and that these
kinds of piercings can stifle that development and lead to infection.

It’s a fair point – but this also feels like a frustrating barrier for young
people who want control over their own bodies – and the reaction from young
people in Wales has been mixed. Some think their peers rush into getting a
piercing too quickly, while others say it should be about what makes you
happy.

When teenagers hit 16, they can (among other things) consent to medical and
surgical procedures, drink alcohol, have sex, and join the armed forces. So
it’s hard to see what the problem is with a little stud, bar or hoop when they
are legally grown up enough to do all these other things. If young people can
do all this before they reach 18 years old, surely they can alter or enhance
their body in any way they like?

The ban, particularly for 16 and 17-year olds, may feel like nothing more than
just another barrier to those who want to, and feel ready to, take
responsibility for their own bodies.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/204578/original/file-20180202-162093-501wob.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
Piercings, not problems. Shutterstock

Teenagers are going to rebel, experiment and try new things. In the USA, more
young people over 18 than ever before are getting piercings as well as
tattoos. In the UK there has been a similar boom in young people getting
piercings over the past 20 years – and having piercings has become a rite of
passage for many. Something to get excited about – no different from a first
alcoholic drink, or finally being able to call themselves an “adult” when they
reach 18.

The problem is that there can be serious health effects when getting a
piercing. Even non-intimate ear piercings can result in keloid scars, while
piercings on all parts of the body, can give rise to serious infections and
even disfigurement. Researchers have found that young people who get piercings
are likely to experience swelling, infection and bleeding, particularly in
intimate areas of the body. In a 2008 study of piercings in England – which
has been cited by the Welsh government – 28% of people who had body piercings
experienced complications, while 13% had serious problems. In addition, one in
100 piercings among 16 to 24-year-olds saw them being admitted to hospital.

## Risky business

The health risks of getting an intimate piercing appear to be high. So when
the medical perspective on piercing is considered, there appears to be
complete justification for the ban. There is also the issue of children being
placed in potentially vulnerable situations to consider. Giving evidence to
the Welsh government, the Chartered Institute for Environmental Health said
this:

> If you go to a doctor for an intimate examination, you’re entitled to have a
chaperone there, and the doctor, or whoever is involved, will have had a
criminal record check at some point.

>

> We have practitioners who have had no checks at all around sexual offences
that they may have carried out, or assaults that they may have carried out.
But people are putting themselves, and children are putting themselves, in an
extremely vulnerable position.

Another valid point – there are child protection issues at play here. But
surely that is the case for any adult who may get an intimate piercing too?

For many people, making choices over their own body is empowering, makes them
feel good and helps them to feel that they look good, which lifts self-esteem,
positivity and confidence. This is so important for young people today, with
so many experiencing negativity about their bodies, having suicidal thoughts
and urges towards self-harm.

Young people are always striving for control over their own minds and bodies –
so being able to feel good about themselves is likely to overwhelm any common
sense relating to the health risks that come with piercings. If a young person
who can legally do many things wants to feel good about themselves by having a
piercing, is it really so bad? This is about about choice – and the ban takes
away choice for people who feel happy to have piercings on their body.

__

        
                  * Young people
          * Wales
          * Body modification
          * Welsh law
          * Articles for young people
        
          * __ Tweet
          * __ Share
          * __ Get newsletter Newsletter
        

### You might also like

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Graham Ó Síodhacháin/Flickr

## Is extreme body modification even legal?

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
She branded me with science. Cory Doctorow

## The new tattoo: is body branding legal?

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Think twice before copying Tyson’s tattoo. Mario Anzuoni/Reuters

## Who owns your tattoo? Maybe not you

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
About one in four people regrets having tattoos. From www.shuttertock.com

## Tattoo regret: Can you make it go away?

### Most popular on The Conversation

        
                  * Explaining Adani: why would a billionaire persist with a mine that will probably lose money?
          * Are you burnt out at work? Ask yourself these 4 questions
          * The Reserve Bank will cut rates again and again, until we lift spending and push up prices
          * Why the raids on Australian media present a clear threat to democracy
          * The behavioural economics of discounting, and why Kogan would profit from discount deception
          * ‘Do I need to shave my pubic hair before having sex?’
          * There are four types of drinker – which one are you?
          * Grattan on Friday: Is it good for Labor, or Bill Shorten, for the former leader to stay in parliament?
          * View from The Hill: Kristina Keneally vs Peter Dutton should produce plenty of political bloodsport
          * Coalition likely to have strong Senate position as their Senate vote jumps 3%
        

### Events

        
                  * Your Leadership Voice - Women In Focus (Classic)  -- Caulfield East , Victoria
        
          * Your Leadership Voice: Women in Focus -- Caulfield, Victoria
        
          * Sydney Ideas: Why should the perfect robot look and think just like a human? -- Sydney, New South Wales
        
          * Getting the work of government done: thinking differently about commissioning and contracting -- Melbourne, Victoria
        
          * What will be the new government’s vision for higher education?  -- Parkville, Victoria
        

__ More events

### Jobs

        
                  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/2/logos/width36_logo-1501461860.png)
        

##### Associate Dean (School Principal) Urban School

        
                  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/1/logos/width36_logo-1520549009.png)
        

##### Research Fellow / Senior Research Fellow Opportunities In Digital

Ethics, School Of Computing And Information Systems

        
                  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/6/logos/width36_logo-1431665524.jpg)
        

##### Clinical Operations Manager – Uwa Dental School

        
                  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/64/logos/width36_logo-1435284135.jpg)
        

##### Professor of Urbanism

        
                  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/60/logos/width36_logo-1402555597.jpeg)
        

##### Clinical Assistant Professor in Pharmacy

__ More jobs

## The Conversation

###### Community

        
                  * Community standards
          * Republishing guidelines
          * Friends of The Conversation
          * Research and Expert Database
          * __Analytics
          * __Job Board
          * __Events
          * __Our feeds
          * __Donate
        

###### Company

        
                  * Who we are
          * Our charter
          * Our team
          * Our audience
          * Resource for Teachers
          * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
          * Our blog
          * Partners and funders
          * Resource for media
          * Contact us
          * Work with us
        

###### Stay informed and subscribe to our free daily newsletter and get the

latest analysis and commentary directly in your inbox.

Email address

_✔_ __![](/assets/spinner-9643e2633c59d728d78b58f465f2fb9c.gif)

###### Follow us on social media

        
                  * __
          * __
          * __
        

Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections

Copyright (C) 2010–2019, The Conversation Media Group Ltd

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

