

Skip to content

![DrugRehab.org](/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/cropped-logo4.png)

Download Family Guide

__ 1-877-752-6506

Follow:

  * 
  * 
  * 
  * 

Who Answers?

  * Find a Rehab Center
  * Top Rated Rehabs
    *       * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    *       * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    *       * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    * Rhode Island
    *       * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * Washington, D.C.
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
  * Treatment Types
    * By Program
    * Inpatient
    * Short-Term
    * Long-Term
    * Residential
    * Detox
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * Aftercare
    * 12-Step
    * Non 12-Step
    * By Person
    * Men
    * Women
    * Executives
    * Christian
    * Catholic
    * Native Americans
    * Specialty Rehabs
    * Wilderness
    * Holistic
    * Luxury
    * Bio-Physical
    * Alternative
  * Blog
  * Addiction Resources
    *       * Finding a Rehab
      * Cost of Drug Rehab
      * Choosing the Right Rehab
      * Paying for Rehab with Insurance
      * Finding the Best Rehab for You
      * Signs of Effective Drug Rehabs
    * Addiction Help
      * Am I Addicted?
      * Addiction in the Family
      * Help for Alcoholics in the Family
      * Help for an Alcoholic Spouse
      * Drug Addiction and the Brain
      * Help for Alcohol Poisoning
      * How to Stop Drinking
      * Signs of Prescription Drug Abuse
      * Frequently Asked Questions
    *       * By Drug
      * Crack Cocaine
      * Fentanyl
      * Klonopin
      * Methamphetamines
      * Morphine
      * Oxycontin
      * Percocet
      * Opioids
    * Recovery Resources
      * Drugrehab.org Experts
      * Expert Area
      * Profiles in Recovery
  * Contact Us

# Is Cocaine Physically Addictive? Is It Mentally Addictive? Or Both?

__Find Rehab Now

![Is Cocaine Physically Addictive Is It Mentally Addictive Or Both

Rebrand](/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Is-Cocaine-Physically-Addictive-Is-It-

Mentally-Addictive-Or-Both-Rebrand.jpg)

Those looking for a quick and intense high often end up abusing cocaine. This
white, powdery substance is either snorted, injected, or smoked as crack
cocaine, and it delivers a euphoric high in only a few seconds to a few
minutes. As an extract from the leaves of a coca plant, it is the strongest
natural stimulant known to man. However, when it is sold on the streets, it is
by no means a pure substance; often laced with other anesthetics, laxatives,
sugar, creatine, and caffeine, the dealers can make more money off
unsuspecting buyers. Cocaine is a dangerous drug to start using due to its
highly addictive qualities.

## Is Cocaine Physically Addictive?

Unlike heroin or other narcotic drugs, cocaine does not have any outward
physical withdrawal symptoms. Some addicts undergoing withdrawal have reported
sleep disturbances and fatigue, but overall, cocaine addictive qualities do
not take place in the body.

While cocaine does not have any proven physically addictive qualities, it can
still affect the body in other ways. Long term use or overdose can lead to
heart attack, stroke, brain hemorrhaging, and respiratory failure. Even
sporadic use can lead to health complications such as high blood pressure,
hardened arteries, bowel gangrene, and loss of gray matter in the brain due to
expansion of the reward center of the brain. Because cocaine eliminates
appetite, many of those who abuse cocaine are also malnourished.

## Is Cocaine Mentally Addictive?

This is where cocaine hooks you; it all takes place in the mind. Every time
you abuse cocaine, the drug interacts with the dopamine receptors in your
brain, raising levels of dopamine and stimulating the central nervous system.
Because the high only lasts for a short period of time, anywhere from 5 to 30
minutes, cocaine is a drug that often leads to overdosing and high levels of
abuse due to users taking more and more to get the desired high. This repeated
use causes normal dopamine communication in the brain to malfunction.

Ultimately, it changes the brain's reward processing, not allowing the user to
appreciate the things in life that used to make them happy: good food, being
around friends, their favorite book or movie. Things they previously enjoyed
lose meaning and their whole focus is on getting more cocaine and getting high
in order to feel good. Thus, many of those who are in between highs or trying
to quit using cocaine can develop severe depression, causing them to think
suicidal thoughts and potentially hurt themselves. Those going through
withdrawal often experience a mixture of anxiety, agitation, aggression,
irritability, paranoia, and mood swings.

Because cocaine is often referred to as the “rich man's drug”, people are not
only affected mentally, but financially as well. Some go bankrupt due to the
high cost, others borrow from friends and family and cannot pay them back.
There have also been some reported cases of mothers attempting to barter their
children for the drug, lending itself to actually how addictive it really is.

## Treatment For Cocaine Addiction

Because cocaine is mentally addictive, most rehabs focus on therapies that
help patients learn coping mechanisms and life skills to help with cravings
and moments of temptation in order to avoid relapse. Such therapies include
cognitive-behavioral therapy, group therapy sessions to give social support,
and individual counseling to help the patient with their possible mood swings
or depression, giving them the tools to ward off negative thoughts and the
urge to use again.

## Get Help At DrugRehab.org

![Our staff can help you find the right rehab center to fit your needs and

help you get back on the path to clean living.](/wp-

content/uploads/2010/08/contact-drugrehab.png)If you or a loved one are
suffering from an addiction to cocaine, don't wait any longer to get help. Our
staff can help you find the right rehab center to fit your needs and help you
get back on the path to clean living.

Start Your Recovery

Talk With Our Treatment Specialists Today:

### Search For A Help Center

Select your state

  * Alabama
  * Alaska
  * Arizona
  * Arkansas
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Connecticut
  * Delaware
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Hawaii
  * Idaho
  * Illinois
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Maryland
  * Massachusetts
  * Michigan
  * Minnesota
  * Mississippi
  * Missouri
  * Montana
  * Nebraska
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New Jersey
  * New Mexico
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * North Dakota
  * Ohio
  * Oklahoma
  * Oregon
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * South Carolina
  * South Dakota
  * Tennessee
  * Texas
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virgin Islands
  * Virginia
  * Washington
  * West Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming

### Latest Blog Post

  * 5 Ways To Stay Sober On St. Patrick’s Day

### From Our Experts

  * ![Deborah King](/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/image1-210x205.png) Dr. Deborah King

Life Is The New Cool

Download Family Guide

__ Help Center

  * __ Rehab FAQ's
  * __ Choosing the  
Right Rehab

  * __ Videos

  * __ Recovery  
Support

### Sign Up For Our Newsletter

Sign up for our Newsletter and receive the latest on addiction treatment news.
Keep up on new treatment methods, new intervention methods, new self help
techniques, new drug and alcohol rehab centers and much more. Your information
will be kept confidential.

  * 
  * 
  * 
  * 

![](/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/cropped-logo4.png)

For Immediate Treatment Help Call:

(877) 752-6506

  * About Us
  * Terms of Use
  * Marketing Ethics
  * Privacy Policy
  * Disclaimer
  * Contact Us
  * Who Answers?

DrugRehab.org is intended for educational purposes only and is not designed to
provide medical advice of any kind. Any information found on DrugRehab.org
should never be used to diagnose a disease or health problem, and in no way
replaces or substitutes professional care. In the case of a suspected health
problem, please contact your healthcare provider. The producers, contributors,
sponsors, editors, and authors of DrugRehab.org have no responsibility or
obligation to anyone (person or entity) for any harmful consequences that may
happen, directly or indirectly, as a result of the content or information
provided on DrugRehab.org. In the case of a medical emergency, please call
9-1-1 immediately.

Copyright © DrugRehab.org 2018  
is a property of Freedom Healthcare of America, LLC

×

#### Talk to a Treatment Specialist Today

##### Call: 877-752-6506

Or fill out the form below

We're here to help start your recovery.

Call (888) 682-5929

100% Free & Confidential.

##### How Our 24/7 Hotline Works

×

Calls will be answered by a qualified admissions representative with Freedom
Healthcare of America, LLC, the owners of DrugRehab.org.

**Calls to any general helpline (non-facility specific 1-8XX numbers) for your
visit will be answered by Freedom Healthcare of America, LLC.**

We look forward to helping you!

__1-877-752-6506

__

![logo](/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/drugrehab-addiction-recovery-logo.png)

Questions about treatment?

Call: (877) 752-6506

![](/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/cropped-logo4.png)

  * Find a Rehab Center
  * Top Rated Rehabs ****
    * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * Washington, D.C.
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
    * __Back
  * Treatment Types ****
    * By Program ****
    * Inpatient
    * Short-Term
    * Long-Term
    * Residential
    * Detox
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * Aftercare
    * 12-Step
    * Non 12-Step
    * __Back
    * By Person ****
    * Men
    * Women
    * Executives
    * Christian
    * Catholic
    * Native Americans
    * __Back
    * Specialty Rehabs ****
    * Wilderness
    * Holistic
    * Luxury
    * Bio-Physical
    * Alternative
    * __Back
    * __Back
  * Blog
  * Addiction Resources ****
    * Finding a Rehab ****
    * Cost of Drug Rehab
    * Choosing the Right Rehab
    * Paying for Rehab with Insurance
    * Finding the Best Rehab for You
    * Signs of Effective Drug Rehabs
    * __Back
    * Addiction Help ****
    * Am I Addicted?
    * Addiction in the Family
    * Help for Alcoholics in the Family
    * Help for an Alcoholic Spouse
    * Drug Addiction and the Brain
    * Help for Alcohol Poisoning
    * How to Stop Drinking
    * Signs of Prescription Drug Abuse
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * __Back
    * By Drug ****
    * Crack Cocaine
    * Fentanyl
    * Klonopin
    * Methamphetamines
    * Morphine
    * Oxycontin
    * Percocet
    * Opioids
    * __Back
    * Recovery Resources ****
    * Drugrehab.org Experts
    * Expert Area
    * Profiles in Recovery
    * __Back
    * __Back
  * Contact Us

For Immediate Treatment Help Call: (877) 752-6506

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

