

Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to
A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving
Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People

Search ____

×

Submit __

For a full list of topics: A-Z Index

Vital Signs

Section Navigation

TP Docs Home

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email
  * Syndicate

# Alcohol Poisoning Deaths

A deadly consequence of binge drinking

Español (Spanish)

Minus

Related Pages

On This Page

  * Problem
  * Infographic
  * What Can Be Done
  * Science Behind the Issue
  * Related Pages

#### January 2015

![VitalSigns](/vitalsigns/images/vitalsigns_logo-300px.png)

![A person's silhouette](/vitalsigns/images/figure_man_145px.png)

#### ![tomb shape](/vitalsigns/alcohol-poisoning-deaths/images/icon1.png)6 a

day

An average of 6 people die of alcohol poisoning each day in the US.

#### ![3 in 4 people](/vitalsigns/alcohol-poisoning-deaths/images/icon2.png)3

in 4

76% of alcohol poisoning deaths are among adults ages 35 to 64.

#### ![Icon of a man](/vitalsigns/alcohol-poisoning-

deaths/images/icon3.png)76%

About 76% of those who die from alcohol poisoning are men.

On average, 6 people died every day from alcohol poisoning in the US from 2010
to 2012. Alcohol poisoning is caused by drinking large quantities of alcohol
in a short period of time. Very high levels of alcohol in the body can
shutdown critical areas of the brain that control breathing, heart rate, and
body temperature, resulting in death. Alcohol poisoning deaths affect people
of all ages but are most common among middle-aged adults and men.

**States and communities can take steps to reduce alcohol poisoning deaths by
preventing binge drinking, including:**

  * Partnering with police, community groups, health departments, and doctors, nurses, and other health care providers to reduce binge drinking and related harms.
  * Tracking the role of alcohol in injuries and deaths.
  * Supporting proven programs and policies that decrease binge drinking. States with stronger alcohol policies have less binge drinking.

Problem

#### There are 2,200 alcohol poisoning deaths in the US each year.

**Alcohol poisoning deaths:**

  * Most people who die are 35-64 years old.
  * Most people who die are men.
  * Most alcohol poisoning deaths are among non- Hispanic whites. Although a smaller share of the US population, American Indians/Alaska Natives have the most alcohol poisoning deaths per million people of any of the races.
  * Alaska has the most alcohol poisoning deaths per million people, while Alabama has the least.
  * Alcohol dependence (alcoholism) was identified as a factor in 30% of alcohol poisoning deaths.

**Binge drinking can lead to death from alcohol poisoning.**

  * Binge drinking (4 or more drinks for women or 5 or more drinks for men in a short period of time) typically leads to a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) that exceeds 0.08 g/dL, the legal limit for driving in all states.
  * US adults who binge drink consume an average of about 8 drinks per binge, which can result in even higher levels of alcohol in the body.
  * The more you drink the greater your risk of death.

![Learn more about signs of alcohol poisoning and standard drink size in

US.](/vitalsigns/alcohol-poisoning-deaths/images/graphic1_570px.jpg)

View larger image and text description.

Top of Page

Infographic

![Learn more about alcohol poisoning,  who is affected and where they

live.](/vitalsigns/alcohol-poisoning-deaths/images/infographic_570px.jpg)

View larger image and text description.

Top of Page

What Can Be Done

#### The US government is

  * Supporting proven programs and policies to reduce binge drinking.
  * Helping states and communities measure binge drinking and related harms, including alcohol poisoning.
  * Expanding access through the Affordable Care Act to new health insurance plans to cover alcohol screening and brief counseling.

#### We know what works

The Community Preventive Services Task Force has identified programs and
policies to reduce binge drinking based on reviews of the scientific evidence:
thecommunityguide.org/alcoholExternalExternal

#### States and communities can

  * Support proven programs and policies that decrease binge drinking. States with stronger alcohol policies have less binge drinking.
  * Partner with police, community groups, health departments, and doctors, nurses, and other health care providers to reduce binge drinking and related harms.
  * Track the role of alcohol in injuries and deaths.

#### Doctors, nurses, and other providers can

  * Screen all adult patients for binge drinking and counsel those who binge drink to drink less.
  * Recognize that most people who drink too much are not alcohol dependent (alcoholics) but may still need counseling.
  * Support proven programs and policies to prevent binge drinking.

#### Everyone can

  * Avoid binge drinking. If you choose to drink alcohol, follow the dietary guidelines.
  * Avoid drinks with unknown alcohol content or mixing alcohol with energy drinks. Caffeine can mask alcohol's effects and cause people to drink more than they intend.
  * Get help for anyone experiencing lifethreatening signs of alcohol poisoning.
  * Talk to your doctor, nurse, or other health care provider if you think you may have a drinking problem, or call the national Treatment Referral Routing Service (1-800-662-HELP).

#### 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans:

  * Don't start drinking or increase the amount you drink on the basis of potential health benefits. If you choose to drink, do so in moderation - up to 1 drink a day for women or up to 2 drinks a day for men.
  * Don't drink at all if you are under age 21, pregnant or may be pregnant, have health problems that could be made worse by drinking, or are engaging in activities for which alcohol is dangerous (e.g., driving).

Top of Page

Science Behind the Issue

  * MMWR
  * Science Clips

Related Pages

  * Vital Signs Issue details: Alcohol Poisoning Deaths -- United States, 2010-2012, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR)
  * Vital Signs - Alcohol Poisoning Deaths [PODCAST - 1:15 minutes]
  * Vital Signs - Alcohol Poisoning Deaths [PSA - 0:60 seconds]
  * Prevention Status Reports (PSRs): Excessive Alcohol Use
  * Public Health Grand Rounds - Preventing Excessive Alcohol Use: What Public Health Can Do
  * Binge drinking [VIDEO - 4:23 minutes]
  * Alcohol and Public Health
  * Preventing Excessive Alcohol Use
  * Binge Drinking
  * Caffeine and Alcohol

#### On Other Web Sites

  * The Community Guide: Preventing Excessive Alcohol UseExternal
  * NIAAA: Alcohol Overdose: The Dangers of Drinking Too MuchExternal
  * ICCPUD: The Role of Public Health in Preventing Underage Drinking and Excessive Drinking by AdultsExternal
  * MedlinePlus - AlcoholExternal

Top of Page

Page last reviewed: January 6, 2015

Content source: National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Division of Population Health

home Vital Signs

  * Topics Covered
  * All CDC Vital Signs
  * Digital Media Tools

Get Email Updates

To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:

Email Address

What's this?

Submit

Get Connected

Social_round_rss RSS MMWR RSS

Social_round_rss RSS VitalSigns RSS

Related Links

  * Download this factsheet Cdc-pdf PDF [PDF - 1.51 MB]
  * en Español Cdc-pdf PDF [PDF - 1.16 MB]
  * CDC Digital Press Kit
  * Read the MMWR
  * Science Clips

**CONTACT CDC-INFO**

Have questions? We have answers. 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) TTY:
888-232-6348

Email CDC-INFO

**CDC INFORMATION**

  * About CDC
  * Jobs
  * Funding
  * Policies
  * File Viewers & Players

  * Privacy

  * FOIA
  * No Fear Act
  * OIG
  * Nondiscrimination
  * Accessibility

**CONNECT WITH CDC**

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Youtube
  * Instagram

  * Syndicate

  * CDC TV
  * RSS
  * Email

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

USA.gov

CDC Website Exit Disclaimer external icon

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

file_external

#### Exit Notification/Disclaimer Policy

Close

**Links with this icon indicate that you are leaving the CDC website.**

  * The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cannot attest to the accuracy of a non-federal website.
  * Linking to a non-federal website does not constitute an endorsement by CDC or any of its employees of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the website.
  * You will be subject to the destination website's privacy policy when you follow the link.
  * CDC is not responsible for Section 508 compliance (accessibility) on other federal or private website.

For more information on CDC's web notification policies, see Website
Disclaimers.

Cancel Continue

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

