

Skip to Navigation

## Search form

Search

  * Home
  * Store
  * Career Center
  * Affiliate Login
  * Contact Us

![Home](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/default/files/logo_1.png)

Donate to MHA

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/default/files/new_inspire-

icon.png)![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/twitter-

icon.png)![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/facebook-

icon.png)![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/logo_instagram_36x36.png)![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/pintrest-

icon.png)![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/youtube-

icon.png)

Menu

Search

  * About Us
    * Who We Are
    * Our History
    * The B4Stage4 Philosophy
    * The Mental Health Bell
    * MHA Store
    * Board of Directors
    * Our Staff
    * Our Affiliates
    * Starting Your Own Affiliate
    * Standards of Affiliation
    * Financial Information & Annual Reports
  * Programs
    * About MHA Screening
    * Online Depression Screening
    * Screening to Supports
    * Back to School
    * Back to School: Understanding Trauma
    * Back to School: Recognizing Depression
    * Back to School: Recognizing Anxiety
    * Back to School: Recognizing Psychosis
    * Back to School: Preventing Suicide
    * Mental Health Month
    * # 4Mind4Body

    * 4Mind4Body: Animal Companionship
    * 4Mind4Body: Work-Life Balance
    * 4Mind4Body: Spirituality and Religion
    * 4Mind4Body: Humor
    * 4Mind4Body: Social Connections and Recreation
    * Infographic: Chronic Health Conditions and Mental Health
    * Self-Help Tools
    * Center for Peer Support
    * What is a Peer?
    * Peer Support: Research and Reports
    * Resources and Support for Peers
    * MHA Peer Programs
    * National Certified Peer Specialist (NCPS) Certification
    * Life on Campus
    * What's Your Plan? College with a Mental Health Disorder
    * Balancing Work and School
    * Taking a Leave of Absence: What You Need to Know
    * Sleep and the Student - College Concerns
    * Stressed or Depressed? Know the Difference
    * Boost Your School Performance by Taking Care of You
    * Top Ten Freshman Year Issues
    * Alcohol, Substance Abuse and Depression
    * Winter Break Survival Tips for College Students
    * The Most Stressful Time of the Semester - Finals
    * So You've Graduated College. Now What?
    * Taking Fitness Too Far for the Summer
    * Implementing Life on Campus
    * Minority Mental Health
    * Workplace Wellness
    * Corporate Excellence Award
    * Work-Life Balance
    * Workplace Training and Resources
    * Mental Illness and Work
    * Support an Employee
    * Workplace Bullying & Violence
    * Signs of a Healthy Workplace
    * Clifford Beers Society
    * Social Self-Directed Care Program
  * Take a Screen
    * Mental Health Screening Tools
    * Mental Health Spanish Screening Tools
  * Find Help
    * Find Help For Myself
    * Find Help For Someone Else
    * Mental Health Treatments
    * Types of Mental Health Professionals
    * Therapy
    * Finding Therapy
    * Find Support Groups
    * Finding Other Local Services
    * Medication
    * Hospitalization
    * In Patient Care
    * Understanding Clinical Trials
    * Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
    * Psychiatric Advance Directives: Taking Charge of Your Care
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * How can I get information about medications?
    * How can I get help paying for my prescriptions?
    * What to do if I'm unsatisfied w/ the mental health care I'm receiving?
    * What do I need to know about my insurance benefits?
    * What can I do if my insurance company is refusing to approve?
    * How to overturn managed care treatment denials
    * Working With a Provider
    * Choosing a Provider
    * Questions to Ask a Provider
    * You and Your Provider
    * You're on the Team: Shared Decision-Making
      * Help for Providers
      * Helpful Resources
      * How Shared-Decision Making Works
      * Preparing for Appointments
      * Shared-Decision Making Checklist
      * Shared-Decision Making for Providers
      * Talking to your Doctor
      * Why Providers Should Use SDM
    * Recovery & Support
    * Treatment
    * Education
    * Housing
    * Managing Your Money
    * Parenting
    * Paying for Care
    * Meaningful Work and Recovery
    * Taking Good Care of Yourself
    * Wellness Planning and Maintenance
    * Recovery Assistance Programs
    * Care For Your Health
    * For Providers
    * For Family & Friends
    * Person-Centered Language
    * Psychiatric Advance Directives
    * Creating a Psychiatric Advance Directive
    * FAQs about Psychiatric Advance Directives
    * Psychiatric Advance Directives Glossary and Resources
    * Psychiatric Advance Directives: Meet the Experts
  * Do More
    * Share What #mentalillnessfeelslike
    * Become an Associate Member
    * Volunteer
    * Join the Advocacy Network
    * Partner with Us
    * Donate to MHA
    * Planned Giving
    * Clifford Beers Society
    * Mental Health First Aid
  * Learn More
    * Anxiety
    * Bipolar
    * Depression
    * Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
    * Psychosis
    * Staying Mentally Healthy
    * Live Your Life Well
      * How Stress Hurts
      * Stress Screen
      * Resources
      * When Change is Hard
      * References
      * Ten Tools
      * Connect with others
      * Stay Positive
      * Get Physically Active
      * Help Others
      * Get Enough Sleep
      * Create Joy and Satisfaction
      * Eat Well
      * Take Care of Your Spirit
      * Deal Better with Hard Times
      * Get Professional Help If You Need It
    * Complementary Medicine
    * Acknowledgements
    * Disclaimer
    * Download CAM Analysis
    * For Providers
    * List of CAM Treatments
    * All Other Topics A-Z
  * Donate
    * Donate Now
    * Monthly Gift
    * Legacy Gift
    * Clifford Beers Society
    * In Memory
    * In Honor
    * Fundraise
    * Other Ways to Give
  * Policy
    * Current Legislation
    * Legislative Priorities
    * Policy Issues
    * Position Statements
    * Advocacy Network
    * The State of Mental Health in America
    * Access to Care Data
    * Adult Data
    * Download the Printable Report
    * Glossary and Citations
    * Prevalence Data
    * Ranking Guidelines
    * Ranking the States
    * Youth Data
    * Regional Policy Council
    * Advocacy Mondays in May
    * Research and Reports
  * News & Events
    * 2019 Annual Conference
    * News
    * Press Releases
    * Our Blog: Chiming In
    * Why the New Mental Health Reform Law Passed, and What It Means to Me
    * B4Stage4 Program
    * Information for Journalists
    * Event Calendar
    * Webinars

![Counseling](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/default/files/styles/interior_page_banner/public/counseling.jpg?itok=VKDbVCAK)

Share  
this page

![Print](/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/print-share-icon.png)

![](/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/email-share-icon.png)

## You are here

Home » Find Help » Mental Health Treatments

# Mental Health Treatments

Many people diagnosed with mental illness achieve strength and recovery
through participating in individual or group treatment. There are many
different treatment options available. There is no treatment that works for
everyone – individuals can chose the treatment, or combination of treatments,
that works best.

  * **Psychotherapy** – Psychotherapy is the therapeutic treatment of mental illness provided by a trained mental health professional. Psychotherapy explores thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and seeks to improve an individual’s well-being. Psychotherapy paired with medication is the most effective way to promote recovery. Examples include: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Exposure Therapy, Dialectical Behavior Therapy, etc.
  * **Medication** – Medication does not outright cure mental illness. However, it may help with the management of symptoms. Medication paired with psychotherapy is the most effective way to promote recovery.
  * **Case Management** – Case management coordinates services for an individual with the help of a case manager. A case manager can help assess, plan, and implement a number of strategies to facilitate recovery.
  * **Hospitalization** – In a minority of cases, hospitalization may be necessary so that an individual can be closely monitored, accurately diagnosed or have medications adjusted when his or her mental illness temporarily worsens. 
  * **Support Group** – A support group is a group meeting where members guide each other towards the shared goal of recovery. Support groups are often comprised of nonprofessionals, but peers that have suffered from similar experiences. 
  * **Complementary & Alternative Medicine** – Complementary & Alternative Medicine, or CAM, refers to treatment and practices that are not typically associated with standard care. CAM may be used in place of or addition to standard health practices.
  * **Self Help Plan** – A self-help plan is a unique health plan where an individual addresses his or her condition by implementing strategies that promote wellness. Self-help plans may involve addressing wellness, recovery, triggers or warning signs. 
  * **Peer Support** – Peer Support refers to receiving help from individuals who have suffered from similar experiences. 

## Other treatments include:

  * Electroconvulsive Therapy
  * Art Therapy

![phone icon](/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/phone-block-img.png)

In Crisis?

Call 1-800-273-TALK  
OR  
Text MHA to 741741

## Find Help

  * Find Help For Myself
  * Find Help For Someone Else
  * Mental Health Treatments
    * Types of Mental Health Professionals
    * Therapy
    * Finding Therapy
    * Find Support Groups
    * Finding Other Local Services
    * Medication
    * Hospitalization
    * In Patient Care
    * Understanding Clinical Trials
    * Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
    * Psychiatric Advance Directives: Taking Charge of Your Care
  * Frequently Asked Questions
  * Working With a Provider
  * Recovery & Support
  * Psychiatric Advance Directives

![Find MHA in your area](/sites/default/files/images/find-mha-in-your-

area.png)

Join  
Our Mailing List

![m3 logo](/sites/default/files/m3-block-img-new.png)

Mind

Your Health

Screen for 9  
common conditions. GO

![heart and donate icon](/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/red-heart-

icon.png)

Help

Support MHA

Donate or set up a  
recurring gift. GIVE

![#mentalillnessfeelslike](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/default/files/mifl%20widget.png)

Collapse -

  * About Us
    * Who We Are
    * Our History
    * The B4Stage4 Philosophy
    * The Mental Health Bell
    * MHA Store
    * Board of Directors
    * Our Staff
    * Our Affiliates
    * Financial Information & Annual Reports
  * Programs
    * About MHA Screening
    * Screening to Supports
    * Back to School
    * Mental Health Month
    * Center for Peer Support
    * National Certified Peer Specialist (NCPS) Certification
    * Life on Campus
    * Minority Mental Health
    * Workplace Wellness
    * Clifford Beers Society
    * Social Self-Directed Care Program
  * Take a Screen
    * Mental Health Screening Tools
    * Mental Health Spanish Screening Tools
  * Find Help
    * Find Help For Myself
    * Find Help For Someone Else
    * Mental Health Treatments
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Working With a Provider
    * Recovery & Support
    * Psychiatric Advance Directives
  * Do More
    * Share What #mentalillnessfeelslike
    * Become an Associate Member
    * Volunteer
    * Join the Advocacy Network
    * Partner with Us
    * Donate to MHA
    * Mental Health First Aid
  * Learn More
    * Anxiety
    * Bipolar
    * Depression
    * Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
    * Psychosis
    * Staying Mentally Healthy
    * Complementary Medicine
    * All Other Topics A-Z
  * Donate
    * Donate Now
    * Monthly Gift
    * Legacy Gift
    * Clifford Beers Society
    * In Memory
    * In Honor
    * Fundraise
    * Other Ways to Give
  * Policy
    * Current Legislation
    * Legislative Priorities
    * Policy Issues
    * Position Statements
    * Advocacy Network
    * The State of Mental Health in America
    * Regional Policy Council
    * Advocacy Mondays in May
    * Research and Reports
  * News & Events
    * 2019 Annual Conference
    * News
    * Press Releases
    * Our Blog: Chiming In
    * B4Stage4 Program
    * Information for Journalists
    * Event Calendar
    * Webinars

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/default/files/mha-logo-small.png)

500 Montgomery Street, Suite 820  
Alexandria, VA 22314

**Phone** (703) 684.7722

**Toll Free** (800) 969.6642

**Fax** (703) 684.5968

* * *

**Web Sponsor**

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/default/files/betterhelp-

logo.png)

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/inspire-

icon.png)

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/twitter-

icon.png)

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/facebook-

icon.png)

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/pintrest-

icon.png)

![](http://www.mentalhealthamerica.net/sites/all/themes/bwm_njord/images/youtube-

icon.png)

Select LanguageEnglishArabicFrenchGermanItalianRussianSpanish

Print this Page

## Text Resize

-A +A

## Secondary Footer Menu

  * Home
  * Contact Us
  * Store
  * Career Center
  * Site Policies
  * Site Map
  * Donate
  * Affiliate Login

SEO Provided by Pikes Peak SEO

(C) Copyright 2019 | Mental Health America | Formerly known as the National
Mental Health Association. MHA permits electronic copying and sharing of all
portions of its public website and requests in return only the customary
copyright acknowledgement, using "(C) Copyright Mental Health America" and the
date of the download.

**The links on this page may contain document data that requires additional
software to open:**

  * Adobe Reader is required to download PDF documents.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

