

Skip to content

![](/wp-content/themes/itep/img/logo-itep-1x.png)

Subscribe

ITEP's Email Digest

  * __
  * __
  * __

ITEP's Email Digest  
Subscribe

  * __
  * __
  * __

![ITEP Logo](/wp-content/themes/itep/img/logo-itep-2x.png) Toggle navigation

  * About 

    * Mission & History
    * Staff
    * Microsimulation Tax Model
    * Board of Directors
    * Employment
    * Contact

* * *
    
    
    * #### Our Experts
    
      * ![](https://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Carl-Davis-100x100.png)
    

##### Carl Davis

    
    
      * ![](https://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/alanessigpic-1-100x100.jpg)
    

##### Alan Essig

    
    
      * ![](https://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/4-18matt5_rev-100x100.jpg)
    

##### Matthew Gardner

    
    
      * ![](https://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/steve3-rev-100x100.jpg)
    

##### Steve Wamhoff

    
    
      * ![](https://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Wiehe-Meg-100x100.jpg)
    

##### Meg Wiehe

  * Federal Policy 

### Federal Policy Homepage

view »

* * *
    
    
    * Corporate Taxes
    * Tax Analyses
    * Tax Credits for Workers and Families
    * Tax Reform Debate
    

  * State Policy 

### State Policy Homepage

view »

* * *
    
    
    * Education Tax Breaks
    * Immigration
    * Personal Income Taxes
    * Property Taxes
    * Sales, Gas and Excise Taxes
    * SALT
    * State Corporate Taxes
    * Tax Basics
    * Tax Credits for Workers and Families
    
    * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * District of Columbia
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    
    * Illinois
    * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    
    * Montana
    * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    
    * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
    
    * Education Tax Breaks
    * Immigration
    * Personal Income Taxes
    * Property Taxes
    * Sales, Gas and Excise Taxes
    * SALT
    * State Corporate Taxes
    * Tax Basics
    * Tax Credits for Workers and Families
    

* * *
    
    
    * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * District of Columbia
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
    

  * Publications 

    * Reports
    * Publications by Year
    * Policy Briefs
    * Blog Archive
  * Maps

  * Newsroom
  * Blog
  * Donate
  * __

January 23, 2019

# Taxing Cannabis

report

#### Authors

Carl Davis

Misha Hill

Richard Phillips

Read as PDF

**Table of Contents:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing
Cannabis | How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue
Performance | Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# ![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Cover-1-232x300.png) Executive
Summary

State policy toward cannabis is evolving rapidly. While much of the debate
around legalization has rightly focused on potential health and criminal
justice impacts, legalization also has revenue implications for state and
local governments that choose to regulate and tax cannabis sales.

For decades, analysts interested in the tax revenue potential of legalizing
cannabis had to use unreliable survey data and speculation regarding how a
legal market might operate. But this is changing. This month marks the five-
year anniversary of the first legal, taxable sale of recreational cannabis in
modern U.S. history. In January 2014, recreational cannabis establishments in
Colorado opened their doors to the public, followed soon thereafter by
businesses in Washington State, Oregon, Alaska, Nevada, California, and most
recently Massachusetts. These states’ experiences with a tax that did not
exist just a few years ago are providing invaluable information to lawmakers
across the country as they consider legalizing and taxing recreational
cannabis sales.

This report describes the various options for structuring state and local
taxes on cannabis and identifies approaches currently in use. It also
undertakes an in-depth exploration of state cannabis tax revenue performance
and offers a glimpse into what may lie ahead for these taxes.

### Key Findings:

  * State and local excise tax collections on retail cannabis sales surpassed $1 billion for the first time in 2018. This marks a 57 percent increase over 2017 levels, driven partly by the start of legal retail sales in California and partly by rapid growth in cannabis tax revenues in five other states reporting revenue data: Alaska, Colorado, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington State.
  * In states allowing taxable sales of recreational cannabis, annual cannabis excise tax revenues ($1.04 billion) already rival total excise tax revenues collected from all forms of alcohol ($1.16 billion) including beer, wine, and liquor. In Colorado and Nevada, cannabis excise taxes raise more revenue than alcohol excise taxes, and the same is projected to occur in California by 2020. Notably, all six states reporting cannabis revenue data raised more from excise taxes on cannabis than from sales of beer and wine, and the total amount of cannabis excise tax revenue reported across these states ($1.04 billion) more than tripled the amount of revenue raised from excise taxes on beer and wine ($304 million) in 2018.
  * General sales taxes on cannabis are also raising substantial revenues. In 2018, general sales taxes on cannabis generated a combined total of more than $300 million in California, Colorado, Nevada, and Washington. Alaska and Oregon do not levy statewide general sales taxes and Massachusetts is not yet reporting data.
  * While cannabis tax revenues are meaningful, and growing rapidly, they still represent less than 1 percent of total state and local tax collections in each of the six states reporting data. Cannabis taxes are a potentially important source of revenue for states and localities, but they will not be a transformative one.
  * Cannabis tax revenue is growing rapidly and has tended to grow fastest in the first few years following legalization as legal businesses expand their operations to meet consumer demand. Across states reporting multiple years of revenue collection data, annual revenue growth has averaged 158 percent between years one and two before slowing to 55 percent growth, 29 percent growth, and 17 percent growth in each subsequent year.
  * The price of cannabis is falling, and this will pose a major challenge to cannabis tax revenue collections in many states. In Colorado, for instance, average wholesale cannabis prices are down 61 percent from their 2015 peak. Most states with legal sales underway base their tax systems on the price of cannabis, meaning that price cuts leave these states vulnerable to reductions in revenue. So far, the amount of cannabis being sold on the legal market has grown quickly enough to prevent a price-induced revenue decline. But when consumption begins to stabilize, states that have linked their tax systems to the falling price of cannabis will likely be disappointed by the revenue yield of those taxes.
  * Nationwide legalization and taxation of recreational cannabis could generate approximately $11.9 billion in state and local excise and sales tax revenue each year. This assumes taxation levels similar to those that currently exist in Washington State. Revenue estimates for all 50 states are provided in Appendix B of this report.

### Policy Recommendations:

  * States should apply their cannabis excise taxes based wholly, or partly, on the weight of the cannabis being sold. Taxing the product based exclusively on its price poses a major challenge to the long-run sustainability of state and local cannabis tax revenues because prices have been shown to fall dramatically following legalization. In the long-run, states are likely to see faster revenue growth, and less volatility, from a tax based on weight rather than price.
  * Weight-based tax rates applied to cannabis should be indexed to grow alongside the rate of inflation each year. This will prevent erosion in the real value of these taxes over time.
  * States should phase-in their cannabis taxes over time, rather than locking in a permanently low rate of tax. Low tax rates can help legal businesses price cannabis at levels more competitive with the illicit market during the early stages of legalization when legal prices tend to be highest. But as prices fall and consumers become accustomed to shopping in the legal market, low tax rates will no longer be needed to discourage shopping in the illicit market.
  * Earmarking cannabis revenues to specific public services should be done sparingly and should be limited to causes with a direct relation to cannabis such as the regulation of the market and the implementation or expansion of substance abuse treatment programs. Arbitrary constraints on how certain revenues must be spent can make it difficult for lawmakers to craft budgets that direct public revenues to the areas where they are needed most.

**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing Cannabis |
How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# What’s in a Name?

Pot, weed, marijuana, cannabis—the flowering plant that is the subject of this
report goes by many names.

Recently, government officials in California, Massachusetts, Washington State,
Canada, and elsewhere have begun to use the plant’s formal scientific name,
_Cannabis_ , when writing laws and naming agencies that regulate the
substance.

But in popular culture, “marijuana” remains the most familiar term. It is also
a term that, at least in the U.S., carries with it a history of racism and
xenophobia.

The cannabis plant existed in the United States as early as the late 18th
century and was widely cultivated for medicinal and industrial purposes.
According to journalist and anti-prohibitionist H.L. Mencken, there was no
documented use of the Spanish word “marihuana” prior to 1894. Use of the
Spanish word by cannabis prohibitionists was intended to link the plant to
Mexican immigrants who were falsely blamed with introducing the substance to
the U.S. The transition toward using the exotic-sounding word, “marijuana,”
was accompanied by the debut of racist and xenophobic arguments in support of
prohibition.

Modern criminalization of cannabis is still racialized as seen in the racial
disparity in cannabis arrests and prosecutions, and wrongly equating
immigrants to “drug dealers and rapists,” among other examples.

## This report uses the more neutral and scientific term, “cannabis,”
throughout.

# Introduction

State policy toward cannabis is evolving rapidly. States did not begin
legalizing cannabis for medical use until the late 1990s, and as recently as
2012, recreational cannabis use was illegal in all 50 states. Now, 33 states
and the District of Columbia (D.C.) allow the use of cannabis for medical
purposes, adult recreational use, or both. As of January 2019, 10 states and
D.C. have legalized recreational cannabis for adult use. Seven of those states
(Alaska, California, Colorado, Massachusetts, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington
State) have retail businesses that are selling cannabis and collecting state
and local taxes and two more states, Maine and Michigan, are in the process of
regulating and licensing their legal markets.

Shifting public attitudes and current political momentum suggest that more
states are likely to pursue cannabis legalization and taxation in the near
future. While much of the policy debate around cannabis legalization rightly
focuses on potential health and criminal justice impacts, legalization also
has revenue implications for state and local governments that choose to tax
legal purchases of cannabis. This report examines issues surrounding the
design and implementation of taxes on cannabis at the state and local level
and takes a close look at the revenue performance of retail cannabis taxes in
the states where taxable sales are underway.

**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing Cannabis |
How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# Options for Taxing Cannabis

There are several options to consider when levying a tax on sales of legal
cannabis. States can include cannabis in their general sales tax bases, levy a
special tax on cannabis and products containing cannabis, or pursue both
approaches simultaneously.

Expanding state and local sales tax bases to include cannabis should be
straightforward in most cases: the general sales tax rate can simply be
applied to the total price of the cannabis or cannabis-containing product.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Infographic-Recreational-Cannabis-

Taxes-791x1024.jpg)

But effective cannabis tax policy should go beyond simply adjusting existing
sales tax bases to include the product. Special excise taxes can mitigate the
negative impact of cannabis use by discouraging its consumption and raising
revenue that can be used to offset the potential social costs of legalization
and the past social costs of criminalization.[1] In other words, the tax
treatment of legal cannabis should be similar to that of tobacco and alcohol,
both of which face excise taxes at the federal, state, and sometimes local
levels.

The following discussion addresses some of the advantages and disadvantages of
various forms of excise taxation and concludes that an inflation-indexed,
weight-based tax should be a key component of any state cannabis tax regime.

## Weight-Based Excise Taxes

Excise taxes are often based on the quantity of the product being sold rather
than on its price.[2] For example, cigarettes are currently taxed at $1.01 per
pack[3] at the federal level and $1.79 per pack[4] on average at the state
level. Alcohol and gasoline are typically taxed per gallon sold. In the
context of cannabis, the appropriate measure of quantity is the product’s
weight. Model legislation proposed by the Marijuana Policy Project (MPP), for
instance, recommends an excise tax on cannabis that varies based on the part
of the plant and is adjusted annually for inflation. The rates recommended by
MPP are $50 per ounce of cannabis flowers, $15 per ounce of cannabis leaves,
and $25 per immature plant.[5]

The primary advantage of a weight-based tax is that the amount of revenue
raised should be relatively stable even in the face of the significant drop in
cannabis prices that has been shown to follow legalization. In Colorado, the
average wholesale price of cannabis fell by more than half over the span of
just two years (from July 2016 to July 2018).[6] Cannabis prices in Colorado
as of January 2019 are down 61 percent from their 2015 peak, as indicated by
the data in Figure 1. These dramatic price declines, which are likely to
continue in the years ahead, have major implications for the revenue that
Colorado can raise though its price-based tax system. A weight-based tax, by
contrast, would not be vulnerable to revenue loss every time cannabis sellers
reduce their prices.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-1@300x-1024x597.png)

Weight-based taxes also have enforcement advantages, as they tend to be
collected earlier in the production process rather than at the final point of
sale. An earlier collection point is also helpful in ensuring accurate tax
collection on edible products that are only partly comprised of cannabis. A
weight-based excise tax applied to chocolates containing cannabis, for
instance, should be based on the weight of the cannabis used in making the
product—not the cocoa, sugar, and other ingredients that make up the final
product.

An earlier point of collection can result in fewer entities collecting the
tax, which makes auditing easier for state tax departments (this was the
rationale behind federal and state reforms that moved the responsibility for
motor fuel tax collection away from retailers and onto distributors, for
instance). In Maine, lawmakers recently converted a voter-approved cannabis
tax based on retail sales prices into a hybrid system with taxes based on both
weight and price. The _Portland Press Herald_ reported that this change was
made partly because “officials say an excise tax would discourage diversion to
the black market because it establishes a record of the plant when it is first
produced, making it harder for that product to disappear along the way.”[7]

A weight-based tax may also deter tax avoidance schemes in which a retailer
sells (or even “gives away”) highly-taxed cannabis at a steep discount on the
condition that the customer purchases a lower-taxed product such as a t-shirt
or pipe. Weight-based taxes should be applied to all cannabis transferred by
licensed businesses, including those that businesses label as gifts with
purchase.

Additionally, states seeking to apply excise taxes at the wholesale or
distributor level may find weight-based taxes to be simpler than price-based
taxes, especially in the case of vertically integrated businesses where one
business entity, or related entities, is responsible for growing, processing
and ultimately selling the product to consumers. Determining the true value of
cannabis transferred within a single business entity, or between related
entities, can be difficult. Determining its weight, by contrast, is more
straightforward.

One potential disadvantage of a weight-based tax on cannabis is that it does
not account for the potency of the cannabis being cultivated. The potency of
cannabis is driven primarily by its tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) content.[8] A
weight-based cannabis tax may therefore inadvertently incentivize producers to
cultivate stronger cannabis because it would have a somewhat higher sale
price, yet still only be subject to the same amount of tax as lower potency
cannabis. This concern may be of limited significance, however, as emerging
evidence indicates that high-potency cannabis does not sell for a
significantly higher price than low-potency versions of the product.[9]

Even under a weight-based tax, states and localities do have options to ensure
potency is reflected in their tax bases. For instance, Alaska, California, and
Maine each tax the plant’s more potent flowers at a higher rate than its less
potent leaves. This structure resembles the current approach to taxing
alcohol, where categories of product that are of higher potency, such as
liquor, are subject to higher per-gallon taxes than categories of lower
potency, such as wine and beer.[10]

Another disadvantage of weight-based taxes is their vulnerability to
inflation, as a flat per-ounce tax rate written into law will inevitably see
its real value decline over time. Fortunately, this disadvantage is easily
remedied by writing the tax law so that the rate is automatically adjusted
each year to keep pace with a broad measure of inflation in the economy. Many
states already include such a provision in their motor fuel excise tax
laws.[11]

On balance, the stability of weight-based taxes even in the face of rapid
price declines provides a compelling reason for every state with legal sales
of recreational cannabis to include a weight-based component in their tax
regimes—either as a complement or substitute to the price-based taxes
described below. Weight-based taxes must be indexed to inflation, however, to
avoid long-run revenue declines associated with inflation.

## Price-Based Excise Taxes

The most common alternative to a weight-based excise tax is taxing cannabis
based on its price at either the retail or wholesale level. A price-based tax
automatically adjusts to the size of the consumption base to which it applies,
meaning that it will capture the same percentage of overall spending on
cannabis even when the product’s price changes.

One potential advantage of a price-based cannabis tax is that it will result
in higher tax payments on more expensive cannabis sold under premium labels,
which is likely to be purchased by consumers with somewhat more disposable
income. Another advantage is that it may result in higher taxes on stronger,
more intoxicating cannabis (as mentioned above, however, the link between
cannabis potency and prices may be weaker than many observers initially
anticipated). A third advantage is that state tax departments may find it
easier to administer a tax based on reported sales prices rather than having
to establish a system for measuring, reporting, and verifying the weight of
cannabis sold.

The most significant disadvantage of a price-based cannabis tax is that its
yield is likely to be severely restricted by the falling price of cannabis. It
is still unclear how much farther the price of retail cannabis might fall, and
it is therefore also unclear how much revenue a price-based cannabis tax will
yield in the long run.

Moreover, price-based taxes can pose a challenge when lawmakers seek to apply
them at the wholesale level because determining the true price of cannabis
within a vertically integrated firm is often difficult. In Colorado, for
instance, cannabis retailers were initially required to cultivate at least 70
percent of the cannabis they sold. This requirement made it very difficult for
tax authorities to determine the wholesale price of cannabis since most
cannabis in the vertically integrated industry was being “sold” within the
same firm. This difficulty forced regulators to adopt a de facto weight-based
system wherein cannabis “sold” at the wholesale level was subject to a tax
based on a single estimated average price of cannabis, rather than on a “sale”
price reported by the firm.[12] Aside from Colorado, Nevada is the only other
state with a price-based tax at the wholesale level and it also bases its tax
calculation on a single statewide average market price.

Finally, states implementing price-based cannabis taxes must be careful to
take steps to prevent tax avoidance schemes under which cannabis is given away
for “free,” or at a steep discount, on the condition that the consumer buys
another, lower-taxed product. Such an arrangement could be used to help
consumers avoid cannabis taxes. Washington State’s statute provides one
example of how these avoidance schemes could be prevented:

_Marijuana producers, processors, and retailers are prohibited from making
sales of any marijuana or marijuana product, if the sale of the marijuana or
marijuana product is conditioned upon the buyer 's purchase of any service or
nonmarijuana product. This subsection applies whether the buyer purchases such
service or nonmarijuana product at the time of sale of the marijuana or
marijuana product, or in a separate transaction._ [13]

The Vermont Governor’s Marijuana Advisory Commission also recently recommended
that any legislation establishing a system of legal sales should include
similar language.[14]

Other types of discounts, such as those offered to employees or to customers
buying larger quantities, are also problematic for price-based excise
taxation. There is little rationale for collecting lower taxes on cannabis
sold to employees than to people who do not work in the cannabis industry, or
on cannabis sold to people buying large amounts as opposed to small amounts.
For this reason, states considering price-based taxation should consider
applying their taxes to the gross price of cannabis before such discounts are
applied.

Ultimately, the uncertainty surrounding future cannabis pricing makes taxing
cannabis based solely on its price a risky proposition. While price-based
cannabis taxes may be useful in helping ensure that high-potency cannabis and
premium cannabis are subject to somewhat higher taxes, any price-based tax
should be accompanied by a weight-based tax to improve the long-run
sustainability of cannabis tax revenues.

## Potency-Based Excise Taxes

Some experts have proposed that a cannabis excise tax would work most
effectively if it was applied to the amount of THC being sold rather than
simply the plant’s weight or price.[15] Technology exists to test for the
amount of THC in a plant and many states require disclosure of THC content,
but reliability and replicability of testing remain problematic, especially
for raw plant material.[16]

Indeed, cannabis testing laboratories lack the regulation and oversight that
most other public health and safety labs require. Thus, there is not yet an
industry standard and testing results may vary.[17] If a tax is levied on a
seller’s _reported_ THC content, then sellers would be incentivized to give
accurate content levels because underreporting THC content to avoid a higher
tax would risk losing customers.[18] A tax on reported THC content of raw
plant matter could be combined with a tax on tested THC content of
concentrates. Testing results for concentrates are much more reliable than
those for raw plant material.

Given current technological limitations, the tax code’s approach to THC may
have to more closely resemble its treatment of nicotine than of alcohol;
although alcohol is frequently an important determinant of a product’s tax
rate, no jurisdiction in the world taxes tobacco by nicotine content.[19]
Taxes on THC content remain an interesting possibility, but a weight-based tax
remains a more practical alternative for now.

## Phasing in Excise Tax Rates

Among the biggest hurdles faced by regulators in establishing legal cannabis
markets is competition from the illicit market.[20] At the outset, cannabis
prices in the legal markets have typically been much higher than black market
prices. This creates an incentive for consumers to avoid shifting their
purchases to the legal market, particularly since most cannabis consumers are
accustomed to shopping in the black market as it was previously the only
option available.

In the short-run, states should help put their newly legal markets on a
somewhat more competitive footing with the illicit market by levying a low tax
rate on cannabis. On its own, a low tax rate is unlikely to equalize prices
across the legal and illicit markets during the early days of legalization
when newly legal businesses are grappling with supply constraints. But a low
tax rate at the outset can help to ensure that states are not driving a larger
wedge between prices on the legal versus illicit markets.

Low tax rates should not be made permanent, however. While high retail prices
pose a problem for law enforcement in the early stages of legal sales, very
low prices are likely to be the more important issue once legal markets are
fully established. For this reason, states should schedule a gradual phase-in
of their ideal long-run cannabis tax rate.

The experience of states such as Colorado has shown that cannabis prices can
fall dramatically as producers and retailers learn to operate more
efficiently. Moreover, a potential easing of federal restrictions on access to
banking, certain tax deductions, and the interstate shipment of cannabis could
lead to similarly dramatic price declines in the years ahead.

A very low price for cannabis could have troubling implications, such as
making the drug affordable even to adolescents with minimal disposable income.
And when pre-tax prices plummet, the argument that low tax rates are required
to make the legal market competitive with the illicit market will become
substantially weaker.

After a few years of shopping in legal, regulated stores, it is unlikely that
a significant number of consumers will abandon the convenience, selection,
quality-control, and protection from legal repercussions offered by legal
stores. (Consider, for example, the small number of moonshiners operating now
compared to just after the end of alcohol prohibition.) A gradual phase-in of
cannabis taxes is the best way to draw consumers into the legal market without
sacrificing long-run revenue collections with a permanently low rate of tax.
Put another way, state lawmakers should not allow what is largely a short-run
concern (the illicit market) to dictate tax policy for the long-haul.

While no state has thus far chosen to phase-in their cannabis taxes, this
approach was used at the federal level at the end of alcohol prohibition in
the 1930s and it would be simple to implement in the context of cannabis
taxation as well.[21]

## General Sales Taxes

Forty-five states levy general sales taxes which, in principle, should apply
broadly to most or all retail transactions. Most of those states also allow
their local governments to levy general sales taxes. Until recently, however,
the illegal and unregulated nature of cannabis resulted in it being sold
entirely outside of state sales tax structures.[22] In other words, cannabis
has enjoyed a de facto sales tax exemption. Bringing cannabis out of the black
market allows state and local governments to include the product in their
sales tax bases in the same manner as most other goods and services. State and
local general sales taxes should be collected on final sales of cannabis just
as they are already collected on other retail transactions, with the possible
exception of medical cannabis, discussed below.

## Taxing Medical Cannabis

Determining the proper tax treatment of cannabis is complicated by the fact
that the drug can be used for both recreational and medicinal purposes.
Recreational cannabis can create some of the same societal costs as alcohol,
such as impaired driving. Medical cannabis use, by contrast, should arguably
enhance the wellbeing of society overall when used correctly.

Excise taxes on cannabis are generally thought of as a tool for discouraging
the drug’s use or funding programs that can offset its negative societal
effects—issues that are less applicable in the case of medical cannabis. From
that perspective, there is little rationale for applying a stand-alone excise
tax to medical cannabis.

General sales taxes are a separate issue. Nearly every state in the country
exempts prescription drugs from its general sales tax, but very few states
exempt non-prescription drugs.[23] At present, medical cannabis is best
classified as a non-prescription drug since its lack of approval by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) means doctors can only recommend that their
patients use cannabis rather than formally prescribe it. This suggests that,
barring FDA approval, state and local sales taxes should apply to medical
cannabis. And indeed, most states have decided to include medical cannabis
sales in their general sales tax bases, although at least eleven states offer
an exemption for such sales.[24]

Thus far, every state that has legalized recreational cannabis for use by
adults first established a medical market. State policymakers considering
legalization may be concerned that levying lower taxes on medical cannabis may
lead to tax base erosion in the recreational cannabis market. That is, a lower
tax on medical cannabis may incentivize consumers to seek doctors’
recommendations without a bona fide medical condition to purchase cannabis at
a discount. But it is unclear whether this is happening in practice, and a
robust regulatory system around medical cannabis could help prevent this
outcome.

Colorado, for example, has permitted medical-use cannabis since 2000 and
medical sales grew every year until 2016. After recreational cannabis had been
available for two years, however, medical sales saw their first ever decline
while recreational sales continued to grow.[25] For cannabis users with
legitimate medical needs, the introduction of a recreational cannabis option
is somewhat akin to a previously prescription-only drug suddenly becoming
available over-the-counter. Even if a patient can still obtain a prescription
for their medication, the inconvenience and cost of a doctor’s appointment may
encourage patients to purchase the over-the-counter option even if it is
somewhat more expensive.

Substantial excise taxes on medical cannabis run the risk of preventing lower-
and moderate-income patients from accessing a necessary treatment. Ideally,
cannabis purchased for legitimate medical use, with a doctor’s recommendation,
should be taxed in the same manner as any other non-prescription medication.
But states seeking to levy significantly lower tax rates on medical cannabis
than on recreational cannabis should be sure to have a robust regulatory
system in place to ensure that cannabis qualifying for the reduced medical
rate is only available to patients with a legitimate medical need.

**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing Cannabis |
How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# How States and Localities Tax Cannabis

States with legal cannabis sales have adopted a variety of cannabis tax
regimes built around the product’s weight, its price, or both. Appendix A
describes state approaches to both excise taxation and general sales taxation
of adult-use recreational cannabis, and the discussion below outlines some of
those approaches.

## States with Weight-Based Tax Systems

Alaska and California currently employ weight-based taxes on cannabis. Maine
is also scheduled to implement such a tax, though retail sales have yet to
begin. In Maine, voters initially approved a purely price-based tax, but
legislators modified that system to include taxes on both the price and weight
of cannabis to improve the long-run sustainability and enforceability of the
tax.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-2-Venn-Diagram-

Solid@300x-1024x1024.png)

Among these three states, tax rates on cannabis flowers, or bud, are $50 per
ounce in Alaska, $20.94 per ounce in Maine, and $9.25 per ounce in
California.[26] Unlike California and Maine, Alaska lacks a statewide price-
based tax on cannabis sales, which helps explain why Alaska levies a higher
rate. Alaska also offers a lower rate of $25 per ounce on immature or abnormal
flowers.

Each of these three states also levies lower taxes on cannabis leaves, or
trim, than it does in the plant’s more potent flowers. Per-ounce tax rates on
trim are $15 in Alaska, $5.88 in Maine, and $2.75 in California. Each of these
states also levies a tax on immature cannabis plants, and Maine levies a tax
of 30 cents per seed.

California is the only state that has taken the sensible step of indexing its
weight-based tax rates to inflation.[27] This means that in Alaska and Maine,
the real value of these weight-based taxes will inevitably decline over time
as inflation erodes the real value of the flat tax amounts written into law.

While not levying traditional weight-based taxes, Colorado[28] and Nevada[29]
are also notable in that their tax systems require that weight be factored
into the tax calculation. Specifically, both states levy 15 percent taxes on
producers based not on the actual prices they charge, but on the average fair
market price of various categories of cannabis products. In Colorado, for
instance, a vertically integrated producer would calculate the amount of tax
it owes on its cannabis flowers by weighing them, multiplying that weight by
an average market price of $781 per pound (as of January 1, 2019), and then
multiplying that figure by 15 percent. The calculation proceeds in a similar
fashion in Nevada for all producers, vertically integrated or not.

## States with Price-Based Tax Systems

Except for Alaska, every state allowing taxable sales of recreational cannabis
levies a price-based excise tax on those sales. California, Colorado,
Massachusetts, Nevada, Oregon and Washington collect cannabis-specific taxes
based on the product’s price, and Maine and Michigan are scheduled to do so
once legal businesses in those states open their doors to the public.

As described above, Colorado and Nevada each levy a 15 percent tax on the
average market price for wholesale sales. California, Colorado, Maine,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Nevada, Oregon and Washington each levy cannabis-
specific taxes on the consumer’s sale price ranging from 10 to 37 percent.
Alaska, Massachusetts, and Oregon give localities the option to levy an
additional cannabis-specific tax (in Massachusetts and Oregon, local tax rates
are capped at 3 percent).

California also gives localities the option to levy a local cannabis business
tax. Rates currently range as high as 20 percent on the business’s gross
receipts and up to $25 per square foot of cultivation space. In Washington,
cannabis businesses are also responsible for the state’s 0.484 percent
business and occupation tax (B&O tax) on gross receipts.

Colorado, Oregon, and Washington have already adjusted their price-based tax
rates since their original enactment. Colorado was the first state to open
retail stores—doing so in January 2014—and it initially levied a 15 percent
excise tax on producers and a 10 percent excise tax on consumers, in addition
to the regular state sales tax of 2.9 percent and any local sales tax. The
state has since kept the 15 percent excise tax on producers but shifted to a
15 percent excise tax on consumers while exempting cannabis sales from the
state sales tax. The Oregon legislature shifted from a per ounce excise tax
levied on the wholesaler (Oregon does not have a statewide sales tax) to a 17
percent excise tax on consumers and a local tax of up to 3 percent for
cannabis. Washington shifted from a 25 percent excise tax levied at the
producer, processor and consumer levels to a single 37 percent excise tax on
only the consumer. These early adjustments indicate that state lawmakers are
interested in adjusting and improving upon their cannabis tax structures as
they become more familiar with this new industry.

## State Approaches to General Sales Taxation

With the spread of legal cannabis sales for adult recreational use, cannabis’s
de facto sales tax exemption is eroding. Of the nine states that have
legalized recreational cannabis sales, six include the product in their
statewide general sales tax bases. Colorado exempts recreational cannabis,
though not medical cannabis, from its state sales tax. Alaska and Oregon do
not levy statewide general sales taxes.

Five of these nine states allow their local governments to levy general sales
taxes (Alaska, California, Colorado, Nevada, and Washington), and in all five
states those local governments are allowed to include cannabis sales within
the scope of their general sales taxes. Notably, Massachusetts and Oregon lack
local-level general sales taxes but allow their local governments to levy
cannabis-specific taxes at rates of up to 3 percent. In Alaska, localities
have the option to include cannabis in their local general sales tax bases
(with rates currently ranging as high as 7.5 percent), levy a stand-alone
excise tax on cannabis, or levy both taxes simultaneously.

## State Approaches to Taxing Medical Cannabis

States have taken varied approaches to taxing medical cannabis. While some
states tax medical cannabis similarly to non-prescription medication (applying
general sales taxes but not additional excise taxes), others levy excise taxes
to replace, or complement, general sales taxes.

A detailed summary of state tax regimes as they apply to medical cannabis is
available from Fox Rothschild LLP.[30] At least sixteen states and the
District of Columbia levy general sales taxes on the sale of medical cannabis,
while fourteen states collect some type of excise tax. At least seven states
collect both general sales taxes and excise taxes on sales of medical
cannabis. Seven states collect excise taxes but not general sales taxes. And
nine states apply neither excise taxes nor general sales taxes to medical
cannabis sales.

In states with both recreational and medical sales, medical cannabis is often
exempt from some consumption taxes. Colorado, Maine, Massachusetts, and
Oregon, for example, exempt medical sales from their cannabis excise taxes,
although Colorado and Maine do apply their general sales taxes to medical
cannabis. In California and Washington, medical cannabis is subject to excise
taxes, but the general sales tax does not apply.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-4-Venn-Diagram-

Solid@300x-1024x1024.png)**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction |
Options for Taxing Cannabis | How States and Localities Tax Cannabis |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance | Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking
Revenue | Conclusion

# Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance

Until recently, estimates of the potential revenue yield of taxes on
recreational cannabis were based on surveys in which respondents often tended
to underreport their use of this illegal drug, and on speculation into how a
new legal market might operate. Growing experience with actual legal markets
for cannabis, however, is providing a rich new source of data.

The first legal, taxable sale of recreational cannabis in modern US history
took place in Colorado in January 2014—just over five years ago. Sales began
later that year in Washington State followed by Oregon in 2015, Alaska in
2016, Nevada in 2017, and California and Massachusetts in 2018. (The data
throughout this section will focus on the first six states listed because
Massachusetts sales only began in November 2018 and revenue data are not yet
available.)

As a result, there are now more than half a dozen states gaining real world
experience with a tax that did not exist a decade ago.

## Current Cannabis Revenue Collections

As seen in Figure 5, states with taxable retail sales of recreational cannabis
in 2014 (i.e. Colorado and Washington) raised a mere $54.6 million in cannabis
excise taxes that year. That figure more than quadrupled in 2015, to $218.5
million, as those two states’ retail markets grew. Rapid growth has persisted
in every subsequent year as the early-adopting states continued to see more
growth and as additional states began taxing recreational cannabis. Combined
state and local cannabis excise tax revenues in the six states with available
data are expected to surpass $1 billion annually for the first time in 2018
(as of this writing, fourth quarter data for 2018 are still incomplete).

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-5@300x-1024x597.png)

Most states allowing for the legal sale of recreational cannabis also apply
state and/or local sales taxes to the drug’s purchase price. Those taxes,
which are not included in Figure 5, are expected to raise more than $300
million in additional revenue in 2018. Gross receipts taxes, license fees, and
income tax revenues associated with recreational cannabis are also excluded
from Figure 5.

## Comparing “Sin Taxes” on Cannabis, Alcohol, and Tobacco

Excise taxes on alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis are sometimes referred to as
“sin taxes” because the use of these products is considered to produce
negative social outcomes and these targeted taxes can both discourage these
products’ use and raise revenue to offset those costs. Figures 6 and 7 compare
state and local cannabis excise tax revenue collections to the revenue raised
from state and local excise taxes on alcohol and tobacco.

In the six states where legal recreational sales have been underway for a year
or more, the total amount of revenue raised from cannabis excise taxes ($1.04
billion) is roughly on par with the amount raised through excise taxes on
alcohol ($1.16 billion).

Most state and local alcohol tax revenue comes from the sale of liquor, or
spirits. If those sales are excluded and the analysis is narrowed to include
only taxes on beer and wine, then Figure 6 shows that total excise tax revenue
from cannabis sales across these six states ($1.04 billion) is more than three
times larger than total excise tax collections from beer and wine sales ($304
million). This is partly a reflection of a substantial and growing market for
legal cannabis, and partly of the fact that beer and wine taxes tend to be
quite low, sometimes just pennies per gallon.

Figure 6 also shows that cannabis excise taxes currently raise far less
revenue than excise taxes collected on the sale of tobacco products, which
totaled nearly $3.37 billion across the six states examined here.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-6@300x-1024x597.png)

A closer look at state-by-state revenue from these so-called “sin taxes” on
alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis is provided in Figure 7. Remarkably, all six
states collect more revenue from their excise taxes on cannabis than from
their excise taxes on beer and wine. Two states, Colorado and Nevada, collect
more from their cannabis excise taxes than from their excise taxes on all
alcohol, including liquor, wine, and beer. And in Washington State, cannabis
excise taxes are nearly on par with excise tax revenue from all forms of
alcohol.

Only one state, Colorado, collects more revenue from cannabis excise taxes
than from tobacco excise taxes. In Colorado, cannabis excise taxes in calendar
year 2018 (projected at $243.5 million) are expected to rival total excise tax
revenue collections from beer, wine, spirits, and tobacco combined (projected
at $253.1 million).

Some of these cannabis markets are quite new. For example, California and
Nevada’s markets have each been in operation for less than two years and it is
therefore reasonable to expect that in these states, cannabis tax revenue
growth could outpace growth in alcohol or tobacco tax revenues in the years
ahead. Once California’s recreational cannabis market matures, for instance,
it is very likely that cannabis excise tax revenues will exceed excise tax
revenues from the sale of alcohol. Official projections from the governor’s
office currently indicate that this will occur in fiscal year 2020.[31]

Of course, excise taxes are not the only taxes levied on alcohol, tobacco, and
cannabis. States and localities often tax these products under their general
sales taxes as well–the same taxes that consumers pay on the clothing,
furniture, toiletries, and other items they buy every day. Because consumers
spend far more on alcohol and tobacco than on cannabis, the general sales tax
revenue associated with those first two categories of products is surely
larger than the general sales tax revenue raised from legal cannabis. But
states do not typically report the amount of general sales tax revenue they
raise from alcohol or tobacco (or from most other specific categories of good
and services) which makes an accurate comparison of sales taxes across product
types impossible.

Nonetheless, a focus on excise taxes, or “sin taxes,” provides an informative
lens because these taxes, in theory, should be specifically calibrated to
deter consumption and to offset the negative consequences of these products on
society.

## Putting Cannabis Tax Revenues in Context

A combined revenue gain in excess of $1 billion annually is a meaningful
amount for these six states, though not a transformative one. State and local
governments in these jurisdictions raised a combined total of nearly $335
billion in tax revenue in fiscal year 2016.[32] Across all six states, the
amount of revenue raised from cannabis excise taxes falls short of one percent
of total state and local tax collections. Since the bulk of cannabis tax
revenue collections flow to states rather than localities, however, the impact
on state budgets specifically is somewhat more meaningful.

## Cannabis Tax Revenue Growth

States’ experiences with the taxation of recreational cannabis thus far have
made clear that new tax revenues will not materialize overnight. Most states
legalizing the substance saw more than a year lapse between legalization and
the date of the first legal sale. And even after sales are underway, revenue
performance is often underwhelming in the initial months, and sometimes years,
as businesses inevitably need time to ramp up their operations.

Figure 8 shows the month-by-month trajectory of cannabis excise tax revenues
in all six states where taxable sales of recreational cannabis have been
underway for a year or more. These figures are reported on a per capita
basis—that is, adjusted for the size of each state’s population—in order to
facilitate comparisons across states. Every state has exhibited rapid revenue
growth throughout the first year of legal sales and, for the most part,
substantial revenue growth in the second year as well.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-8@300x-1024x597.png)

Oregon’s cannabis excise tax revenues over the most recent 12-month period
were a full 40 percent higher than during the preceding 12-month period. In
Colorado, the comparable figure stands at 20 percent while in Washington State
year-over-year growth totaled 9 percent.

Alaska, which is earlier in the process of establishing its legal market,
experienced rapid growth of 173 percent relative to a year earlier.

California, Massachusetts, and Nevada each have less than two years of
experience with recreational cannabis taxation but are poised to see rapid
revenue growth in the months and years ahead as their legal markets expand.

Figure 9 summarizes the average rate of growth that states legalizing and
taxing recreational cannabis have seen in each of the years immediately
following the start of taxable sales. While every state’s experience with
legalization will be somewhat different, these data offer some rough
guidelines regarding the growth rate that states implementing cannabis excise
taxes might expect in the early years.

![](http://itep.org/wp-content/uploads/Figure-9-1024x597.png)

There are four states in which taxable retail sales of cannabis have been
underway for two years or more: Alaska, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington.

Among those four states, three saw excise tax revenues double between the
first and second full years of collections. The average annual rate of growth
across these states was 158 percent.

Revenue growth has also been very strong between years two and three, with an
average rate of growth across Colorado, Oregon, and Washington of 55
percent.[33] Between years three and four the comparable figure is 29
percent.[34] And then in Colorado, the only state reporting nearly five years
of revenue data, excise tax growth between years four and five appears to be
on pace for roughly 17 percent growth.[35]

These findings suggest that it will take several years after legalization for
a state to realize the full revenue potential of cannabis taxation. And even
then, as described elsewhere in this report, new developments such as cannabis
price cuts may stand in the way of revenue stability. While there appears to
be some leveling-off of revenue growth in states where cannabis taxation has
been underway for several years, there are no guarantees that future cannabis
tax revenues—particularly those raised by price-based taxes—will plateau for
long.

## Tax Revenue Potential Across the States

Cannabis legalization should not be pursued solely for reasons of tax policy.
Nevertheless, lawmakers in states considering legalization are often, quite
sensibly, interested in knowing what legalization and taxation could mean for
state and local revenue collections.

Data limitations and the uncertainty associated with establishing new legal
markets for cannabis mean that any estimate of the amount of revenue that
cannabis taxes could raise will be imprecise. But state and local revenue
collections over the last five years arguably allow for better revenue
estimation today than ever before.

Appendix B reports 50-state estimates of recreational cannabis taxation based
on Washington State’s experience, wherein state and local governments are
collecting approximately $460 million annually through a 37 percent excise
tax, a 6.5 percent state sales tax, and local sales taxes averaging 2.82
percent statewide. Despite these relatively high tax rates, Washington’s
cannabis users are paying no more for the substance than they did prior to
legalization and they are enjoying the benefits of improved selection and
quality control offered by legal stores.[36]

In Washington, $460 million is equivalent to $493 per regular cannabis user,
defined in this report as adults who used cannabis within the last month.
Frequent users account for most cannabis sales and are therefore a useful
guidepost for scaling Washington’s revenue amount up, or down, to match the
profile of other states.[37]

The calculations contained in Appendix B suggest that legalizing recreational
cannabis in every state and applying levels of taxation in line with those
that currently exist in Washington State could generate $11.9 billion in state
and local revenue each year. While this is a substantial sum, it is not a
transformative one. Total state and local tax collections totaled nearly $1.6
trillion in fiscal year 2016, meaning that the amount of cannabis tax revenue
projected in this report would amount to less than 1 percent of state and
local tax revenues collected nationwide.[38]

By comparison, states and localities raised approximately $7.3 billion from
their excise taxes on alcohol and $18.4 billion from their excise taxes on
tobacco products in fiscal year 2016, the most recent year for which data are
available.[39] They also raised additional revenue from the application of
general sales taxes to these products, though these data are not reported
separately.

Thus far, most states pursuing legalization have been reluctant to impose
taxes on cannabis at levels as high as in Washington. Recent evidence
suggests, however, that even Washington’s comparatively high levels of tax are
falling short of the revenue-maximizing level.[40]

It is also vital to note that matching Washington State’s current level of
taxation is not simply a matter of copying the state’s tax structure. Because
Washington’s system for taxing cannabis is structured largely around the price
of the product, the state is vulnerable to future revenue declines if prices
continue to fall (as discussed in the next section).

While Washington has demonstrated that collecting an annual average amount of
$493 per regular user is feasible, sustaining this level of collection over
the long-run will likely require levying a weight-based tax rather than one
tied to the uncertain, and declining, price of cannabis.

**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing Cannabis |
How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook

The past five years of experience with legal recreational cannabis have
provided new and important insights into the tax revenue potential of
cannabis. But prior experience does not always offer a reliable guide to what
lies ahead. This section discusses five issues that will be key in determining
the amount of tax revenue that states will be able to raise from legalized
cannabis: future cannabis prices, changes in consumption, the status of the
illicit market, the impact of cannabis tourism, and the federal government’s
approach to cannabis.

## Falling Cannabis Prices

Most states with legal recreational cannabis levy their taxes as a percentage
of the product’s price at either the wholesale or retail level. This means
that the price of cannabis is usually a major driver of the amount of revenue
that can be gained through taxation. Thus far, the experience of every state
where legal, taxable sales have been underway for three years or
more—Colorado, Oregon, and Washington—indicates that prices are likely to fall
substantially in the years following legalization as competition increases and
cannabis businesses learn to operate more efficiently.[41]

Figure 1 showed that the average price of wholesale cannabis in Colorado has
already plummeted from a peak of $2,007 per pound in 2015 down to just $781
per pound today. While it is impossible to know for sure what will happen to
cannabis prices in the years ahead, it is worth pointing out that very few
crops command anything close to this price even at the retail level, which
suggests that there may still be significant room for further price
reductions. Indeed, a study by the RAND Corporation describes a price of $227
per pound (or 50 cents per gram) as a “conservative” estimate of long-run
retail prices and theorizes that the price could fall to as low as one-tenth
that amount.[42] As discussed later, various forms of federal policy change
could accelerate the ongoing trend toward lower cannabis prices in the years
ahead.

It is becoming increasingly clear that cannabis prices will fall significantly
within a legal market, and when this occurs revenues collected from any sales
or excise tax tied to the price of cannabis will be dramatically reduced.

## Trends in Cannabis Consumption

Under any type of cannabis tax, the amount of cannabis purchased will be a key
determinant of tax revenue yield. But the future of cannabis consumption
remains uncertain. There is some evidence that states legalizing recreational
cannabis have seen a modest uptick in use following legalization, though it
can be difficult to establish a baseline for such comparisons as many people
are reluctant to admit to using cannabis before legalization.[43]

Moreover, short-term changes in consumption are not always indicative of a
long-run trend because consumer preferences inevitably evolve over time. While
it seems likely that legalization will cause some individuals who had
previously abstained to consume cannabis, it is impossible to know how much of
an initial increase in usage will become permanent and how much is a product
of the novelty of legal sales that will fade with time.

Analysts at the Cato Institute have plausibly theorized that new consumers
under legalization are most likely to be “casual users” whose spending on
cannabis will remain modest.[44] Much like with alcohol, heavy users are
responsible for the bulk of cannabis spending.[45] According to one estimate,
just one-third of cannabis users (those using daily or nearly daily) undertake
three-quarters of cannabis spending.[46] Similarly, a more recent estimate
from Colorado indicates that in 2017, just 22.1 percent of users accounted for
71.1 percent of consumption.[47]

Moreover, it is important to keep in mind that there are limits to the amount
that households will spend on leisure activities overall, including cannabis
use or other activities such as going to a movie theater or out to dinner.
Moving cannabis sales out of the illicit market and into a legal, taxed market
will generate an unambiguous revenue gain for states. But the apparent revenue
gain from converting non-users into users may be partly undercut if new users
ultimately spend less money on other forms of taxable leisure.

Over the long-run, it’s unlikely that consumers’ interest in cannabis will
move in a straight line, as the nation’s experience with alcohol consumption
makes clear. Since the 1950s the share of Americans saying they consume
alcohol at least occasionally has been as low as 58 percent and as high as 71
percent.[48]

## How Do Other Excise Taxes Fare in the Wake of Cannabis Legalization?

Another question surrounding the revenue impact of cannabis legalization is
the extent to which it impacts revenue raised from excise taxes on alcohol and
tobacco.

The evidence as to whether cannabis is a substitute or complement for alcohol
is still mixed. Most of the research that has been done has focused on the
impact of medical cannabis laws on alcohol consumption, and thus may not be
generalizable to the impact of retail cannabis sales on alcohol sales. Current
research is also limited in its generalizability because the studies measure
different age groups, measures of alcohol consumption, and periods of time.
Further, different demographic groups (e.g. adults and teens, high-income
users, and low-income users) may differ in their substitute-complement
relationship for alcohol and cannabis.* In the states with the longest running
retail sales, Colorado and Washington, there does not appear to have been a
meaningful negative impact on their alcohol tax revenue.

Current research links increased cannabis use to increased tobacco use. This
means that legalization of cannabis could increase revenue raised by tobacco
excise taxes. However, this research is generally based in the current legal
landscape of cannabis prohibition, so legal cannabis may not have the same
impact on tobacco use. Since legal retail sales started in 2014 there has not
been a dramatic increase in tobacco tax revenue in the states with legal
cannabis.

## * Beau Kilmer and Rosanna Smart. “How Will Cannabis Legalization Affect
Alcohol Consumption?” Rand Corporation, February 13, 2018.
https://www.rand.org/blog/2018/02/how-will-cannabis-legalization-affect-
alcohol-consumption.html.

## Competition from the Illicit Market

At the outset, one of the most important determinants of cannabis tax revenue
performance will be the ability of legal businesses to draw customers away
from the illicit market. Established cannabis users are accustomed to buying
the product on the illicit market, and while some consumers are willing to pay
more for the convenience, selection, and quality-control benefits offered by
legal businesses, there is a limit to how much more they are willing to
pay.[49]

With any tax, some level of evasion is inevitable. No state with a legal
retail market will completely eliminate competition from the illicit
market.[50] In any case, state lawmakers should be careful to create a robust
enforcement regime that limits opportunities for tax evasion, such as applying
cannabis taxes relatively early in the production process in order to minimize
diversion of cannabis out of legal channels before the tax is applied.

To make legal businesses competitive with the illicit market, lawmakers should
phase in the implementation of cannabis taxes. Evidence from Colorado and
elsewhere indicates that cannabis prices in the legal market are likely to be
highest in the months and years immediately following legalization, which
suggests that this is the time when legal businesses will be most in need of a
competitive boost.

In the long-run, it is unlikely that consumers who have become accustomed to
the convenience and selection of legal stores will suddenly retreat to the
illicit market because of a difference in prices, particularly as legal stores
are able to improve their efficiency and bring down their pre-tax costs. Once
prices begin to fall and consumers have become accustomed to shopping in the
legal stores, states should have considerably more flexibility to increase
their cannabis tax rates without risking a mass exodus to the illicit market.

Also of note is homegrown cannabis, which cannot be reliably taxed and can
therefore impact cannabis revenue collections. Regulations for homegrown
cannabis pre-date retail sales by at least a decade. States with legal retail
markets must ensure that the regulations for homegrown cannabis keep up with
the realities of the new retail market. Prior to legal retail sales, homegrown
plants were generally permitted for medical patients and their caretakers or
medical providers, and often homegrown plants were the only medical cannabis
available. Lawmakers were hesitant to apply strict limits on the number of
plants and often deferred to medical providers guidance on how many plants
were medically necessary. The intention was to avoid impeding patients’ access
to what was often the only legal source of medical cannabis. In the absence of
state regulations to the contrary, the de facto limit home growers placed on
themselves was 100 plants to avoid federal mandatory sentencing. For example,
in Colorado home growers could cultivate up to 99 plants per patient until the
law changed in 2018. According to a former director of Colorado’s cannabis
enforcement agency, most home growers abided by state regulations, but some
unscrupulous growers took advantage of the lax policy for personal profit.[51]

States with legal retail markets have begun implementing regulations to curb
excessive home growth. Alaska, California, Colorado, Massachusetts, Nevada,
Vermont, and the District of Columbia each allow individuals to grow up to six
plants per person for non-medical purposes. Elsewhere the limits are three
plants per person in Maine, four per person in Oregon, and twelve per
household in Michigan. Washington is the only state with a legal recreational
market that does not allow individuals to grow their own plants for non-
medical purposes.[52]

## Cannabis Tourism

Cannabis tourism is an emerging industry and entrepreneurs have developed
tours for travelers seeking to use cannabis. Consumption by tourists is a
potentially meaningful component of cannabis tax revenue collections, but
considerable uncertainty exists regarding its current and potential impacts on
revenues.

The tax implications of cannabis tourism extend beyond just the impact on
cannabis tax revenues. If people visit a state specifically because cannabis
is legal, the result would be higher revenues from taxes on lodging, rental
cars, gasoline, restaurant meals, and other items purchased by tourists.

Policymakers and advocates of cannabis legalization sometimes argue that
cannabis taxes will largely be paid by non-resident visitors who live in
states where cannabis remains illegal. Nevada officials, for instance,
predicted that 63 percent of sales would be made to out-of-state visitors,
driven largely by the crowds of tourists who already flock to Las Vegas each
year.[53] A study of potential legalization of cannabis sales in Vermont,
conducted prior to legalization in Maine and Massachusetts, also estimated
that most sales would likely be to tourists. Seven times as many cannabis
users live within fifty miles of Vermont as compared to the number of current
users living inside the state’s borders.[54]

But there is also evidence that actual consumption by out-of-state visitors
may be lower than some early predictions suggested. A 2017 study prepared for
the Colorado Department of Revenue found that out-of-state sales have averaged
about 8.6 percent of total consumption since sales began in 2014.[55] This is
considerably lower than the same group’s 2014 estimate that sales to out-of-
state visitors accounted for about 44 percent of metro area and 90 percent of
mountain community sales of retail cannabis.[56] The 2014 report was published
in July of that year, just six months after legal sales began. This suggests
that much of the gain in state revenues due to tourism may be very short
lived. Despite this early evidence that tourists were accounting for a large
share of the state’s legal cannabis purchases in the early months, the group’s
most recent estimates suggest that for the entirety of 2014, out-of-state
visitors were responsible for just 7.4 percent of consumption.[57]

Ultimately, while the novelty of legal cannabis sales is likely to lure in
some tourists, such an effect is unlikely to significantly impact a state’s
overall level of tourism. A 2016 study from the state of Colorado showed that
only four percent of adult visitors came to the state because of legal
cannabis sales.[58] Official state tourism departments are hesitant to
advertise cannabis tourism because it still runs afoul of federal law.[59]
Further, all states ban public consumption of cannabis and consumption in
hotel rooms is often, though not always, prohibited either by the state or by
the hotels themselves.[60] There are reports of private clubs operating in
legal gray areas under social use licenses in Colorado[61] and consumption
lounges in a few California cities,[62] but the law-abiding tourist will
likely have difficulty finding a place to partake. Additionally, those who
travel to a state are often unable to take cannabis home with them because the
federal government still prohibits transporting cannabis across state lines.
If federal prohibition stays in place and states do not allow places for legal
consumption, then it is doubtful whether cannabis tourism will become a major
revenue generator.

Moreover, the tourism draw of legal cannabis is likely to wane as more states
begin to allow retail sales. State experiences with legalized gambling provide
a cautionary tale. As more states have legalized gambling, the tourist flow
has slowed and the incidence of gambling taxes has shifted away from tourists
and toward state residents.[63] New Jersey is a prime example. The state was
once the nation’s second largest gambling market behind Nevada, but after
neighboring Pennsylvania opened casinos in 2006 New Jersey slipped behind it
to third place. Competition from Pennsylvania had devastating impacts on
Atlantic City’s economy. Between 2014 and 2016 five of the city’s twelve
casinos closed, eliminating 11,000 jobs.[64] Since then, gambling tax revenue
has partly recovered and two new casinos opened in 2018. But it is unclear if
more casinos will translate to more gaming tax revenue since the casinos are
largely competing for the same pool of gamers. Gambling revenue is still far
below its 2006 peak and the city has become more reliant on fees from parking
and hotel rooms to keep its budget in balance.[65]

While it is unlikely that any state will become as dependent on its cannabis
industry as Atlantic City is on its gambling industry, it is important that
lawmakers recognize that tourist-driven cannabis tax dollars are likely to
follow a similar pattern. Early adopters are likely to see the largest revenue
gain from tourists, and that gain may not be easily replicable in late-
adopting states. And as more states legalize cannabis even the early adopters
are likely to see their tourism-related revenues wane.

## The Federal Government’s Approach to Cannabis

Actions by the federal government in the years ahead will have major
implications for the amount of revenue that states and localities can generate
from taxes on cannabis.

The federal government has the legal authority to shut down state-sanctioned
cannabis production facilities and retail outlets at any time. But as the
number of such businesses has exploded, it has become increasingly impractical
for the federal government to shut down state-sanctioned cannabis businesses
in a broad way.

Fears of aggressive federal intervention briefly surfaced upon the appointment
of Jeff Sessions to the position of Attorney General. Sessions has said that
he considers cannabis dangerous and something that “good people” do not
use.[66] In January 2018, he issued guidance reversing an Obama-era policy
that had curtailed the federal government’s involvement in cannabis businesses
operating in compliance with state law.[67] Despite this official reversal,
however, Sessions’ tenure as attorney general, which ended in November 2018,
did not bring fundamental changes to the way the federal government has dealt
with the cannabis industry in practice.

Looking ahead, many of the actions that the federal government might take
could help to grow the cannabis industry overall (thereby increasing cannabis
tax revenues) while also contributing to a decline in cannabis prices (thereby
reducing revenues in states that tax cannabis based on its price). The
remainder of this section will consider three such policy changes: reforming
the federal income tax treatment of cannabis industry expenses, allowing for
the shipment of cannabis across state lines, and expanding access to banking
services for the cannabis industry.

### Deductions for Business Expenses Incurred Within the Cannabis Industry

Section 280E of the Internal Revenue Code denies businesses the ability to
deduct many normal business expenses if the businesses are “trafficking in
controlled substances.” Without the ability to deduct their payments of rent,
wages, advertising, and almost everything else other than the cost of goods
sold, state-sanctioned cannabis businesses have faced federal income tax rates
as high as 70 percent.[68] Given these high rates, some federal policymakers
have proposed exempting state-sanctioned cannabis businesses from 280E with
bills like the “Small Business Tax Equity Act of 2017.”

State approaches to business tax deductions for the cannabis industry are
varied, with some adhering to the federal government’s strict limitations on
such deductions and others allowing a broader set of business deductions more
in line with what businesses in other industries are afforded.[69]

In general, the cannabis industry would like to be able to claim the same
types of ordinary business deductions available to other types of businesses.
But a national consumer lobby, NORML, worries that allowing tax deductions for
advertising expenses in particular would irritate parents and favor “well
funded corporate controlled marijuana companies, which can afford extensive
advertising.”[70] Public health scholars worry that advertising and marketing
of cannabis will stoke demand among youth and vulnerable users; while
advertising may benefit from constitutional protection as commercial free
speech, nothing precludes denial of tax deductions for advertising and
marketing expenses.[71] As a compromise, NORML has proposed allowing cannabis
businesses to deduct expenses such as rent and wages, but to continue the
denial of such deductions for advertising-related expenses.

The fact that most business deductions are unavailable to the cannabis
industry is pushing up costs for cannabis businesses which has the twofold
effect of discouraging new businesses from entering the market and increasing
the prices charged by businesses that are operating. If the federal government
repeals or relaxes Section 280E as it applies to cannabis businesses, it is
reasonable to expect that more cannabis businesses will open their doors, but
that the price of cannabis will fall and states and localities whose tax
structures are linked to that price will potentially face revenue declines.

### Legal Status of Interstate Shipment of Cannabis

If the federal government were to enact a full-scale legalization of cannabis,
one of the most significant changes would be the ability of cannabis
businesses to ship their products across state lines. Currently, the
interstate shipment of cannabis is a federal crime and therefore the states
with legal cannabis are seeing the growing, processing, and selling of
cannabis all happen entirely within their own borders. This is in sharp
contrast to the markets for tobacco and alcohol, where shoppers are typically
confronted with a range of choices that, for the most part, were shipped in
from other states.

Allowing for the interstate shipment of cannabis is likely to lead to
consolidation in the cannabis industry, to the advantage of some states over
others. States that are slow to allow for the establishment of a recreational
cannabis industry within their borders may find that it is too late for their
own residents to set up businesses that can compete with larger, more
established companies that may seek to ship in their product from outside the
state’s borders.

Consolidation is also likely to lead to a dramatic drop in prices as large
businesses realize economies of scale to bring down their costs. Such a drop
will have a negative impact on state and local tax revenue collections in any
jurisdiction that has tied its cannabis tax structure to the product’s price.

### Access to Banking Services

Part of the leniency afforded to states with legalized cannabis sales by the
Obama administration was guidance from the Treasury Department on how
financial institutions could offer services to state-sanctioned cannabis-
related businesses without facilitating money laundering.[72] Attorney General
Sessions’ announcement in January 2018 reversed this guidance.

Large banks have been reluctant to publicly admit to offering services to
cannabis businesses for fear of federal retaliation. But according to the
latest report from the Treasury Department, as of September 2017, before
Sessions’ announcement, 400 banks and credit unions were providing services to
cannabis-related businesses—up from just over 300 in October 2016.[73] This
represents a tiny fraction of all the depository institutions operating at the
same time—over 5,700 banks and 5,600 credit unions—meaning the vast majority
of federally regulated banks have refused to accept money generated from
cannabis sales.[74]

The result has been to force dispensaries to operate almost exclusively in
cash, which can create significant problems for tax enforcement and make the
dispensaries targets for robbery. States have limited ability to develop an
effective workaround to the federal law. In Colorado, a few state credit
unions handle most of the cannabis business. Stakeholders in Massachusetts
have suggested solutions as varied as utilizing the blockchain technology
popularized by cryptocurrencies like bitcoin or a state-run cannabis bank.
Most states have a “seed to sale” tracking system in hopes of keeping track of
the cash (and cannabis) flow, but it is unlikely this will completely resolve
the issue.[75] Federal intervention via the passage of legislation such as the
proposed “Secure and Fair Enforcement (SAFE) Banking Act,” which would open up
banking to the cannabis industry, could have a significant impact on the
financial standing of the cannabis industry and tax enforcement in the
states.[76] As with most policy changes that would ease restrictions on the
cannabis industry, however, such a change could also contribute to falling
cannabis prices, with negative implications for states whose cannabis tax
systems are based on price.

**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing Cannabis |
How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# Earmarking Revenue

Proponents of cannabis legalization often advocate for earmarking some portion
of tax revenue to pay for specific public services. For example, the first $40
million generated each year by Colorado's 15 percent tax on the average market
price is earmarked for school construction, with an additional $30 million
from the 15 percent tax on the sale price earmarked for the state’s public
school fund in fiscal year 2017-2018 and a percentage of the special sales tax
revenue earmarked in the years to follow.

While earmarking cannabis funds for popular spending initiatives may make
political sense, it is not necessarily effective budget policy. One inherent
problem with earmarking is that state revenue is typically fungible between
different spending areas. Lawmakers can shift other revenues away from the
earmarked fund, leaving the overall amount of money spent on that area
unchanged.[77] In other words, earmarking can function more as a political
talking point than a true policy commitment.

Moreover, in the rare cases where earmarking may succeed in directing
additional revenue toward particular causes, that outcome may not always be
desirable. Substituting the best judgment of our elected officials with an
automatic earmarking formula may prove problematic in the long run if state
priorities change but the formula does not. Arbitrary constraints on how
certain revenues must be spent can make it more difficult for lawmakers to
craft budgets that direct public revenues to the areas where they are needed
most.

Additionally, earmarking excise tax revenue can be counterproductive if it
creates a substantial incentive for lawmakers to promote the activity that the
tax was initially intended to discourage. For example, some states effectively
encourage residents to gamble to generate revenue through the state
lottery.[78] Because cannabis tax revenues are usually small relative to
states’ total budgets, however, the temptation is modest in practice.

While most cannabis tax earmarking proposals are made for political reasons,
there is a case to be made for directing some revenues toward programs that
offset negative externalities created by consumption. These could include, for
instance, drug treatment and education programs.

Most states generally direct funds first to cover administration and
implementations costs of the program. Revenue can also be directed to
enforcement and oversight of production, though much of this is already funded
through licensing fees on producers and sellers.[79]

California and Massachusetts have opted to earmark funds for restorative
justice and social service programs to assist the communities, predominantly
low-income communities of color, that have been disproportionately impacted by
policing due to prohibition. California and Washington both earmark funds for
university-based studies on the impact of legalization on public health and
safety, the economy, and criminal justice. Michigan voters agreed to earmark a
portion of their upcoming cannabis tax revenues to clinical trials focused on
the medical uses of cannabis by armed services veterans. Michigan and Oregon
each earmark some of their state revenue collections directly to local
governments. And earmarking cannabis tax revenue toward K-12 public education
is also common.

Alaska is the only state that does not currently earmark any of its cannabis
revenue.

**Jump to:** Executive Summary | Introduction | Options for Taxing Cannabis |
How States and Localities Tax Cannabis | Cannabis Tax Revenue Performance |
Cannabis Tax Revenue Outlook | Earmarking Revenue | Conclusion

# Conclusion

There are a variety of goals lawmakers may seek to accomplish when taxing
cannabis such as raising revenue, deterring consumption, and hastening the
decline of the illicit market. The policy issues and choices outlined in this
report will help inform how state and local tax laws can best achieve these
goals in both the short- and long-term.

While cannabis taxes are a meaningful source of revenue in states with
established retail markets those revenues have not been high enough to
fundamentally transform state budgets. In general, cannabis taxes tend to
raise roughly the same amount as taxes on alcohol, and substantially less than
taxes on tobacco.

The evidence accumulated thus far points toward a few sensible recommendations
for states considering legalization and taxation of recreational cannabis.
Those include levying weight-based taxes that will be immune to the impending
collapse in cannabis prices, indexing those weight-based tax rates to rise
alongside inflation, phasing in cannabis taxes over time in order to hasten
the decline of the illicit market, and earmarking cannabis tax revenues only
sparingly if at all.

This is a rapidly evolving policy area. States with legal markets and those
considering establishing legal markets should pay close attention to the
impacts of their policies, and those of their peers, to determine best
practices and to prepare for inevitable changes in the cannabis industry.

* * *

## Appendix A

## Appendix B

* * *

[1] Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. “The ITEP Guide to Fair State
and Local Taxes,” March 3, 2011. https://itep.org/the-itep-guide-to-fair-
state-and-local-taxes/.

[2] Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. “How Sales and Excise Taxes
Work,” August 2011, https://itep.org/how-sales-and-excise-taxes-work/.

[3] Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the U.S. Department of
Treasury. “Tax and Fee Rates,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://www.ttb.gov/tax_audit/taxrates.shtml.

[4] Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. “State Cigarette Excise Tax Rates &
Rankings,” December 21, 2018,
http://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/0097.pdf.

[5] Marijuana Policy Project. “Model Legislation to Regulate and Tax Marijuana
Similarly to Alcohol,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://www.mpp.org/issues/legislation/model-state-bill-to-replace-
prohibition-with-regulation/.

[6] Colorado Department of Revenue. “Current and Prior Average Market Rates
for Retail Marijuana Excise Tax,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/AMR_PriorRates_Jan2019.pdf.

[7] Overton, Penelope. “Maine’s pot legalization committee reaches agreement
on rewrite of voter-approved law,” _Portland Press Herald_ , February 23,
2018\. https://www.pressherald.com/2018/02/23/maines-pot-legalization-
committee-finds-agreement-on-taxes-other-regulations/.

[8] Jonathan P. Caulkins Angela Hawken, Beau Kilmer and Mark A. R. Kleiman.
_Marijuana Legalization: What Everyone Needs to Know_ (New York City: Oxford
University Press, 2012), 151-177.

[9] See research by Ben Hansen, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber posted by
Pat Oglesby of the Center for New Revenue:
https://newrevenue.org/2018/11/30/weak-correlation-between-thc-concentration-
and-cannabis-price/. In addition, a “disadvantage to a tax based on THC
potency is that it could encourage more consumption of less-potent marijuana…
[i]f the public health costs of smoking marijuana outweigh the health costs of
consuming more potent marijuana.” Jane G. Gravelle and Sean Lowry. Federal
Proposals to Tax Marijuana: An Economic Analysis,” Congressional Research
Service, November 13, 2014, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43785.pdf.

[10] Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the U.S. Department of
Treasury. “Tax and Fee Rates,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://www.ttb.gov/tax_audit/taxrates.shtml.

[11] Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. “Most Americans Live in States
with Variable-Rate Gas Taxes,” June 28, 2017. https://itep.org/most-americans-
live-in-states-with-variable-rate-gas-taxes-4/.

[12] Pat Oglesby. “Colorado's Crazy Marijuana Wholesale Tax Base,” Center for
New Revenue, March 26, 2014.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2351399.

[13] R.C.W.A. 69.50.380(1).
https://app.leg.wa.gov/RCW/default.aspx?cite=69.50.380.

[14] Governor’s Marijuana Advisory Commission. “Recommendations for Possible
Taxing and Regulating of Adult-Use Marijuana in Vermont as Adopted by the
Governor’s Advisory Commission on Marijuana,” December 2018.
https://marijuanacommission.vermont.gov/document/taxation-and-regulation-
subcommittee-final-report.

[15] Jonathan P. Caulkins, Angela Hawken, Beau Kilmer, Mark A. R. Kleiman,
Katherine, Pfrommer, Jacob Pruess and Timothy Shaw. “High tax states: options
for gleaning revenue from legal cannabis (A Step Forward: Creating a Just Drug
Policy for the United States),” Oregon Law Review 91, no. 4 (n.d.): 1041–1068,
accessed January 16, 2019. http://www.countthecosts.org/sites/default/Options-
for-cannabis-revenue.pdf.

[16] Jonathan P. Caulkins, Beau Kilmer, Mark A. R. Kleiman, Robert J. MacCoun,
Greg Midgette, Pat Oglesby, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Peter H. Reuter.
“Considering Marijuana Legalization: Insights for Vermont and Other
Jurisdictions,” Rand Corporation, 2015.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR864.html.

[17] Peter Unger, Roger Brauninger, Chris Hudalla, PhD, Mowgli Holmes, PhD and
Bethany Sherman. “Standards for Cannabis Testing Laboratories,” Cannabis
Safety Institute, December 2014. http://cannabissafetyinstitute.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/Standards-for-Cannabis-Testing-Laboratories.pdf.

[18] Jonathan P. Caulkins, Beau Kilmer, Mark A. R. Kleiman, Robert J. MacCoun,
Greg Midgette, Pat Oglesby, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Peter H. Reuter.
“Considering Marijuana Legalization: Insights for Vermont and Other
Jurisdictions,” Rand Corporation, 2015.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR864.html.

[19] Pat Oglesby. “Tax Marijuana by Potency? Probably Not,” Center for New
Revenue, March 20, 2013. https://newrevenue.org/2013/03/20/tax-marijuana-by-
potency-probably-not/.

[20] Gene Johnson. “Legalizing Marijuana In Washington And Colorado Hasn't
Gotten Rid Of The Black Market,” _Business Insider_.
http://www.businessinsider.com/legal-marijuana-in-washington-and-colorado-
hasnt-gotten-rid-of-the-black-market-2015-1.

[21] Jonathan P. Caulkins, Beau Kilmer, Mark A. R. Kleiman, Robert J. MacCoun,
Greg Midgette, Pat Oglesby, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Peter H. Reuter.
“Considering Marijuana Legalization: Insights for Vermont and Other
Jurisdictions,” Rand Corporation, 2015, 89.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR864.html.

[22] Some states have laws requiring illegal cannabis buyers or sellers to
anonymously purchase and place tax stamps on their cannabis but virtually no
one buys the stamps because possessing cannabis without medical authorization
is illegal even with the stamps attached.

[23] Federation of Tax Administrators. “State Sales Tax Rates and Food and
Drug Exemptions,” January 2018.
https://www.taxadmin.org/assets/docs/Research/Rates/sales.pdf.

[24] Those states are California, Florida, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota,
New York, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and West Virginia. It
is unclear whether North Dakota’s general sales tax applies to medical
cannabis sales. Jennifer E. Benda and Jacob D. Millis. “Cannabis Industry
State Tax Guide,” Fox Rothschild LLP, September 2018.
https://www.foxrothschild.com/content/uploads/2018/08/Cannabis-Tax-E-book-
Septemberv2-2018-2.pdf.

[25] Elise Schmelzer. “Denver marijuana sales reach record high of $587
million, sales across state continue to rise,” _Denver Post_ , August 19,
2018\. https://www.denverpost.com/2018/08/09/colorado-marijuana-sales-2017-2/.

[26] Maine’s tax rates are officially set on a per-pound basis, but this
section converts those rates to per-ounce amounts to allow for an easier
comparison across states.

[27] Pat Oglesby.“Indexing: Rhode Island’s marijuana bill gets it,” Center for
New Revenue, February 28, 2013. https://newrevenue.org/2013/02/28/indexing-
rhode-islands-marijuana-bill-gets-it/.

[28] Pat Oglesby. “Colorado’s marijuana tax continues to decline,” Center for
New Revenue, September 3, 2018. https://newrevenue.org/2018/09/03/colorados-
marijuana-tax-continue-to-decline/.

[29] Pat Oglesby. “Nevada’s 70-cent per gram tax on marijuana flower,” Center
for New Revenue, July 2, 2017.
https://newrevenue.org/2017/07/02/nevadas-70-cent-per-gram-tax-on-marijuana-
flower/.

[30] Jennifer E. Benda and Jacob D. Millis. “Cannabis Industry State Tax
Guide,” Fox Rothschild LLP, September 2018.
https://www.foxrothschild.com/content/uploads/2018/08/Cannabis-Tax-E-book-
Septemberv2-2018-2.pdf.

[31] The California governor’s budget projects that in FY2020, alcoholic
beverage taxes will raise $389 million and cannabis excise taxes will raise
$514 million. Governor Gavin Newsom. “2019-20 Governor’s Budget: Revenue
Estimates,” January 10, 2019.
http://www.ebudget.ca.gov/budget/2019-20/#/BudgetSummary.

[32] U.S. Census Bureau. “2016 State & Local Government Finance Historical
Datasets and Tables,” accessed October 10, 2018.
https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2016/econ/local/public-use-datasets.html.

[33] For the third year, Oregon only reported 10 months of data as of this
writing. This calculation assumes that Oregon’s monthly revenue collections
remain unchanged across months 10, 11, and 12.

[34] This calculation uses data from Colorado and Washington.

[35] For the fifth year, Colorado only reported 11 months of data as of this
writing. This calculation assumes that Colorado’s monthly revenue collections
remain unchanged across months 11 and 12.

[36] A crowdsourced Internet archive of cannabis prices, PriceOfWeed.com,
reported an average price of $232 per ounce on the illicit market in July
2014, compared to $233 per ounce as of January 2019. Philip Ross. “Marijuana
Costs In the US: How Black Market, Retail and Medical Pot Prices Compare,”
_International Business Times_ , July 8, 2014.
https://www.ibtimes.com/marijuana-costs-us-how-black-market-retail-medical-
pot-prices-compare-1622362. “Data for the price of weed in: Washington, United
States,” _PriceOfWeed.com_ , accessed January 16, 2019.
http://www.priceofweed.com/prices/United-States/Washington.html.

[37] A more detailed explanation of the calculations undertaken in this report
is provided in Appendix B.

[38] U.S. Census Bureau. “2016 State & Local Government Finance Historical
Datasets and Tables,” accessed October 10, 2018.
https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2016/econ/local/public-use-datasets.html.

[39] _Ibid._

[40] Brett Hollenbeck and Kosuke Uetake. “Taxation and Market Power in the
Legal Marijuana Industry,” Available at SSRN, December 2, 2018.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3237729. Benjamin Hansen,
Keaton Miller, and Carolina Weber. “The Taxation of Recreational Marijuana:
Evidence from a Reform in Washington State,” August 2017.
http://faculty.washington.edu/ceweber/HMW_marijuanatax.pdf.

[41] Josh Lehner. “Marijuana: Falling Prices and Retailer Saturation?,” Oregon
Office of Economic Analysis, February 8, 2018.
https://oregoneconomicanalysis.com/2018/02/08/marijuana-falling-prices-and-
retailer-saturation/.

[42] Jonathan P. Caulkins, Beau Kilmer, Mark A. R. Kleiman, Robert J. MacCoun,
Greg Midgette, Pat Oglesby, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Peter H. Reuter.
“Considering Marijuana Legalization: Insights for Vermont and Other
Jurisdictions,” Rand Corporation, 2015.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR864.html.

[43] William C. Kerr, Yu Ye, Meenakshi Sabina Subbaraman, Edwina Williams,
Thomas K. Greenfield. “Changes in Marijuana Use Across the 2012 Washington
State Recreational Legalization: Is Retrospective Assessment of Use Before
Legalization More Accurate?,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 79(3),
495-502 (2018). https://www.jsad.com/doi/abs/10.15288/jsad.2018.79.495.

[44] Jeffrey Miron and Katherine Waldock. “The Budgetary Impact of Ending Drug
Prohibition,” Cato Institute, September 27, 2010.
http://www.cato.org/publications/white-paper/budgetary-impact-ending-drug-
prohibition.

[45] Christopher Ingraham. “Think you drink a lot? This chart will tell you,”
_Washington Post_ , September 25, 2014.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/09/25/think-you-drink-a-lot-
this-chart-will-tell-you/.

[46] Steven Davenport and Jonathan P. Caulkins. “Evolution of the United
States marijuana market in the decade of liberalization before full
legalization.” Journal of Drug Issues, 46(4):411–427 (2016).

[47] Adam Orens, Miles Light, Brian Lewandowski, Jacob Rowberry and Clinton
Saloga. “Market Size and Demand for Marijuana in Colorado 2017 Market Update,”
Marijuana Policy Group LLC, August 2018.
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/MED%20Demand%20and%20Market%20%20Study%20%20082018.pdf.

[48] Gallup. “Alcohol and Drinking,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://news.gallup.com/poll/1582/alcohol-drinking.aspx.

[49] Michael Amlung, Derek D. Reed, Vanessa Morris, Elizabeth R. Aston, Jane
Metrik, James MacKillop. “Price elasticity of illegal versus legal cannabis: a
behavioral economic substitutability analysis,” Society for the Study of
Addiction,114(1):112-118 (2019).

**[50]** Pat Oglesby. “The optimal amount of crime is not zero,” Center for
New Revenue _,_ May 29, 2015. https://newrevenue.org/2015/05/29/optimal-
amount-of-crime/

[51] Christine Vestal. “Western States Try to Tame Homegrown Marijuana,” The
Pew Charitable Trusts, September 12, 2017.
http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-
analysis/blogs/stateline/2017/09/12/western-states-try-to-tame-homegrown-
marijuana

[52] Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board. “FAQs on Marijuana,” accessed
January 16, 2019. https://lcb.wa.gov/mj2015/faqs_i-502.

[53] Regina Garcia Cano and Scott Sonner. “Six things to know about Nevada
marijuana: edibles, tourism impact, casino ban and more,” _The Cannabist_ ,
July 3, 2017. https://www.thecannabist.co/2017/07/03/nevada-marijuana-tourism-
edibles-casinos/82941/.

[54]Jonathan P. Caulkins, Beau Kilmer, Mark A. R. Kleiman, Robert J. MacCoun,
Greg Midgette, Pat Oglesby, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Peter H. Reuter.
“Considering Marijuana Legalization: Insights for Vermont and Other
Jurisdictions,” Rand Corporation, 2015, 89.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR864.html.

[55]Adam Orens, Miles Light, Brian Lewandowski, Jacob Rowberry and Clinton
Saloga. “Market Size and Demand for Marijuana in Colorado 2017 Market Update,”
Marijuana Policy Group LLC, August 2018.
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/MED%20Demand%20and%20Market%20%20Study%20%20082018.pdf.

[56] Miles K. Light, Adam Orens, Brian Lewandowski and Todd Pickton. “Market
Size and Demand for Marijuana in Colorado,” The Marijuana Policy Group, July
2014\.
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/Market%20Size%20and%20Demand%20Study%2C%20July%209%2C%202014%5B1%5D_3.pdf.

[57] Adam Orens, Miles Light, Brian Lewandowski, Jacob Rowberry and Clinton
Saloga. “Market Size and Demand for Marijuana in Colorado 2017 Market Update,”
Marijuana Policy Group LLC, August 2018.
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/MED%20Demand%20and%20Market%20%20Study%20%20082018.pdf.

[58] Alicia Wallace. “Colorado’s tourism office will soon start educating
visitors about marijuana laws,” _The Cannabist_ , September 16, 2016.
https://www.thecannabist.co/2016/09/16/marijuana-tourism-colorado/63350/.

[59] _Ibid._

[60] Leafly. “Public Cannabis Consumption Laws: A State-By-State Guide,”
Updated October 30, 2017. https://www.leafly.com/news/cannabis-101/public-
consumption-laws-a-state-by-state-guide. Matt Laslo. “American High: State-by-
State Guide to Legal Pot,” _Rolling Stone_ , April 19, 2017.
https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-news/american-high-state-by-
state-guide-to-legal-pot-192704/. Marjorie Miller. “Los Angeles for tourists:
Hollywood, beaches…and pot?” _Associated Press_ , May 21, 2018.
https://www.apnews.com/70321d47e1bc4e56a9c6d6e48103bce3/Los-Angeles-for-
tourists:-Hollywood,-beaches-_-and-pot.

[61] Chris Kudalis. “Las Vegas: no marijuana lounges until 2019, monitoring
Denver social use licenses,” _The Cannabist_ , March 6, 2018.
https://www.thecannabist.co/2018/03/06/las-vegas-no-marijuana-lounges-
until-2019/100606/.

[62] Marjorie Miller. “Los Angeles for tourists: Hollywood, beaches…and pot?”
_Associated Press_ , May 21, 2018.
https://www.apnews.com/70321d47e1bc4e56a9c6d6e48103bce3/Los-Angeles-for-
tourists:-Hollywood,-beaches-_-and-pot.

[63] Misha Hill. “Lottery, Casino and Other Gambling Revenue: A Fiscal Game of
Chance,” Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, June 12, 2018.
https://itep.org/lottery-casino-and-other-gambling-revenue-a-fiscal-game-of-
chance/.

[64] Wayne Parry. “At 40, are Atlantic City casinos healing or courting
danger?” _Las Vegas Sun_ , May 11, 2018.
https://lasvegassun.com/news/2018/may/11/at-40-are-atlantic-city-casinos-
healing-or-courtin/.

[65] New Jersey Division of Gaming Enforcement. “Atlantic City Gaming Industry
Casino Revenue Fund Taxes and Fees Source Report,” August 20, 2018.
http://www.nj.gov/oag/ge/docs/Financials/CRFTF/CRFTFSourceReport.pdf.

[66] Christopher Ingraham. “Trump’s pick for attorney general: ‘Good people
don’t smoke marijuana,” _Washington Post_ , November 18, 2016.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/11/18/trumps-pick-for-
attorney-general-good-people-dont-smoke-marijuana/.

[67] Charlie Savage and Jack Healy. “Trump Administration Takes Step That
Could Threaten Marijuana Legalization Movement,” _New York Times_ , January 4,
2018\. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/04/us/politics/marijuana-legalization-
justice-department-prosecutions.html.

[68] National Cannabis Industry Association. “Internal Revenue Code Section
280E: Creating an Impossible Situation for Legitimate Businesses,” April 2015.
https://thecannabisindustry.org/uploads/2015-280E-White-Paper.pdf

[69] Jennifer E. Benda and Jacob D. Millis. “Cannabis Industry State Tax
Guide,” Fox Rothschild LLP, September 2018.
https://www.foxrothschild.com/content/uploads/2018/08/Cannabis-Tax-E-book-
Septemberv2-2018-2.pdf.

[70] NORML. “Federal: Legislation Pending To Cease Penalizing State-Compliant
Marijuana Businesses Under the Federal Tax Code,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://norml.org/action-center/item/federal-legislation-pending-to-cease-
penalizing-state-compliant-marijuana-businesses-under-the-federal-tax-code.

[71] Pat Oglesby. “How Bob Dole got America addicted to marijuana taxes,”
December 18, 2015. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2015/12/18/how-bob-
dole-got-america-addicted-to-marijuana-taxes/.

[72] U.S. Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. “BSA Expectations
Regarding Marijuana-Related Businesses,” FIN-2014-G001, February 14, 2014.
https://www.fincen.gov/resources/statutes-regulations/guidance/bsa-
expectations-regarding-marijuana-related-businesses.

[73] U.S. Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. “Marijuana Banking
Update,” Data ending September 30, 2017, accessed January 16, 2019.
https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/273281%20EA%204th%20Q%20MJ%20Stats_Public_Web.pdf.

[74] Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. “The FDIC and the Banking
Industry: Perspective and Outlook,” accessed January 16, 2019.
https://www.fdic.gov/about/strategic/strategic/bankingindustry.html. National
Credit Union Administration. “Industry at a Glance,” Current as of September
30, 2017, https://www.ncua.gov/analysis/Pages/industry/industry-at-a-glance-
september-2017.pdf.

[75] Shira Schoenberg. “Cash-heavy marijuana industry faces banking, security
challenges,” _MassLive.com_ , March 22, 2018.
https://www.masslive.com/politics/index.ssf/2018/03/cash-
heavy_marijuana_industry.html.

[76] Secure and Fair Enforcement Banking Act. S.1152 of the 115th Congress
(2017-18). https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/1152.

[77] Shakala Alvaranga. “Why your child’s school may not see any of that
marijuana tax money – Hint: it’s complicated,” _LasVegasNow.com_ , September
5, 2018. https://www.lasvegasnow.com/news/why-your-childs-school-may-not-see-
any-of-that-marijuana-tax-money-hint-its-complicated/1421997569.

[78] _Ibid._

[79] Marijuana Policy Project. “Medical Marijuana Dispensary Laws: Fees and
Taxes,” accessed January 16, 2019. https://www.mpp.org/issues/medical-
marijuana/medical-marijuana-dispensary-laws-fees-and-taxes/.

* * *

#### Tags

cannabis taxes

* * *

#### Authors

Carl Davis

Misha Hill

Richard Phillips

#### Share

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

# ITEP

Washington, DC Office  
1616 P Street, NW Suite 200  
Washington, DC 20036

Phone: 202-299-1066  
Fax: 202-299-1065  
e-mail: [email protected]

Subscribe to ITEP's Email Digest

Subscribe

  * __
  * __
  * __

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

