

Skip to main content

![Home](/themes/custom/drugpolicy/logo.png)

## Quick Links

  * Blog.
  * For Media.
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube

## Main navigation

  * Issues.
    * About the Drug War.
    * History of the Drug War
    * Drug War Statistics
    * Making Economic Sense
    * New Solutions for Drug Policy
    * The International Drug War
    * Reforming Marijuana Laws.
    * Legalization & Regulation
    * Medical Marijuana
    * Criminal Justice Reform.
    * Drug Decriminalization
    * Mass Criminalization
    * Race & the Drug War
    * Women & the Drug War
    * LGBTQIA+ People & the Drug War
    * Asset Forfeiture Reform
    * Harm Reduction.
    * Discrimination
    * Overdose
    * Naloxone
    * Good Samaritan Laws
    * Supervised Consumption Services
    * Syringe Access
    * Drug Checking
    * Protecting Youth.
    * Families
    * Drug Education
    * Student Aid
    * Safer Partying
  * Drug Facts.
    * Marijuana
    * Heroin
    * MDMA (Ecstasy, Molly)
    * Cocaine
    * Methamphetamine
    * LSD
    * Psilocybin Mushrooms
    * Synthetic Opioids (Fentanyl)
    * Synthetic Cannabinoids (Spice, K2)
    * Synthetic Cathinones (Bath Salts, Flakka)
  * Take Action.
    * Action Alerts
    * Become a Member
    * Attend an Event
    * Contact Your Elected Officials
    * Key States
    * Shop to Support DPA
    * Ways to Give
  * Resources.
    * Browse Resources
    * Drug Education Resources
    * Resources for Academics
    * Online Resource Library
    * Recommended Books
    * Treatment, Counseling & Legal Help
  * About Us.
    * Vision & Mission
    * History of DPA
    * Our Victories
    * Staff & Board
    * Departments & State Offices
    * Jobs & Internships
    * Advocacy Grants from DPA
    * International Drug Policy Reform Conference
    * Membership
    * Annual Report
    * Member Newsletter
    * Financial Documents

Search

_Search this site_ _Close search panel_

Donate _⁠⁠ _

__

# Does marijuana legalization lead to increased use?

![](/sites/default/files/default_images/drug_facts_hero.png)

Go back to 10 Facts About Marijuana

Changes in marijuana laws have not been found to have a significant impact on
rates of adult use.

> "There is little evidence that decriminalization of marijuana use
necessarily leads to a substantial increase in marijuana use." - The National
Academy of Sciences

**In short: legal access ≠ increased use.**

When it comes to use by young people, several recent reports have found that
in the majority of states that have approved medical marijuana, use among
teenagers has actually decreased.

Experts say this is due to a diminished “forbidden fruit” effect and decreased
access to marijuana as it moves from the unregulated streets – where there are
no age requirements – to inside licensed dispensaries, where you need to be 21
to purchase marijuana.

Go back to 10 Facts About Marijuana

## Other Marijuana Facts

Is marijuana a gateway drug?

Do people still get arrested and punished for using marijuana?

Is it true that marijuana has medicinal properties?

Does marijuana legalization lead to increased use?

What is the relationship between marijuana and cancer?

How strong is today’s marijuana?

Does marijuana impair driving the way alcohol does?

Are more people becoming dependent on marijuana?

Does marijuana negatively impact mental health?

Does using marijuana have long-term effects on the brain?

## Get Updates

Sign up to receive action alerts and news about drug policy reform.

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/press-resources.png)

Press Resources.

Get tips for covering the war on drugs and download DPA staff photos, logos,
marijuana stock photos and b-roll video.

See Resources

![Man at No More Drug War rally](/sites/default/files/2019-06/2018-annual-

report-footer2.jpg)

Annual Report.

The Drug Policy Alliance is entering a critical chapter in its history. ****
We have the momentum to end the drug war. Will you stand with us?

View Report

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/store.png)

Wear Your Support.

Show off your support for drug policy reform with our new Party Safer t-shirts
and tank tops.

Shop Now

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/give-now-2.png)

Give Now.

### Together, we are fighting for responsible drug policy. Join us.

Give Now.

## Footer menu

  * News.
  * Jobs.
  * Store.
  * Contact Us.

![Drug Policy Alliance

Logo](../sites/default/files/We_are_DPAlliance_96_0.png)

**Drug Policy Alliance Headquarters**

131 West 33rd Street, 15th Floor

New York, New York 10001

**P.** 212.613.8020

  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠ ⁠_
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _

  * Privacy Policy.

  * Terms of Use.
  * © Copyright 2019 Drug Policy Alliance. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

