

  * Stockholm
    * Stockholm Tourism 
    * Stockholm Vacation Rentals 
    * Stockholm Vacation Packages 
    * Stockholm Photos 
    * Stockholm Map 
    * Stockholm Travel Guide 
  * Hotels 

![TripAdvisor](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/branding/rebrand/TA_logo_secondary.svg)

Stockholm

Search for "{0}"

Post

Trips

Tip: All of your saved places can be found here in My Trips.

Inbox

Inbox

See all

Log in to get trip updates and message other travelers.

ProfileJoin

Search

Enter a destination

Search

  * Stockholm
  * Hotels 
  * Things to do 
  * Restaurants 
  * Flights 
  * Vacation Rentals 
  * Vacation Packages 
  * CruisesNEW
  * Rental Cars 
  * Travel Forum 
  * Airlines 
  * Travel Guides 
  * Best of 2019 
  * Road Trips 
  * Help Center 

  * 

![TripAdvisor](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/branding/rebrand/TA_logo_primary.svg)

Log in Join

  *     *       * Recently viewed
  * Bookings
  * Inbox 

More

Help Center

# Shopping Guide for Stockholm: Travel Guide

  * Europe 
  * Sweden 
  * Stockholm County 
  * Stockholm 
  * Travel Guides

All Stockholm Guides

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

# Shopping Guide for Stockholm

by cafespecific, London, United Kingdom

Exclusively commissioned by TripAdvisor

92%

Found this guide helpful

×

About cafespecific

Lives in London, United Kingdom

Since Sep 2009

25-34 year old male

Hello! I'm Johannes, German-born but citizen of the world! At the moment I
live in London and travel whenever I can. My preferred destinations in Europe
are Spain and Sweden and otherwise I love exploring Southeast and East Asia
and South America. I am a big fan of nice hotels and spas and always know the
best ways to get a good deal. I hope you enjoy my guides, feel free to contact
me for further information. - J

One thing you may notice when you visit Stockholm for the first time is that
many people are very fashionable, and that many apartments and shops have very
distinctive and exceptionally beautiful interior designs. Stockholmers love
nice things and many of them are quite serious about what and where they buy
their various items. Despite its rather small size, the city is a great
destination for shopping and this guide will lead you to the places that
should be at the top of your list.

Good for

  * Shopping Fanatic
  * Luxury Traveler
  * Thrifty Traveler
  * Trendsetter
  * Like a Local

10 Places

3 City Tips

Print

Map

10 Places

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Old Haymarket

Flea & Street Markets

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Drottninggatan

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Kulturhuset

Civic Centers

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Gallerian

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Nordiska Kompaniet (NK)

Department Stores

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Sturegallerian

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Ostermalm Saluhall

Flea & Street Markets

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Svenskt Tenn

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Emmaus Vintage Shop

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/social/no_photo_attraction.gif)

## Stockholm Quality Outlet Barkarby

Factory Outlets

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/x.gif)![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/x.gif)

Old Haymarket

Hotorget, Norrmalm, Stockholm 111 57, Sweden

Drottninggatan

Drottninggatan, Stockholm, Sweden

Kulturhuset

Sergels torg, Stockholm 103 27, Sweden

Gallerian

37 Hamngatan, Stockholm 111 53, Sweden

Nordiska Kompaniet (NK)

18-20 Hamngatan, Stockholm 111 77, Sweden

Sturegallerian

4 Stureplan, Stockholm 114 35, Sweden

Ostermalm Saluhall

Ostermalmstorg, Stockholm 114 39, Sweden

Svenskt Tenn

5 Strandvaegen, Stockholm 114 51, Sweden

Emmaus Vintage Shop

Peter Myndes Backe 8, Stockholm, Sweden

Stockholm Quality Outlet Barkarby

Flyginfarten 4, Jarfalla 177 38, Sweden

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Old Haymarket

Flea & Street Markets

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Drottninggatan

Gift & Specialty Shops

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Kulturhuset

Civic Centers

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Gallerian

Gift & Specialty Shops

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Nordiska Kompaniet (NK)

Department Stores

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Sturegallerian

Gift & Specialty Shops

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Ostermalm Saluhall

Flea & Street Markets

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Svenskt Tenn

Gift & Specialty Shops

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Emmaus Vintage Shop

Gift & Specialty Shops

▼

▲

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)

Stockholm Quality Outlet Barkarby

Factory Outlets

▼

### cafespecific's City Tips

  * Get inspiration from what Stockholmers wear! You will be on the safe side by following the popular trends of the city.
  * Shopping in Stockholm can be quite expensive. Check out the seasonal sales for awesome bargains!
  * Some of the more expensive Swedish brands have factory outlets either in the city center or on the outskirts of Stockholm.

  * Old Haymarket

Flea & Street Markets

    
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/07/94/c6/a2/hay-market-hotorget.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/01/3e/ab/4a/hotorget-hotorget-haymarket.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/03/cc/d7/1f/cheeses.jpg)
    

See more photos

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

The Hay Market in Stockholm is a market place in the city center where you can
buy fresh food, flowers, antiques (sometimes), and much more. In addition to
the market square itself, there is a cinema, a concert hall and a very cool
department store. Start your shopping tour here to get some initial
inspiration.

Good for

    
    
    * Foodie
    * Must See
    * LGBT
    * Trendsetter
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    * Art and Architecture Lover
    

Tips

    
    
    * Prices magically shrink right before the market closes. Be patient if you want to save some money!
    
    * Visit Hötorgshallen when you are at the Hay Market. Just go down the stairs next to cinema to experience one of Stockholm's coolest underground food markets.
    
    * Check out PUB, the department store located right next to the Hay Market. PUB offers designer fashion, furniture, and much much more!
    
    * The sculptures in front the the concert hall are actually created by the famous artist, Carl Milles.
    

Plan to stay: Less than 1 hour

From the community

Ranked #66 of 284 things to do in Stockholm

323 Reviews

    
    
    * Hay market - Market hall 06/08/2019
    * Buyer beware 04/02/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.334732,18.062153&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.334732,18.062153&signature=9NM3fr37e8VYcReP2M1uWQkj0ig=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Old Haymarket
    

▼

Address:

Hotorget, Norrmalm

Stockholm 111 57

Sweden

Phone:

+46 8 23 00 01

Other:

Website

  * Drottninggatan

Gift & Specialty Shops

    
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/07/2a/16/96/drottninggatan.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/06/ed/c2/90/drottninggatan.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/04/17/0f/ba/drottninggatan.jpg)
    

See more photos

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Drottninggatan (Queen Street) is Stockholm's main shopping street. The street
stretches from the Royal Palace on Gamla Stan to Observatorielunden; a small
hill from where you get a great view over the city. The street itself attracts
many locals and visitors with a great variety of shops and restaurants.

Good for

    
    
    * Must See
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    

Tips

    
    
    * Come here after visiting the Hay Market. Drottninggatan is right next to it!
    
    * One of the main shopping attractions on Drottninggatan is Åhléns City, the biggest branch of the Swedish department store chain Åhléns.
    
    * This street is better for shopping than for eating. If you are hungry, instead of going to a restaurant on Drottninggatan, visit one down one of the side streets.
    

Plan to stay: 1-2 hours

From the community

Ranked #7 of 86 Shopping in Stockholm

214 Reviews

    
    
    * Pedestrian street lined with shops 06/02/2019
    * Busy street with lots of shops 01/26/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.330711,18.064581&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.330711,18.064581&signature=-H4b_4rMMnD0rVYtSSFuQDifEK0=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Drottninggatan
    

▼

Address:

Drottninggatan

Stockholm

Sweden

Other:

Website

  * Kulturhuset

Civic Centers

    
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/01/39/d0/f3/2009-03-18-18-20-16-oesi.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/01/79/24/53/square-outside-the-central.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/02/99/63/53/filename-12-giugno-stoccolma.jpg)
    

See more photos

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Kulturhuset (the Culture House) is a theater/café/performance center in the
city center of Stockholm. It is located right across from Åhléns City and is
the perfect place to continue your shopping tour. The square in front of
Kulturhuset leads you to Sergelgången, an underground shopping street that
connects Åhléns with Nordiska Kompaniet.

Good for

    
    
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    * Art and Architecture Lover
    

Tips

    
    
    * Check out Design Torget on the ground floor of Kulturhuset. In this shop you'll find unique Swedish gifts, kitchen equipment, and other fun things.
    
    * There is a great coffee shop on the 7th floor of Kulturhuset. Here, not only do you get awesome Swedish cake and coffee, but also a great view over the city.
    

Plan to stay: 1-2 hours

From the community

Ranked #59 of 284 things to do in Stockholm

360 Reviews

    
    
    * More for local crowd 04/02/2019
    * Unfriendly to family with children 12/29/2018
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.332539,18.066139&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.332539,18.066139&signature=7SVavExuL1beciZLJe_nRCMYysE=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Kulturhuset
    

▼

Address:

Sergels torg

Stockholm 103 27

Sweden

Phone:

+46 8 508 315 08

Hours:

Mon - Fri

9:00 AM - 7:00 PM

Sat - Sun

11:00 AM - 5:00 PM

Other:

Website

  * Gallerian

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Stockholm can be pretty cold, not only during winter, but also in spring and
autumn. Because of this, the city offers many indoor shopping opportunities,
such as Gallerian, a shopping mall in the city center. Gallerian is located
right next to Kulturhuset and is a great place for shopping on a rainy or
snowy day. In this mall you will find the most famous Swedish clothing store
chains, such as Topshop/Topman, Hollister, as well as a bunch of restaurants
and coffee shops.

Good for

    
    
    * Trendsetter
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    

Tips

    
    
    * You can enter this shopping mall directly from Sergelgången.
    
    * This mall offers free WiFi.
    

Plan to stay: 1-2 hours

From the community

Ranked #19 of 86 Shopping in Stockholm

96 Reviews

    
    
    * Rude info desk 04/14/2019
    * Gallerian is back in business  01/17/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.332085,18.067568&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.332085,18.067568&signature=bPzLgu1te-

YP4YuNUaOrM9q4j7o=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Gallerian
    

▼

Address:

37 Hamngatan

Stockholm 111 53

Sweden

Phone:

+46 8 533 373 00

Hours:

Sun

11:00 AM - 4:00 PM

Mon - Fri

10:00 AM - 7:00 PM

Sat

10:00 AM - 6:00 PM

Other:

Website

  * Nordiska Kompaniet (NK)

Department Stores

    
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/06/dd/c5/40/exposicao-na-nk.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/06/4f/bd/da/nordiska-kompaniet-nk.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/03/d1/75/24/nordiska-kompaniet-nk.jpg)
    

See more photos

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Nordiska Kompaniet is a luxury department store in central Stockholm. Often
referred to as NK, Nordiska Kompaniet have managed to not only impress their
customers with the variety and quality of products they offer, but also with
their artistic display of goods. The department store is known for its
extravagant shop windows and is a great place to visit even if you don't want
to buy anything.

Good for

    
    
    * Must See
    * Luxury Traveler
    * Trendsetter
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    * Art and Architecture Lover
    

Tips

    
    
    * You can get here through Sergelgången.
    
    * There is a beautiful, hip coffee shop called Espresso House on the lower floor of NK.
    
    * There are several traditional Swedish restaurants and cafés on the upper floors.
    

Plan to stay: 1-2 hours

From the community

Ranked #50 of 284 things to do in Stockholm

301 Reviews

Certificate of Excellence 2014

    
    
    * Great shopping 05/09/2019
    * Luxurious department store. 04/04/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.332699,18.069427&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.332699,18.069427&signature=WgquUHLlh1hZX9WvYEDEalPwiss=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Nordiska Kompaniet (NK)
    

▼

Address:

18-20 Hamngatan

Stockholm 111 77

Sweden

Phone:

+46 8 762 80 00

Hours:

Sun

11:00 AM - 5:00 PM

Mon - Fri

10:00 AM - 8:00 PM

Sat

10:00 AM - 6:00 PM

Other:

Website

  * Sturegallerian

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Sturegallerian is a high-end shopping mall, located at Stureplan. You can walk
here easily from NK by walking down Biblioteksgatan, where you will find
several high-end stores and rather expensive restaurants and cafés. In
Sturegallerian itself there are many interesting clothing stores and bakeries.
as well as a spa, to explore

Good for

    
    
    * Luxury Traveler
    * Trendsetter
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Family
    * Art and Architecture Lover
    

Tips

    
    
    * Combine your shopping trip with a relaxing massage at Sturebadet, the spa inside Sturegallerian.
    

Plan to stay: 1-2 hours

From the community

Ranked #21 of 86 Shopping in Stockholm

19 Reviews

    
    
    * Indoor galleria 03/03/2019
    * A very big shopping center, where you can buy all you need (and more!) 08/31/2018
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.335949,18.073240&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.335949,18.073240&signature=L4g4a8DYBzhKUKyQA3C05Dl8Rxw=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Sturegallerian
    

▼

Address:

4 Stureplan

Stockholm 114 35

Sweden

Other:

Website

  * Ostermalm Saluhall

Flea & Street Markets

    
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/07/c6/22/e6/ostermalm-saluhall.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/07/c6/22/e2/ostermalm-saluhall.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/01/c5/b3/7b/ostermalm-saluhall.jpg)
    

See more photos

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Östermalm Saluhall is an indoors food market, close to Sturegallerian. The
market was inaugurated in 1888 and has since attracted many locals and
tourists for both grocery shopping and dining. In addition to vegetables and
foods from all over the world, the market offers a variety of gourmet
restaurants and food stalls.

Good for

    
    
    * Foodie
    * Hidden Gems
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    

Tips

    
    
    * Try the Swedish meatballs if you are hungry. The meatballs you get here are much better than the ones at Ikea!
    

Plan to stay: Less than 1 hour

From the community

Ranked #47 of 284 things to do in Stockholm

1,521 Reviews

    
    
    * Good food for every taste 03/31/2019
    * Disappointed in the temporary location 03/31/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.336121,18.078829&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.336121,18.078829&signature=cw0TOn-

lZeow-JtfvxNU5nM41Oc=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Ostermalm Saluhall
    

▼

Address:

Ostermalmstorg

Stockholm 114 39

Sweden

Phone:

+46 8 661 12 28

Hours:

Mon - Thu

9:30 AM - 6:00 PM

Fri

9:30 AM - 7:00 PM

Sat

9:30 AM - 4:00 PM

Other:

Website

  * Svenskt Tenn

Gift & Specialty Shops

    
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/03/94/1f/e1/svenskt-tenn.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/02/b8/7c/3d/svenskt-tenn.jpg)
    
    * ![](https://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/03/94/1f/e0/svenskt-tenn.jpg)
    

See more photos

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Svenskt Tenn is a furniture store on Strandvägen, specializing in colorful and
unique Swedish designs. The store opened in 1924 and is still popular among
Stockholmers today. There really is no other store like Svenskt Tenn, so if
you need new furniture or accessories for your apartment, this is the place to
go.

Good for

    
    
    * Luxury Traveler
    * Trendsetter
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    

Tips

    
    
    * The quality and uniqueness of what you get at Svenskt Tenn is reflected in the price. Make sure to bring some money if you plan on buying anything.
    
    * This is a great place to buy gifts!
    

Plan to stay: Less than 1 hour

From the community

Ranked #12 of 86 Shopping in Stockholm

55 Reviews

    
    
    * Gorgeous Swedish deisgn 02/06/2019
    * Every corner is a magazine cover 02/01/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.332432,18.078581&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.332432,18.078581&signature=JB2D0IRLjAgcYF_KOLkIgqMWAIc=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Svenskt Tenn
    

▼

Address:

5 Strandvaegen

Stockholm 114 51

Sweden

Phone:

+46 8 670 16 00

Other:

Website

  * Emmaus Vintage Shop

Gift & Specialty Shops

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

Emmaus Vintage Shop is a great place for all bargain hunters. There are
several vintage stores in Stockholm, but none of them are quite as cool as
Emmaus. The store is located close to Götgatan, the hipster shopping street of
Södermalm. The fashion here is very representative of the alternative/hipster
style of Södermalm and a great place to get a typical Stockholm outfit.

Good for

    
    
    * Thrifty Traveler
    * Trendsetter
    * Hidden Gems
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    

Tips

    
    
    * Combine your visit of Emmaus with a stroll along Götgatan, where you can find more great shops.
    

Plan to stay: Less than 1 hour

From the community

Ranked #17 of 86 Shopping in Stockholm

20 Reviews

    
    
    * Large selection 04/22/2019
    * Second hand 09/27/2018
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.319370,18.070129&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.319370,18.070129&signature=IX11KRBnBrUxrcTaIUN9H3eFjlQ=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Emmaus Vintage Shop
    

▼

Address:

Peter Myndes Backe 8

Stockholm

Sweden

Other:

Website

  * Stockholm Quality Outlet Barkarby

Factory Outlets

![](https://media-

cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-l/08/67/d3/05/johannes-f.jpg)

cafespecific Says:

This is one place in Stockholm that thrifty travelers shouldn't miss. The
Quality Outlet in Barkaby offers pretty much all Swedish high-end brands at
outlet prices. The outlet is located outside the city center but can be easily
reached by the commuter train and bus.

Good for

    
    
    * Thrifty Traveler
    * Trendsetter
    * Like a Local
    * Solo
    * Friends
    * Couples
    * Senior
    * Shopping Fanatic
    * Family
    

Tips

    
    
    * There is an Ikea right next to the outlet, just in case you urgently need a scented candle.
    
    * If you want to try Swedish fast food, try Max Burgers across the street from the main entrance. The food is actually very good!
    

Plan to stay: 1-2 hours

From the community

Ranked #1 of 9 things to do in Jarfalla

96 Reviews

    
    
    * A Fantastic Shopping Experience 02/12/2019
    * Nice 01/23/2019
    

See all reviews

![](//maps.google.com/maps/api/staticmap?&channel=ta.desktop.guide&zoom=14&size=150x150&scale=2&client=gme-

tripadvisorinc&sensor=false&language=en_US&center=59.417721,17.858355&maptype=roadmap&&markers=icon:http%3A%2F%2Fc1.tacdn.com%2Fimg2%2Fmaps%2Ficons%2Fpin_v2_CurrentCenter.png|59.417721,17.858355&signature=AP1wuzc9-2hJF5VWBER0-nOXPOk=)

    
    
    * ![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/maps/icons/icon_t2d_mini_v3.png)Stockholm Quality Outlet Barkarby
    

▼

Address:

Flyginfarten 4

Jarfalla 177 38

Sweden

Phone:

+46 70 819 68 47

Hours:

Mon - Fri

10:00 AM - 8:00 PM

Sat - Sun

10:00 AM - 6:00 PM

Other:

Website

top

Problem with this guide?

×

Was this guide helpful?

YesNo

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6036461&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![TripAdvisor](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/branding/rebrand/TA_logo_primary.svg)know
better book better go better

© 2019 TripAdvisor LLC All rights reserved.

Terms of Use | Privacy Policy | Site Map | How the site works

  * TripAdvisor LLC is not a booking agent and does not charge any service fees to users of our site... (more) 

TripAdvisor LLC is not responsible for content on external web sites. Taxes,
fees not included for deals content.

EXPLORE

About UsHelp Center

CURRENCY/REGION

₩KRW

United States

![](https://static.tacdn.com/img2/x.gif)

![](//sg.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

