

Accessibility links

  * Skip to main content
  * Keyboard shortcuts for audio player

  * ![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)

  *     *       * NPR Shop
  *     * Open Navigation Menu 

Close Navigation Menu

  * Home

  * News Expand/collapse submenu for News

    * National
    * World
    * Politics
    * Business
    * Health
    * Science
    * Technology
    * Race & Culture
    * Arts & Life Expand/collapse submenu for Arts & Life

    * Books

    * Movies
    * Television
    * Pop Culture
    * Food
    * Art & Design
    * Performing Arts
    * Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music

    * Tiny Desk 

    * All Songs Considered 
    * Music News 
    * Music Features 
    * New Music 
    * Best Music Of 2019 
    * Shows & Podcasts Expand/collapse submenu for Shows & Podcasts

Daily

    
    
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/morning-edition.jpg) Morning Edition 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesat_sq-cbde87a2fa31b01047441e6f34d2769b0287bcd4-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Saturday 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesun_sq-4a03b35e7e5adfa446aec374523a578d54dc9bf5-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Sunday 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/all-things-considered.png) All Things Considered 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/fresh-air.png) Fresh Air 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/up-first.jpg) Up First
    

Featured

    
    
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hibt_podcasttile_sq-98320b282169a8cea04a406530e6e7b957665b3f.jpg?s=100) How I Built This with Guy Raz 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/05/23/screen-shot-2019-05-23-at-8.46.21-am_sq-7dcea391e7a87ca3569fe3d2047dda0144e5d86f.png?s=100) Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me! 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/02/npr_planetmoney_podcasttile_sq-7b7fab0b52fd72826936c3dbe51cff94889797a0.jpg?s=100) Planet Money 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hiddenbrain_podcasttile_sq-270ab642de6948802f485c6ad1f087239ef6e324.jpg?s=100) Hidden Brain 
    * More Shows & Podcasts
    

  * Search

  *     * NPR Shop
  * ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-dark.svg) ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-light.svg)

  * Tiny Desk 
  * All Songs Considered 
  * Music News 
  * Music Features 
  * New Music 
  * Best Music Of 2019 

  * About NPR

  * Overview
  * Support
  * Careers
  * Connect
  * Press
  * Ethics

**What If Marijuana Were Legal? Possible Outcomes** **NPR came up with a
hypothetical scenario and asked experts to respond: Marijuana has been legal
in the U.S. for two years. Legally, it is treated similar to alcohol: It is
taxed and regulated, and users must be 21 or older. Under these parameters,
what are some possible outcomes?**

![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)

#### What If Marijuana Were Legal? Possible Outcomes

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 12:59 **** ** 12:59

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/103276152/103295082" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

  * **_*_ *Transcript**

**What If Marijuana Were Legal? Possible Outcomes** 12:59

### National

# What If Marijuana Were Legal? Possible Outcomes

#### What If Marijuana Were Legal? Possible Outcomes

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 12:59 **** ** 12:59

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/103276152/103295082" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

  * **_*_ *Transcript**

  * **Facebook**

  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

April 20, 200910:50 AM ET

Heard on All Things Considered

![John Burnett at NPR headquarters in Washington, D.C., September 27, 2018.

\(photo by Allison

Shelley\)](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/11/13/npr_19696978_sq-7095c8ddff086d945584ac3146a737732175ee5a-s100-c85.jpg)

John Burnett

Twitter

![Timeline](https://media.npr.org/programs/atc/features/2009/apr/marijuanatimeline_200-6b0b5989217e7acbb628fdb72bc71b291466206b-s800-c15.jpg)

A Brief History Of U.S. Marijuana Laws

_There's a surge of public interest in legalizing marijuana as a partial
answer to a host of problems. Last week, Mexico's congress debated legalizing
cannabis as a way to undermine cartel income. And when President Obama held
his online town hall last month, he was swamped with the question: Why not
legalize pot as a way to help the economy?_

_NPR came up with a hypothetical scenario and asked experts to play along,
commenting on their imagined outcomes. The scenario: Marijuana has been legal
for two years throughout the U.S. It is treated, in the eyes of the law,
similar to alcohol. It is taxed and regulated, and users must be 21 or older.
Pot smokers can buy it by the gram at licensed dispensaries. Predictably, the
law change would make some people very happy — and others deeply concerned._

Imagine if you turned on the radio and heard this: "From NPR News in
Washington, I'm Carl Kasell. After 70 years of prohibition, marijuana becomes
legal today for personal consumption throughout the United States for persons
21 and older "

### Pro Legalization

Drug Policy Alliance Network

Marijuana Policy Project

The National Organization For The Reform Of Marijuana Laws

How would the world change if cannabis finally came out of the closet, if it
were fully legal to possess, sell and cultivate?

Willie Nelson, the 76-year-old iconic balladeer and cannabis connoisseur, says
there are pros and cons.

"We don't worry about going to jail anymore for smoking it," he says. But, "a
lot of our old friends who dealt it are out of work."

In Austin, Texas, the legal cannabis created a surge in business at head shops
such as Oat Willie's.

"There's the most popular one, the Volcano," says Doug Brown, the store's
longtime general manager, pointing to a conical device that is supposed to
provide a milder smoking experience. "It's very expensive — $575 — and they're
hard to get hold of."

### Against Legalization

National Institute On Drug Abuse

Office Of National Drug Control Policy

U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration

In the two years since legalization, Brown has noticed new customers, many of
whom are older.

"More affluent people, more fun people — people that have never done it
before, but have decided to try it since it's now legalized," he says.

One of the new marijuana epicures is Sarah Bird, a middle-aged novelist in
Austin and columnist for _Texas Monthly Magazine_. She says she hadn't smoked
marijuana much since her college days.

"It's been a godsend for the temperamentally tense such as myself," Bird says.
"And it's really been a boon to getting me off my addiction to Ambien and
Yellowtail Merlot."

"What's not to like?" Bird asks. It's low-calorie, she doesn't wake up hung
over, it's great for the libido, and it's popular at dinner parties, baked
into Belgian chocolate brownies.

But most of all, she adds: "You know you're not contributing to the Sinaloa
Cartel and you're not destabilizing Mexico. And in my case, as a parent, I'm
not modeling criminal behavior for my child."

**Recreational And Medicinal Uses**

At the University of Texas at Austin, Kevin Prince, coordinator of UT's
alcohol and drug program, says he's seen a spike in pot smoking since it
became legal. This is troubling to him because national studies show that
sustained marijuana use directly affects academic achievement.

![Poll](https://media.npr.org/news/specials/userpolls/pot_poll_200-458957e49a330cd5b9931d27eb72cabed0ea3ad2-s800-c15.jpg)

Click To Take The Poll

"One of the main issues is there's still a mystique when it comes to marijuana
use," Prince says. "A lot of people still don't know that marijuana use is
addictive. If you're spending more time smoking weed than going to class or
going to work, that's a problem."

Not everyone uses it recreationally. The end of cannabis prohibition has been
a blessing for Marsha, a medical marijuana user with multiple sclerosis.
Sitting in a wheelchair in a friend's backyard in Houston, Marsha says she
smokes weed to "escape from my body" and the chronic pain caused by nerve
damage.

"Oh, what a relief it is not to be home alone wondering if this minor-league
marijuana user, if the cops were gonna come bust me down," she says. "It's
nice to feel free."

**The Cartels Stay Strong**

Free at last to smoke marijuana: Since the prohibition on cannabis ended, has
it delivered the results its supporters claimed it would?

With the spiraling drug mayhem in Mexico, some Latin American leaders looked
at legalizing marijuana as a way to deny the murderous cartels a portion of
their profits. When it was banned, marijuana was the greatest source of income
for Mexican traffickers. Now that it's cultivated domestically and sold
legally, surely that has crippled the cartels?

### Commentary

What If Marijuana Were Legal? Possible Outcomes April 20, 2009

Puff, Puff, Keep Drug Laws Passed April 20, 2009

"These are crooks. You're not gonna take 'em out of the criminal activity
business," says Robert Almonte, who worked narcotics for 25 years with the El
Paso Police Department, just across the river from the ruthless Juarez Cartel.
"Because drugs are legalized, they're not gonna say, 'Let's go back to school
and get an honest job.' "

Almonte, director of the Texas Narcotic Officer's Association, says all
cannabis legalization has done is force the drug mafias to improvise.

"As far as marijuana is concerned, they have been selling it less expensive
than what it can sell for here in the United States," Almonte says. "But more
importantly, we're seeing a more potent marijuana. And with that we're seeing
an increase in the emergency room admissions."

A similar observation comes from William Martin, a drug policy expert and
senior fellow at the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy at Rice
University in Houston.

"Just as after the repeal of prohibition, organized crime got into many other
kinds of activities — protection money, control of the laundry business — so
the drug cartels are quite flexible," Martin says. "They've diversified into
kidnapping, human trafficking, protection other crime. And they're still
selling cocaine, heroin and meth, which are highly profitable. So
unfortunately, it has not hurt them as much as we'd hoped."

**Fewer Criminal Cases, Records**

Supporters of legalization say one of the undeniable benefits has been the
reduction in criminal cases that have clogged courts.

"I used to represent a lot of marijuana smokers and dope dealers," says Gerry
Goldstein, a prominent criminal defense lawyer in San Antonio.

Though he is not billing as many hourly fees these days, he believes that's a
good thing for the criminal justice system.

"Back in 2006 to 2008, 45 percent of all drug arrests in this country for the
most part were marijuana offenses," Goldstein says. "That's a staggering waste
of resources of our law enforcement."

And it left young people scarred with criminal records for something that is
arguably less dangerous than alcohol, Bill Martin says.

"If they were convicted, they could lose employment, child custody, student
aid, voting privileges, some welfare benefits. They could even forfeit assets
like cars or houses. The new regime has eliminated that. Problem users are now
being treated as a public health matter and not as a criminal issue, and
that's appropriate," he says.

**It Wouldn't Fill Government Coffers**

Since marijuana became legal, farmers around the country — illicit and
formerly illicit — have scrambled to put _Cannabis sativa_ seeds into the
ground. Under the law, they pay $1,000 for a state license, whether their crop
is hydroponic or soil-grown.

"The marijuana crop's been going really good. Just wait till the last frost,
just start puttin' the plants in the ground, and add a little nitrogen
fertilizer to give you a lotta leaf, and after that it just grows like a weed,
which is what it is," says Larry Butler. He stands among the crop rows at his
Boggy Creek Farm, a 5-acre certified organic urban farm in Austin, Texas.

His wife, Carol Ann Sayle, says they've been a bit disappointed by their
newest cash crop and are nervous about losing the farm's family ambiance.

"The retailer takes a big hit off the bong, so to speak, and then the
government comes in with their taxes," Sayle says. "So what's left for the
farmer? After all that work and trying to ease peoples' fears that we're gonna
be giving it to children. So, what's left for the farmer? Stems and seeds is
about all that's left."

Jeffrey Miron, a Harvard economist who has modeled and written on the
economics of the marijuana market, figures state and federal taxes on cannabis
sales add up to $6.7 billion annually.

And he calculates the savings from not having to enforce state and federal
marijuana laws — in arrests, prosecution and incarceration — at $12.9 billion
a year. Excluding additional expenses, such as the public health cost of
marijuana, or the cost of administering the new law, Miron figures that legal
pot creates almost a $20 billion bonus. Miron adds, however, that the people
who thought the taxation of marijuana would create a windfall for government
coffers will be disappointed.

"Compared to the size of most federal government agencies, compared to the tax
revenue from things like alcohol and tobacco, and certainly compared to the
size of deficits that we have, this is just not a major issue, it is not a
panacea, it is not curing any of our significant ills," he says. "There may be
good reasons to do it, but the budgetary part is not a crucial reason to do
it."

**There Are More People Smoking It**

Now that marijuana is legal to possess, use, process, transfer, transport,
retail, wholesale and cultivate, has the United States become a nation of
potheads?

The Dutch experiment offers an interesting case study. After marijuana was
decriminalized there in 1976, pot smoking didn't jump in Holland, and it
remained well below U.S. levels. But it rose sharply after coffee shops opened
in the 1980s and began openly selling cannabis. The U.S. already has a huge
appetite for drugs: It's the largest illegal narcotics market in the world.
Half of all high-school seniors have used pot.

Drug policy analysts interviewed for this report believe that now that
marijuana is legal and socially acceptable in the U.S., there are more people
smoking it. And some of them are kids.

"They'll start using it sooner now because it looks like it's more OK, seems
less harmful, because they see their parents doing it," says Rosalie Pacula,
co-director of the Drug Policy Research Center at the RAND Corp. "Do we know
how to keep kids from drinking alcohol? No, we don't. So why would we expect
we'd be any better at it with marijuana?"

And the reason we should care is because of the effect that marijuana can have
on the development of adolescent brains, says Dr. Vicki Nejtek, a research
doctor who works on drug abuse at the University of North Texas Health Science
Center in Fort Worth.

"We know that marijuana use and chronic use, as it is now, in an adolescent
population can cause extreme developmental delay," Nejtek says. "We know the
myelin sheath around our brain cells acts like an insulator to an electric
cord. When that's stripped away, it can cause memory loss, it reduces our
ability to concentrate, and a reduction in brain cell activity."

In 2007, 14.4 million Americans ages 12 and older admitted to survey-takers
that they had used pot in the past month. Rice University's Bill Martin
believes, now that it's legal, about one-third more people are using marijuana
— maybe 19 million Americans. Martin believes legal pot — which is, after all,
an intoxicant — has been good for society but bad for young people.

"I have nine grandchildren," he says. "I would prefer that none of them use
marijuana to any significant extent. I have seen students, I've seen friends,
become less interesting."

NPR's fictitious scenario of legalized marijuana is not likely to come true
anytime soon. Most states are still fighting to legalize medical marijuana and
decriminalize marijuana penalties, much less seriously considering
legalization. President Obama is on record opposing legalizing pot as a way to
boost the economy. For now, whether legal cannabis would cause an outbreak of
reefer madness or make more people just mellow out, makes for an interesting
parlor game. But it's only a pipe dream.

  * **Facebook**
  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

#### Tuesday, June 11th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/731545443/731548267" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

##### Up First

#### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

###### Read & Listen

  * Home
  * News
  * Arts & Life
  * Music
  * Podcasts
  * Programs

###### Connect

  * Newsletters
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * Contact
  * Help

###### About NPR

  * Overview
  * Finances
  * People
  * Press
  * Public Editor
  * Corrections

###### Get Involved

  * Support Public Radio
  * Sponsor NPR
  * NPR Careers
  * NPR Shop
  * NPR Events
  * Visit NPR

  * Terms of Use

  * Privacy
  * Your Privacy Choices
  * Text Only
  * 

NPR thanks our sponsors

Become an NPR sponsor

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

