

Press J to jump to the feed. Press question mark to learn the rest of the
keyboard shortcuts

r/psychotherapy![](https://styles.redditmedia.com/t5_2sodo/styles/communityIcon_6gvz501chvh01.png)

log insign up

User account menu

r/

# psychotherapy

PostsUsers to InterviewBooks and Podcasts

__

38

__

Posted by

u/jtaulbee

M.A., LCPC - USA1 year ago

_Archived_

## Clients who self-medicate with marijuana

![](https://www.redditstatic.com/desktop2x/img/renderTimingPixel.png)

With marijuana becoming legalized and increasingly normalized in America, I've
noticed an increase in clients who admit to regularly using marijuana to self-
medicate for a variety of problems (pain, sleep, anxiety, depression, etc).
I'm finding it difficult to formulate a solid opinion on this issue and how to
address it with clients. On the one hand, marijuana is a drug that poses some
risk of addiction. Self-medication, particularly with mental illness, is
always a red flag. There are some risks of interactions with medications. And
of course, it's still illegal in most states.

On the other hand, there is growing evidence that marijuana does have
medicinal properties for a variety of problems. Its risk profile for most
people is quite low; given the epidemic of addiction to prescription opioids
and benzos, using marijuana to manage pain might actually be the safer option.
Unless the client is exhibiting signs of abusing or becoming dependent on
marijuana, it doesn't seem that it is objectively more harmful than having a
glass of wine or taking a sleeping pill before bed.

This leaves me very ambivalent about how to approach this issue: if a client
regularly uses marijuana to self-medicate pain/sleep/mood issues, reports
feeling that it has been beneficial, and does not report problems stemming
from its use, is this something that I should still be concerned about? Or
might this be a "if it ain't broke, don't fix it" kind of situation?

__26 comments

__share

__

save

__

hide

__

report

__

100% Upvoted

__

This thread is archived

New comments cannot be posted and votes cannot be cast

Sort by

best

besttopnewcontroversialoldq&a

__

__

__

level 1

abituntangled

Marriage & Family Therapist32 points · 1 year ago

I work and specialize in drug and alcohol treatment and see both sides of the
coin. I also struggle with this dilemma.

On one hand, marijuana does have the risk for abuse and self-medication,
especially when the individual has a mental disorder like depression or
anxiety. On the other hand, it does have several beneficial properties that
can actually improve the symptoms of these disorders. So, it's a toss-up.

As a rule of thumb, I think it's always best to explore the client's motives,
feelings, and concerns about their use. Typically, I start getting concerned
if it's slowly or insidiously getting in the way of other areas of functioning
(their relationships, neglecting other things they enjoy, etc.)

I don't believe that self-medication is necessarily "detrimental" to emotional
growth, but I do believe that it poses serious risk and should be discussed in
a collaborative and safe manner.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

Snushine

Professional Counselor24 points · 1 year ago

I came here to say: please oh please can we get some empirical damn studies
done on it already? Can we put this science on par with the science about
opioids and alcohol? Without all the political rhetoric surrounding it?

Just some fuckin' solid science...that's all I'm askin'...

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

jtaulbee

M.A., LCPC - USA _Original Poster_ 3 points · 1 year ago

^ This, 100%.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

[deleted]

2 points · 1 year ago

Agreed. Let's get that research going. :)

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

[deleted]

13 points · 1 year ago · edited 1 year ago

I think an important thing to remember is to look at marijuana like we would
any other substance. What function is it serving? It is causing problems in
their daily life/functioning? Any use of substance (or "self-medicating")
serves a purpose. Find out what the benefits of using it are for them, if it's
getting the way of any goals/other coping, etc.

TLDR: just realized I basically repeated what most others have said. :)

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

psilosyn

6 points · 1 year ago · edited 1 year ago

As someone who has used marijuana for almost 10 years, finishing my psych
degree in a few months, I think this is a complex issue that not only depends
on the individual and the context, but also the individual specific instances
they choose to use it in. Over the past few months I have noticed a tendency
to use marijuana in times of stress--sometimes it's the first thing I think of
\--others it's food or some other coping mechanism. And I have largely attuned
myself and become aware of when it is I use it this way. On the other hand, I
sometimes make a calculated decision to use it in order to get into a specific
space of mind, out of which comes a number of meaningful insights about my
life, including about ruminations, stressors and other pre-occupations. In
this half hour experience or so, I face a number of stressful thoughts and
ideas which I internalize, and I almost universally come to some productive
conclusion or gain a flash of insight--that sticks with me and doesn't
dissipate with the high (these are real insights, and it's hard to make that
point stick with non-users). For example, a week ago a good friend of mine
commented about how weird I am for keeping a pair of pants out in my room
rather than putting them away, and laughingly said I should stop doing that.
Since then I started thinking that maybe I should move the pants... It was
only once I got stoned that I realized it would beyond ridiculous to take this
comment with any degree of seriousness. I laughed about it and realized
there's lots of friendly banter that shouldn't be taken personally, especially
when they're less familiar with your life than you are. This has given me
perspective. Marijuana gives me this type of experience consistently, and is
one of the main reasons I use it. It's an intellectual high, and allows me to
analyze and tune into my anxieties to better understand them. Any paranoia
generated is about _real_ things and it dissipates as these things are
identified, confronted and dealt with. Some people don 't want to deal with
facing the anxieties it brings up, but I think I'm a lot more developed as a
social being because of it. I have more to say but hopefully this provides you
with some perspective. I should note that I do worry about my use as I often
struggle to decide whether it's a good idea or not to smoke up. I know it will
make me recede into my thoughts and sap my extroversion and charisma, and I'll
be tired for a few hours afterward, and might not feel like doing much
(although having a schedule makes it a non-issue). But due to its propensity
to engender these states of mind which are intensely valuable, from a
personally meaningful and practical point of view, I feel it would be best
used ritualistically.

So after all this time, I'm pretty familiar with the up and downsides. But I
know enough to know that the marijuana issue is complex and should be treated
on an individual basis. In the end, I would LIKE to live life without smoking
weed because of its downsides, but the benefits it provides me have so far
prevented me from seeing that as the right decision. I think we all know weed
isn't for everyone. But it does have uses. I can only speak from experience,
but one that's echoed among many.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

Schnauzer2112

7 points · 1 year ago · edited 1 year ago

I too have smoked marijuana for a number of years and have had a similar
experience to what you describe. For me I choose to smoke at the end of the
day while I sit down to watch TV and settle in for the evening. I do sometimes
crave it during the day but it's the same extent to which I crave a cold can
of coke on a warm day. It's more of a "ah, that'd be nice" than a "need it
now" kind of feeling. I do worry about becoming dependent on it to help me
sleep as I have a smoke before bed nearly every night but I think the benefits
outweigh the costs for me personally. Having a smoke allows me to relax, clear
my head, and think about things from a different perspective. I have had
chronic depression and anxiety for a long time now and in some ways I feel
this drug has saved my life in that it never fails to raise my spirits and get
me out of a funk when I feel a period of depression settling in. At these
times it alleviates the mind-numbing existential boredom and stops the
ruminating thoughts in their tracks. Nice to hear from another healthcare
person who smokes marijuana. I know we're out there but it is obviously still
pretty hush hush. It will be interesting to see if and how things change once
it is legalized here!

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

__

level 3

teaparties-tornados

MA, Associate MFT - CA6 points · 1 year ago

Wanted to second the sentiment that it's nice seeing other healthcare
professionals talk about their responsible marijuana use. I've also been
smoking 2-3x a week since my undergrad days, generally limited to weekends
when I want to relax and watch movies, but sometimes on a weeknight if that
day had been particularly stressful or to help me fall asleep. I've also been
exploring different strains/products for headache relief.

I was just in a clinical training this week where we shared our various coping
skills, both good and less good. "Having a glass (or 2) of wine after a
stressful day" came up and nobody batted an eye about that being a relatively
harmless coping tool (moderation of course). I really wanted to bring up
smoking a bowl after a stressful day as it's equivalent, but even though I
live in a progressive area that recently legalized recreation marijuana, I
didn't feel comfortable putting that on the board and potentially being
judged. It's funny how co-workers going out for a few drinks at Friday happy
hour is totally accepted but I feel I can only tell a handful of close
colleague-friends about my moderate and legal marijuana use.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

xSals

11 points · 1 year ago · edited 1 year ago

Touchy subject here. I don't mean to generalize, however, I feel as though
many people who use marijuana are tied to the old axiom of using "intellect as
a defense." In this way, I mean that what I have seen personally is that
people who abuse marijuana (more often than not) do not directly question
their use, and will only point to scientifically/socially accepted reasons as
to why the drug is good. They won't face their subjective reality, but they
will objectively point to how the drug is viewed by science/society, which is
now more benevolent than ever. I would suggest being suggestive (in the
therapy) without infringing on their personal choice to use. Drug use and
other vices that are avenues to self medication are generally accepted by
clinicians as being detrimental to emotional growth, so it would probably be
wise to be confrontational to a degree but in a way where you do not break any
ethical codes in the process. I believe that if psychotherapy is to aid, then
the therapy itself should be a drug along with other coping mechanisms that
you can teach the client^

I hope this made sense and can help you. I'm open to criticism/any feedback.

edits = ^

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

evilqueenoftherealm

5 points · 1 year ago

I think you might be saying that many people who use cannabis are emotionally
avoidant. If so, then I have to say I agree with you: most of my clients who
use cannabis regularly use it to down-regulate emotions as much as anything
else, and this can really interfere with doing the therapeutic work of
learning to process negative emotions.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

__

level 3

xSals

4 points · 1 year ago

Exactly my point. With harder drugs, I find that clients tend to be more
willing to acknowledge the threat of their usage, but with cannabis on the
other hand, it is not that easy.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

rubina19

-4 points · 1 year ago

It doesn't flow- your verbiage is odd

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

__

level 3

xSals

1 point · 1 year ago

Please excuse me. Writing isn't my strong suit :-/

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

noobpsych

PsyD, Psychologist - USA8 points · 1 year ago

I look at marijuana use the same as I look at alcohol use: is it currently or
becoming a problem in your life? Do you smoke/drink as a crutch? Do people
have anything to say about your habits? What would happen if you couldn't
smoke/drink for a month- how would you feel?

For what its worth, I live in a state with basically no decriminalization of
marijuana, no medical use, etc. Dealing with the legal risk of possessing weed
would be dealt with in my line of questioning about smoking becoming a
"problem".

I tend to perk up an ear more readily when a client is drinking and taking
psych meds than smoking.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

jtaulbee

M.A., LCPC - USA _Original Poster_ 3 points · 1 year ago

I totally agree, I tend to think about it in a similar way to alcohol. Where
I'm getting stuck is when it's being used for seemingly medical purposes... if
someone was drinking a 12-pack every night to deal with a bad back, it would
obviously be a red flag for alcoholism. If someone was smoking every night to
manage their pain, however... it still might be drug abuse, but it has more
face validity.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

__

level 3

noobpsych

PsyD, Psychologist - USA9 points · 1 year ago

Hmm.. yeah. I see the conundrum. Let me throw this one atcha:

Client with bad back is prescribed a lot of narcotic painkillers (lets say 6-8
hydrocodone 10s per day). Taking them basically as prescribed, not "abusing"
them.

How would you say this situation fits into the beer/weed matrix?

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

muggleth0ught

4 points · 1 year ago

Helped develop our clinical policies at our opioid treatment clinic.

Focusing on harm is important. With opioid dependency, we don't want to be
kicking people out of treatment for marijuana use. But it can lead to cross-
addictive behaviors and so we still discuss with patients. Enough times and we
have additional monitoring or marijuana classes.

I'd say consider the objective here. Are they coming to you for severe
childhood trauma? As part of family therapy? Help with something unrelated? We
really try to focus on the chief complaint. The patient may not be aware that
marijuana is their chief complaint (i.e. most serious issue wrong with them)
and there are multiple ways to address it.

Motivational interviewing is the style of counseling typically most
recommended for addressing substance use. Allows you to inquire about
cognitive dissonance that surrounds substance use disorders. The keyword is
_disorder_ \- try to identify if there are any problems caused by use.
Otherwise you are pushing your values on others and it is unlikely to do much
more than alienate your patients.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

Firkarg

6 points · 1 year ago

Since no one else has answered yet (as of writing) I thought I'd chime in. A
caveat that I'm not in the US though so I've not had to deal with the legality
issue.

Firstly it should be noted that the efficency of a drug for one situation does
not remedy it in another. Just because Marijuana might be an effective
medication for chronic pain does not mean that it's a good medication for
anything else. Secondly any kind of self medication is, as you rightly point
out, a red flag. Usually because it treats symptoms and not anything
underlying. The main risk here is that the patient will persist in a "good
enough" state that isn't conductive of change. Follow up risks are of course
that while there is only a limited chemical dependency from marijuana there is
a large habitual dependency especially for ritualistic behaviours such as
sleeping. Thirdly there are some very worrying evidence for the impact on
cognitive functions for heavy and/or young users, not to mention the risk for
actual psychosis. Finally where I personally draw the "therapeutic line" is
when the usage goes from a purely pleasure or leisure use to something that
has another motive. I don't care if someone uses it occasionally for pleasure
but if there are other reasons then at the very least it will make them less
motivated to change/therapy or have possible harmful effects. Thus it is
broken so try to fix it :)

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

dustnbonez

5 points · 1 year ago

IMO marijuana does not interact with other medication and is very safe to use.
It just depends how and how much you are using it. When working with clients
of various disorders I want to know the frequency and when there using the
drug.

Even if they do not use it excessively I want to know when they use it. Do
they smoke up before going out on social outings ? Probably not the best use
of the drug.

Do they use it once a week to play video games or laugh with friends and eat
some pizza? I don't see a reason to be concerned.

Even regardless of the frequency I always educate on the pros and cons and let
the client sit with that. If I am working with a client who is abusing the
drug yet wanting help for social anxiety or depression I will motivational
interview and likely give them some time. Ultimately if they do not make
changes with their use of the drug I will discontinue service as any other
therapy will not be effective giving the client abusing it.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

lavenderamethyst

2 points · 1 year ago

I live in Oregon where it's legal. One way that I've devised to determine if
there is an issue is to ask a client who smokes pot, and who says it's for
medical reasons, if they would stop smoking and instead ingest CBD (the
medicinal bit, not the psychoactive THC part) oil or tincture instead. If they
are truly only using it for medicinal purposes, then this should be received
well. If there is otherwise addiction to the THC or the smoking or both, they
will be reluctant and that is something to explore.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

katie3294

MA, LMHC, US2 points · 1 year ago

For patients experiencing chronic pain, I can completely understand and
support treating it with marijuana instead of pain pills. During grad school,
I was in a pretty bad accident and was put on up to 100mg of oxys a day by my
surgeons. The pain was so bad that I couldn't keep food down most days.
Eventually, I was sent to the hospital's pain clinic where I was put on
morphine and oxycontin pretty much full time. Docs can be pretty useless when
it comes to treating chronic pain, and I hated feeling like a pill seeker.
Plus, the side effects of all of the pain meds were awful, and I was down to
85 pounds at one point.

When I got my medical card, I was finally able to stop taking morphine and eat
again. My pain felt more under control, and I didn't have bad pain spikes once
the pills wore off. The dispensary workers always treated me compassionately,
instead of like my pain was an annoying problem that the surgeons couldn't
fix. It really was the best choice for me, and drastically improved my quality
of life. Eventually, I was able to reduce my use as I learned to manage the
pain through mindfulness and relaxation exercises. But I couldn't even begin
to start this work until my pain was at a manageable level . I know I've
rambled on, so I guess the bottom line is, I'd encourage therapists to ask
clients what their experience has been in treating these conditions before
choosing marijuana. In many cases, it's the safest way to keep debilitating
conditions under control.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

__

level 2

jtaulbee

M.A., LCPC - USA _Original Poster_ 3 points · 1 year ago

Thank you for sharing your story! I totally agree with you - pain management
is a huge problem, and I've seen firsthand the damage that the over-
prescription of opioid pain medication is causing to clients. I fully support
the use of medical marijuana as an alternative, and I can't wait until we
finally legalize it and get some good research on the most efficacious way to
use it.

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

redditKMC

2 points · 1 year ago

I grew up priding myself on that fact that I never used "illegal" substances
that would harm me, including marijuana. Years ago, I was prescribed 1mg
klonopin for sleep, and took it exactly as prescribed. When I tapered off last
fall to try to get pregnant, I found the klonopin destroyed my nervous system.
I have been off for 10 months, and the pain I am in daily is unbearable (my
nervous system went crazy and is causing severe muscle spasms which are so
intense they have left me with bruises - I have fainted on a few occasions
from the intensity of the pain). There is nothing doctors can do, so I tried
marijuana. This has been the only thing that has helped with pain and sleep,
and is the only reason I didn't kill myself due to the pain. For years I
thought marijuana was terrible, but after doing quite a bit of research
(through medical journals and peer reviewed articles) , I found there are very
few negative side effects to marijuana, and it is actually safer than many
prescription drugs on the market. There is some question as to the safety of
marijuana before the age of 25, (before age 25, our brains our still
developing), but after that point, occasional use seems to not only be safe,
but actually have neuro-protective properties. The only time I would be
concerned if a patient used marijuana would be if it was a male under the age
of 25 who had a genetic predisposition for schizophrenia - there is some
evidence showing that there is a correlation between using marijuana and
developing schizophrenia in males who are genetically predisposed to it (but
not females, go figure).

Recovery clinics are starting to use marijuana to get patients off of other
medications - they are now saying that marijuana is more of an exit drug for
other meds than a gateway drug, as previously thought. Also, a recent study in
canada showed that many patients were able to reduce the use of
antidepressants and anti-anxiety meds by using marijuana. (Granted, this will
not work for everyone, and some people do get paranoid or anxious from
marijuana - but this goes away in a few hours if it happens). I'm not sure of
the exact numbers, but I believe there was somewhere between a 40-60 percent
decrease in the amount of psych drugs consumed.

I think the biggest factor is how the person can function on it. If a patient
is using it to escape life, then it should be discouraged. If a patient is
using it to help with sleep or anxiety, and is otherwise able to function, why
would anyone discourage it. I am not a doctor, but if a patient told me they
were using something that helped them out, they functioned better on it, and
it had fewer side effects and negative long consequences than many psych meds,
there would be no reason to make them stop, only to try to revolving carousel
of psych meds, hoping to find one that helps. I am not against the use of
psych drugs, I have seen people have their lives saved by them; however, I
have also seen people completely destroyed by psychiatric medication
(akathisia, tardive dyskinesia, and crippling withdrawal from meds). A
psychologists job is to help people cope with their difficulties and be more
functional, and if they found something that is allowing them to do this, I
see no reason to change it!

share

reportSave

__

__

__

level 1

LiesBuried

1 point · 1 year ago

If it's not affecting day to day activities/life I wouldn't question it no
more than you would question a person that smokes cigarettes.

share

reportSave

View entire discussion (26 comments)

More posts from the psychotherapy community

Continue browsing in r/psychotherapy

Community Details

![](https://styles.redditmedia.com/t5_2sodo/styles/communityIcon_6gvz501chvh01.png)r/psychotherapy

33.7k

Members

63

Online

This is a place where mental health professionals and students can share and
discuss topics related to psychotherapy. We encourage discussion of
therapeutic techniques, information related to careers in therapy, and
dissection of case studies. We invite links that contribute to this subreddit;
such links may include information related to practice, therapeutic
approaches, and new research.

JoinCreate post

r/psychotherapy Rules

1.

No Psychological help, opinions, or advice.

2.

Posts should protect the identity of the client

3.

No self-marketing or self-promotion

4.

Follow the reddiquette

5.

No harassing or unrelated client comments

6.

Career and Education Question

7.

Only relevant research

8.

Falsely posing as a therapist

Resources

Book Recommendations by Topic or Theory

Podcast Recommendations

View our List of Users Willing to be Interviewed

View the archive of past Weekly Discussions.

View our wiki on Careers in Mental Health or the previous Education & Career
Advice Megathreads

Suicide Risk Assessment Resources

Sort by type of post

Apps

Billing / Finances

Career/Education

Documentation

Ethics

Grief / Loss

Group therapy

Humor

Private Practice

Research Request

Resources

Self-Care

Substance use

Support

Training / CEUs

Trauma

Theory

Moderators

__

u/caleser

M.S., LPC - USA

u/ForeverJung

Shrinky Dink :snoo_joy:

u/AutoModerator

Bot., ELIZA - Everywhere

u/aguane

Psy.D., Psychologist - USA

View All Moderators

aboutcareerspress

advertisebloghelp

the reddit appreddit coinsreddit premiumreddit gifts

content policy| privacy policy

user agreement| mod policy

© 2019 Reddit, Inc. All rights reserved

Back to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

