

# Alcohol-related traffic crashes in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Alcohol-related traffic crashes in the United States" – news
**·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( August 2008)_
_(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

\---|---

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e2/2014_Traffic_Deaths_Above_0.08_BAC.png/220px-2014_Traffic_Deaths_Above_0.08_BAC.png)

2014 Traffic Deaths due to crashes involving drivers at or above 0.08 BAC [1]

**Alcohol-related traffic crashes** are defined by the United States National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) as alcohol-related if either a
driver or a non-motorist had a measurable or estimated BAC of 0.01 g/dl or
above.[2]

This statistic includes any and all vehicular (including bicycle and
motorcycle) accidents in which any alcohol has been consumed, or believed to
have been consumed, by the driver, a passenger or a pedestrian associated with
the accident. Thus, if a person who has consumed alcohol and has stopped for a
red light is rear-ended by a completely sober but inattentive driver, the
accident is listed as alcohol-related, although alcohol had nothing to do with
causing the accident. Furthermore, if a sober motorist hits a drunk
pedestrian, the accident is also listed as alcohol-related. Alcohol-related
accidents are often mistakenly confused with alcohol-caused accidents.
Some[3][4] have criticized the NHTSA for compiling this statistic since it may
give the impression that drunk drivers cause a much higher percentage of
accidents and does not accurately reflect the problem of drunk driving in the
United States.

Nationally, 12.8% of all drivers involved in fatal accidents during 2013 are
known to have been intoxicated according to the blood alcohol concentration
(BAC laws) of their state.[5] This number is based on a systematic examination
of the official records of each and every accident involving a fatality during
that year in the US.[ _citation needed_ ] However, a majority of fatalities
resulting from car accidents involving alcohol are from sober drivers who are
hit by drunk drivers.

The higher number (about 40%) commonly reported refers to accidents defined as
alcohol-related as estimated by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration.

Each year, The Century Council, a national non-profit organization funded by a
group of alcohol manufacturers, compiles a document of alcohol-related traffic
fatalities. Between 1991 and 2013, the rate of alcohol-related traffic
fatalities (ARTF) per 100,000 population has decreased 52% nationally, and 79%
among youth under 21.[6]

## See also[edit]

  * Foundation for Advancing Alcohol Responsibility, funded by a group of distillers
  * Mothers Against Drunk Driving
  * Transportation safety in the United States

## References[edit]

  1. **^** [1]
  2. **^** [2]
  3. **^** https://www.motorists.org
  4. **^** http://www.alcoholproblemsandsolutions.org/Controversies/1090948932.html
  5. **^** http://www.alcoholalert.com/teenage-drunk-driving.html
  6. **^** The Century Council's Research

## External links[edit]

  * Traffic Safety Facts: Alcohol-Impaired Driving, NHTSA
  * Drunk Driving Fatalities, Foundation for Advancing Alcohol Responsibility

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alcohol-
related_traffic_crashes_in_the_United_States&oldid=882277958"

Categories:

  * Transportation in the United States
  * Alcohol in the United States
  * Driving under the influence

Hidden categories:

  * Articles needing additional references from August 2008
  * All articles needing additional references
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2008

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

Add links

  * This page was last edited on 7 February 2019, at 23:58 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

