

__

## PLOS Blogs

  * Staff Blogs

back

## Staff Blogs

    
    
      * The Official PLOS Blog
      * EveryONE
      * Speaking of Medicine
      * PLOS Biologue
      * PLOS Channels & Collections
    

  * Blogs by Topic

back

## Blogs by Topic

    
    
    * Biology & Life Sciences
    

## Biology & Life Sciences

back

    
    
        * Synthetic Biology
        * Neuroscience
        * DNA Science
    
    * Earth & Environmental Sciences
    

back

## Earth & Environmental Sciences

    
    
        * Ecology Community
        * Paleo Community
        * All Models are Wrong
    
    * Multi-disciplinary Sciences
    

back

## Multi-disciplinary Sciences

    
    
        * PLOS ECR Community
    
    * Medicine & Health
    

back

## Medicine & Health

    
    
        * About PLOS BLOGS
        * Contact
        * Home
        * PLOS BLOGS Community Guidelines
        * Signup Error
        * Signup Successful
        * Sitemap Index
    
    * Research Analysis & Scientific Policy
    

back

## Research Analysis & Scientific Policy

    
    
        * Absolutely Maybe
        * SciComm
    

  * About PLOS Blogs
  * Contact
  *   * PLOS.ORG

  * PUBLICATIONS
  * 

# ![PLOS Blogs Logo](https://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/wp-

content/themes/genesis-plos/assets/images/plos_logo.png)

Diverse perspectives on science and medicine

  * Staff Blogs

    * The Official PLOS Blog
    * EveryONE
    * Speaking of Medicine
    * PLOS Biologue
    * PLOS Channels & Collections
    * Blogs by Topic

    * Biology & Life Sciences

    * Synthetic Biology

    * Neuroscience
    * DNA Science
    * Earth & Environmental Sciences

    * Ecology Community

    * Paleo Community
    * All Models are Wrong
    * Multi-disciplinary Sciences

    * PLOS ECR Community

    * Medicine & Health

      * About PLOS BLOGS
      * Contact
      * Home
      * PLOS BLOGS Community Guidelines
      * Signup Error
      * Signup Successful
      * Sitemap Index
    * Research Analysis & Scientific Policy

    * Absolutely Maybe

    * SciComm
    * About PLOS Blogs
    * Contact
    * __

__

![](https://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2015/10/dna-science_header.gif)

  * About This Blog
  * 

## Post navigation

__Previous

Next __

![](https://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2013/10/embryofetus-690x320.jpg)

# When Does a Human Life Begin? 17 Timepoints

Posted October 3, 2013 by Ricki Lewis, PhD in Uncategorized

I rerun this most-read post about when human life begins every time that the
discussion resurges, which is usually in the shadow of proposed restrictions
on women's reproductive rights. Strong feelings always seem to trump
biological facts. Confusion among politicians appears to be apparent
concerning when certain events begin or structures appear; whether to track
development from fertilization (conception) or the last menstrual period; and
even the distinction between an embryo and a fetus. A 4 or 6 week prenatal
human is _not_ a fetus -- the difference is not arbitrary, it has biological
meaning.

_From October 3, 2013_

![Embryo,_8_cells,_transparent_image](http://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2014/02/Embryo_8_cells_transparent_image-150x150.png)
I’m the author of several college-level textbooks, on human genetics, human
anatomy and physiology, and intro biology. I've been in this business for
decades.

Life science textbooks from traditional publishers don’t explicitly state when
life begins, because that is a question not only of biology, but of
philosophy, politics, psychology, religion, technology, and emotions. Rather,
textbooks list the characteristics of life, leaving interpretation to the
reader. But I can see where the disingenuous idea comes from that textbooks
define life as beginning at conception -- it requires a leap off the page.
Consider a report from the Association of Pro-life Physicians. After a 5-point
list of life's characteristics from "a scientific textbook," this group's
analysis concludes with "According to this elementary definition of life, life
begins at fertilization, when a sperm unites with an oocyte."

Being a biologist, a textbook author, and a mother, I’ve thought a great deal
about the question of when a human life begins. So here are my selections of
times at which a biologist might argue a human organism is alive. I’ll save my
opinion for the end.

1\. _Life is a continuum._ Gametes (sperm and oocyte) link generations.

2\. _The germline._ As oocytes and sperm form, their imprints – epigenetic
changes from the parents’ genomes – are lifted.

![A human fertilized ovum. \(Spike Walker, Wellcome

Images\)](http://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2013/10/fert-

ovum-150x150.jpg) A human fertilized ovum. (Spike Walker, Wellcome Images)

3\. _The fertilized ovum_. Of the hundreds of sperm surviving the swim
upstream to the oocyte, one jettisons its tail and nuzzles inside the much
larger cell, which becomes an ovum, completing its own meiosis. A fertilized
ovum = conception.

4\. _Pronuclei merge, within 12 hours._ After fertilization, the packets of
DNA from male and female -- the pronuclei -- approach, merge, and the
intermingling chromosomes pair and part, as the first mitotic division looms.
A new human genome forms. Following that first division, some genes from the
new genome are accessed to make proteins, but maternal transcripts still
dominate development.

5\. _Cleavage_. Divisions ensue. The cells of an 8-celled embryo (day 3) have
not yet committed to becoming part of the embryo "proper" (one with layers) or
the supportive membranes. Such a cell can still, on its own, develop. An
8-celled embryo whose cells are teased apart could lead to an octamom
situation.

![A day 5 human embryo, at upper left. \(David Becher, Wellcome

Images\)](http://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2013/10/5-day-150x150.jpg) A
day 5 human embryo, at upper left. (David Becher, Wellcome Images)

6\. _Day 5_. The new genome takes over as maternal transcripts are depleted.
The inner cell mass (icm) separates from the hollow ball of cells and takes up
residence on the interior surface. It will become the embryo proper,
distinguishing itself from the remaining part of the ball fated to become the
extra-embryonic membranes. The icm is what all the fuss about human embryonic
stem (hES) cells is about -- the stem cells aren't the icm cells, but are
cultured from them.

7\. _End of the first week_. The embryo implants in the uterine lining.

8\. _Day 16_. The gastrula. Tissue layers form, first the ectoderm and
endoderm, then the sandwich filling, the mesoderm. Each layer gives rise to
specific body parts.

9\. _Day 14_. The primitive streak forms, classically the first sign of a
nervous system and when some nations set the deadline for no longer using
human embryos in experiments.

10\. _Day 18_. The heart beats.

11\. _Day 28_. The notochord closes, and within it the neural tube forms,
preliminary to the spinal cord, while the bulge at the top will come to house
the brain. If the tube doesn’t close completely, a neural tube defect
(anencephaly, spina bifida, and a few others) results.

![A human embryo on the brink of becoming a

fetus.](http://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2013/10/embryofetus-150x150.jpg)
A human embryo on the brink of becoming a fetus.

12\. _End of week 8_. The embryo becomes a fetus, all structures present in
rudimentary form. Attention anti-choice advocates: before this the prenatal
human is _not_ a fetus.

13\. _Week 14 or thereabouts_. “Quickening,” the flutter a woman feels in her
abdomen that will progress to squirms and kicks from within.

14\. _Week 21_. A fetus has a (very slim) chance of becoming a premature baby
if delivered.

15\. _Birth._

16\. _Puberty._ The Darwinian definition of what matters on a population and
species level, when reproduction becomes possible.

17\. _Acceptance into medical school_. I don’t know where this came from, a
joke about Jewish mothers, but in some circles it might now apply to
acceptance into preschool. Or when one 's grown offspring leave home.

My answer? #14. The ability to survive outside the body of another sets a
practical, technological limit on defining when a sustainable human life
begins. That limit may of course change.

![Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail](http://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/files/2013/10/Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail-150x150.jpg)Having
a functional genome, tissue layers, a notochord, a beating heart … none of
these matter if the organism cannot survive where humans survive. Technology
has taken us to the ends of the prenatal spectrum, yet not provided too much
for the middle, other than fetal surgeries for a handful of conditions. We can
collect and select gametes, now thanks to patent no. 8543339. We collect and
select very early embryos in pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, allowing
those without a specific disease to continue development. And although the
gestational age at which a premature infant can survive has crept younger, it
hasn't by much, not since I starting thinking about these things back when I
was a stage #16.

Until an artificial uterus becomes a reality, technology defines, for me, when
a human life begins.

## Post navigation

__Previous

Next __

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/42fdbd1293bf66b1aa2f1874d3a74a1e?s=100&d=monsterid&r=g)

### Ricki Lewis, PhD

  * __
  * __

Ricki Lewis is a science writer with a PhD in genetics. The author of several
textbooks and thousands of articles in scientific, medical, and consumer
publications, Ricki's first narrative nonfiction book, "The Forever Fix: Gene
Therapy and the Boy Who Saved It," was published by St. Martin's Press in
March 2012. In addition to writing, Ricki provides genetic counseling for
parents-to-be at CareNet Medical Group in Schenectady, NY and teaches
"Genethics" an online course for master's degree students at the Alden March
Bioethics Institute of Albany Medical Center.

## 129 comments

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6ac98448d6fc058c12af413905ae8c17?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Chris** says:

October 5, 2013 at 6:03 am

The mere fact that we have to as a society to decide when "life" deserves
protection under the law shows the deteriation of society as a whole.

We are the caretakers of earth; therefore, should value all forms of life with
respect and dignity.

To simply end a "life" because the person has equated it to a nuisance could
possibly be determined to being selfish.

To echo another's sentiments, using technology as basis to determine legality
is a frightening slippery slope.

In the US alone, nearly 40 million fetuses have been "aborted", almost
totaling the number of people who died during WW II.

I wonder if the author realizes the greatest number of clincis per capita are
within areas stricken with poverty. I also fine it ironic that the greatest
number of abortions performed are at places called planned parenthood.

No disease, plague, sickness, cancer, natural disaster, wars, tobacco or any
other form of force that ends life can hold a torch to abortion as the
greatest vehicle of genocide ever.

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cfacfafff8e0fa111c83b93e841a3825?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **David Michelson** says:

October 5, 2013 at 6:42 am

I would say "Thank you all for the enlightening and interesting reading," but
I'll be really tired tomorrow since I couldn't stop reading, so I'll just say
"Good night."

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/210785b14d2c25efde533ed25308b678?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **The Independent Whig** says:

October 5, 2013 at 6:49 am

Thanks to all those who took my question seriously and answered it seriously.

I accept at face value Dr. Lewis’ answer about wanting to write about the
various stages because she’s never seen them all discussed outside of a
textbook.

But that response does not answer my real question: Why is the matter of when
life begins even asked in the first place?

When I wrote the question I thought the short answer was “politics,” but I
think the short answer might be a bit too pat, as “politics” is a loaded word.
Maybe “ethics” is a little less so. But then again, isn’t ethics about the
behaviors and/ or policies that we think are acceptable and not acceptable,
and isn’t that what is about too?

Labels aside, Bob Hunt has two good points. 1) Who has the power to decide who
is expendable and who is not?, and 2) what is the criteria for that decision?

Mveal2006 is also right that at bottom it’s about abortion (which is about
ethics, and politics, and about Hunt’s points).

The comment that has the most resonance with me is the one that David Gaw made
because it encompasses all the others. Further, if we answer his question then
we answer all the others too.

The real point of contention is not in defining when life begins, but in
defining when moral and/or legal rights ensue.

And no, the debate is not about a woman’s right to choose whether or not to
have an abortion. Just as my right to swing my fist ends at the tip of your
nose, a woman’s right to choose abortion ends when that right violates the
rights of another person.

The primary (only?) practical reason we agonize over when life begins is the
presupposition that it is at that point when rights ensue. If not for that
presupposition the debate would be nothing more than an interesting academic
exercise of little or no consequence.

Is the presupposition correct? (I think not).

Of the many definitions of when life might begin, most of the debate seems to
be centered around the point at which the fetus could survive outside the
womb. Sharon makes this point quite eloquently, but I’ll add a couple thoughts
anyway.

It seems that some argue that it takes extreme measures of care for premature
babies to survive, and so even survival outside the womb is not the point at
which rights ensue. But aren’t even full term babies incapable of surviving
without care? So isn’t the question of viability really a question of relative
amounts of care? And eo we really want to go down the path of deciding when
life begins and therefore when rights ensue based on some predetermined level
of care, which means dollars?

And anyway, isn’t the point at which a fetus can survive much earlier today
than it was 10, 20, or 30 years ago? Doesn’t it seem likely that as technology
advances that point will continue to be earlier and earlier? Is it all that
far-fetched to imagine a time 20, 50, 100 years from now when an egg can be
fertilized and grow to full “babyhood” (for lack of a better term) completely
outside the womb?

At some point along that timeline into the future, doesn’t the question of
when life begins become a matter of some arbitrary, academic, definition, and
therefore for all practical purposes moot? How close are we to that point
right now? Have we already passed it and we just don’t know it yet?

The real question, the most important question, the question that will never
become moot, the question for which the matter of when life begins is really
just a proxy, is the one that David Gaw suggested; “When do rights ensue?”

My personal opinion is this: We are all created equal. And while we will
probably never EVER really know, outside of some definition that we ourselves
rationalize, when life actually begins, we DO know the exact instant at which
we are created, and it is in that moment when our rights ensue.

    
    
    1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7333c945a646225507181e936a60a24f?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Rebecca Dalmas** says:
    

October 5, 2013 at 2:48 pm

This question of rights being based on dependency intrigues me. To be blunt,
an embryo or human is often enough referred as a parasite. Yet there are
people in state care, right now, who are legally human, legally alive, who are
completely dependent on constant care.

Some would say that yes, but they can be passed on to another person's care.
That is often, but not always the case. I could be closed off from
civilization for weeks or even months due to living in a remote location in
blizzard conditions, but that does not give me the right to kill my children
or abandon them to die.

The way I see it, we cannot possibly control the gestation of a pregnant
woman, especially against her will, but we also do not have to, as a civilized
society, take part in killing the unborn within her if she does not want to
keep the pregnancy. It is at that point, if she so chooses, that we could say
civilization breaks down in reference to her, it won't support her.  
A woman in this case is not unique. There are endless everyday cases where
civilization breaks and is remended, often entirely depending upon one person
doing what only they can do, whether it be for a minute or an hour, or weeks,
months or years. Conscripted soldiers defend the country. A bystander calls
the police to report criminal activity. Parents feed their children. Adult
children feed and tend to their elderly parents. Doctors, worn to exhaustion,
remain and tend to emergent care cases. Their loved ones wait and support
them. A reluctant leader stands and takes a mantle they don't desire but which
is required for the welfare of the whole.  
There are so many times individuals are called upon by society to bear
adversity, pain, discomfort, even risking their lives just so civilization can
continue. It's not just about life but human life, and what kind of human life
we want to have. Abortion on demand is not civilized.

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f47a6c2057b7fef704a57b322d8034dc?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Bob Berry** says:

October 5, 2013 at 10:56 am

When you argue science, you do not have to even discuss the messy thoughts of
moral decisions. Our declaration of independence states that all humans have
an unalienable right to life, without declaring when that right is in effect.
For me, it is conception, because they are on their way to being born human.

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/10ca6b60a8377d9791f39dd27ebde3fb?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Kyle** says:

October 5, 2013 at 11:00 am

Sadly, Ricki has used imprecise language to confound two different questions,
and therefore she perpetuates confusion. The sperm, egg, and all their
products possess life, and life has been continuous on planet earth for more
than a billion years. The question of when a human life begins is therefore
misleading.

The true question to be debated is: when should our society grant human
rights, and civil rights, to the developing individual?

See how this change of terminology simplifies and clarifies the issue? It also
keeps biologists - like me, who make their careers out of the study of life -
appropriately distanced from the true debate. Our PhD's do not give us special
leverage on this topic.

    
    
    1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/42fdbd1293bf66b1aa2f1874d3a74a1e?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Ricki Lewis, PhD** says:
    

October 5, 2013 at 12:29 pm

My goal was to provide biological information because I am a biologist. I left
the philosophy and bioethics for others.

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7178a34054fb0d532434e812a3ae6ca9?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Thewake52** says:

October 5, 2013 at 12:59 pm

Is a healthy 5 minute old baby truly self "sustaining" outside the womb? Or a
5 week old baby? Or a 5 month old baby? or a 5 year old child? Or a 10 year
old? Is an 85 year old "sustainable" on their own in many cases? Should
culture allow termination of these by others if for someone else the answer
turns out to be "no." And if so, who should that "other" be? The state? The
mother, alone. A child of an elderly parent? Who grants that authority? When
does the other come into its authority to terminate? When does that authority
transfer to the "child"

The idea of sustainability itself seems arbitrary and leads to a myriad of
problems.

Try another approach.

At any step along this process, how ever you define or describe it, the
fertilized egg it will develop into an independent self sustaining entity for
some period of its existence unless some action is taken to prevent it. Now,
of course, many events could derail this process "naturally." But no one
considers an uncontrollable or accidental act to be the willful termination of
life. And really what we are talking about is when is it acceptable for one
human being to make a willful determination to end a life? The Question is
uncomfortable so it is easier to shift the terms of the question to a
definition of life and then to endless discussions about the countless
descriptors we have for the phases of this process: gamete, embryo, baby,
child, adult etc. This seems like a convenient diversion.

The question needs to be focused where it more truly belongs. On the nature of
the termination as an act of will. An act of will to terminate only occurs in
those cases where allowing the process to unfold will produce a child. No act
of will by an other is in play when the termination occurs naturally or
accidentally.

At any stage, again barring the accidental or "natural" failure of some kind,
the fertilized egg will become a "sustainable" human being unless someone
willfully neglects the child, or actively seeks to terminate it. At what ever
stage.

If allowed to unfold the process will produce, inevitably and inexorably what
we will all agree on is a human being. The only thing that will prevent that
is a volitional act of essentially violent interference in this process. This
is true at any and all stages of the process. At 6 weeks, at 14 weeks, at 22
weeks, and so on.

The moment doesn't matter. Every moment along the way is part of a continuum
that connects inextricably with the next moment and carries the full potential
of the next moment within it. Any act at any time that halts this process
prevents a human life from occurring. However you choose to define it.

Again, without that act of will by one human being, another human being will
come into existence. Changing this process anywhere along the continuum
-requires a determined act of alteration of, or interference in, or violation
of the process already underway. "Life" is already underway, in process,
moving forward, and will result in what ever entity you choose to finally call
"life" So, logically, it is life at every point and its life is already
independent since only an act of interference driven by another's will can
change that.

    
    
    1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e0b9df631d52b2c3c8d7a932e2cf8af1?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **petrossa** says:
    

October 5, 2013 at 3:30 pm

This is getting polemic. The basic premise is, is the infant born capable of
full body control functions as it should at the moment of conception. If it
isn't it would die in nature regardless the care of the mother so it isn't
viable. Non-viable life is life that is not meant to be which equals to no
life.

As i said earlier eugenics is a regular daily practice in many civilized parts
of the world. In even more civilized parts even postnatal abortion is possible
within a timeframe of a couple of hours

  1. Pingback: Arguing Eugenics « Mardra Sikora Mardra Sikora

  2. Pingback: Public Schools and the Culture of Death | I Love You but You're Going to Hell

    1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/42fdbd1293bf66b1aa2f1874d3a74a1e?s=56&d=monsterid&r=g) **Ricki Lewis, PhD** says:

October 31, 2013 at 5:30 pm

I am not a "public school textbook author." My textbooks are for college
students.

  1. Pingback: Battle over Birth Control articles | Wende Garrison

Comments are closed.

#### Sign up for PLOS Updates

I have read and agree to the terms of the PLOS Privacy Policy and hereby
consent to send my personal information to PLOS.

#### Tag Cloud

23andMe ALS autism Batten disease bioethics BRCA1 breast cancer Canavan
disease CRISPR CRISPR-Cas9 cystic fibrosis DNA Donald Trump evolution FDA
Foundation Fighting Blindness Francis Collins GAN gene editing gene therapy
genetic counseling genetic disease genetic testing genome editing giant axonal
neuropathy HD human genome Huntington's disease Leber congenital amaurosis
microbiome mitochondrial disease NORD PKU progeria rare disease Rare Disease
Day rare diseases retinitis pigmentosa RPE65 Sanfilippo syndrome Saving Eliza
spinal muscular atrophy stem cells synthetic biology Wayward Pines

#### Archive

  * June 2019
  * May 2019
  * April 2019
  * March 2019
  * February 2019
  * More

![](https://blogs.plos.org/dnascience/wp-content/themes/genesis-

plos/images/plos_logo.png)

  * Home
  * About
  * Guidelines
  * Contact

  * __

  * Login

  * Publications

  * PLOS Biology

  * PLOS Medicine
  * PLOS Computational Biology
  * PLOS Currents
  * PLOS Genetics
  * PLOS Pathogens
  * PLOS ONE
  * PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases

  * Open For Discovery

  * plos.org

  * PLOS Collections
  * PLOS Channels
  * Careers
  * Advertise
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use

single.php

