

the economist

Topicsdown icon

#### Sections

  * Latest updates
  * Leaders
  * Briefing
  * United States
  * The Americas
  * Asia
  * China
  * Middle East and Africa
  * Europe
  * Britain
  * International
  * Business
  * Finance and economics
  * Science and technology
  * Books and arts
  * Graphic detail
  * Obituary
  * Special reports
  * Debates
  * Open Future

#### Blogs

  * Bagehot’s notebook
  * Bartleby
  * Charlemagne’s notebook
  * Democracy in America
  * Erasmus
  * Free exchange
  * Game theory
  * Gulliver
  * Prospero
  * The Economist explains

Current edition

Moredown icon

#### Apps & Digital Editions

  * The Economist apps
  * Espresso
  * Global Business Review
  * World in Figures

#### Other Publications

  * 1843 magazine
  * The World In
  * The World If

#### From The Economist Group

  * Events
  * Online GMAT prep
  * Online GRE prep
  * Executive Education Navigator
  * Which MBA
  * Jobs Board
  * Learning.ly
  * The Economist Store
  * The Economist Intelligence Unit
  * The Economist Corporate Network

#### Media

  * Audio edition
  * Economist Films
  * Podcasts

  * About _The Economist_

Subscribe

user iconLog in or sign upManage subscriptiondown icon

  * Log In
  * Forgot password?
  * New to The Economist? Sign up now
  * Activate your digital subscription
  * Manage your subscription
  * Renew your subscription

magnifier iconSearch

hamburger iconclose icon

Topicsup icon

  * Latest updates
  * Leaders
  * Briefing
  * United States
  * The Americas
  * Asia
  * China
  * Middle East and Africa
  * Europe
  * Britain
  * International
  * Business
  * Finance and economics
  * Science and technology
  * Books and arts
  * Graphic detail
  * Obituary
  * Special reports
  * Debates
  * Open Future

Blogsup icon

  * Bagehot’s notebook
  * Bartleby
  * Charlemagne’s notebook
  * Democracy in America
  * Erasmus
  * Free exchange
  * Game theory
  * Gulliver
  * Prospero
  * The Economist explains

Current edition

Audio edition

Economist Films

Podcasts

The Economist apps

Moreup icon

  * Apps & Digital Editions
  * The Economist apps
  * Espresso
  * Global Business Review
  * World in Figures

* * *

  * Other Publications
  * 1843 magazine
  * The World In
  * The World If

* * *

  * From The Economist Group
  * Events
  * Online GMAT prep
  * Online GRE prep
  * Executive Education Navigator
  * Which MBA
  * Jobs Board
  * Learning.ly
  * The Economist Store
  * The Economist Intelligence Unit
  * The Economist Corporate Network

* * *

  * About _The Economist_

Subscribe

The Economist explainsExplaining the world, daily

# The Economist explainsDo “sin taxes” work?

And are they fair?

![](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/20180811_BLP511.jpg)

### The Economist explains

Aug 10th 2018

by W.Z.

twitter icon

facebook icon

linkedin icon

mail icon

print icon

MANY goverrments use “sin taxes” to dissuade people from smoking and drinking
alcohol. In recent years, some lawmakers have turned their cross-hairs to a
different vice: sugar. Obesity is on the rise all across the world. Forty per
cent of Americans today are obese, up from around 15% in 1980. Several
countries, along with a handful of American cities, have introduced taxes on
sugary drinks in recent years. Their governments hope that these levies will
both raise revenues and reduce how much sugar people consume. But do sin taxes
even work?

**Get our daily newsletter**

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

Policymakers are right to think that sin taxes lead to lower consumption. The
exact estimates vary from study to study, but economists have found that in
general, a 1% increase in the price of tobacco or alcohol in America leads to
a 0.5% decline in sales. In practical terms, this means that sales of tobacco
and alcohol are more responsive overall to price changes than say, sales of
many common household goods, such as coffee. Similarly, while it is still too
early to determine whether these taxes will have any effect on obesity,
studies have shown that they have at the very least reduced sales in Mexico,
and the cities of Berkeley and Philadelphia.

![](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2018/07/blogs/economist-

explains/20180818_woc993.png)

But if there is a problem with sin taxes, it is not that they are ineffective.
Rather, it is that they are inefficient. Sin taxes are blunt policy
instruments. People who only have the occasional drink are not taking on any
great health risks, yet they are taxed no differently than serious alcoholics.
A similar logic applies for sugar taxes. Tobacco presents a slightly different
problem. Nicotine is highly addictive, meaning that there are relatively few
people who smoke cigarettes only occasionally.

It is easiest to justify taxes on particular goods when they present what
economists call “negative externalities”. When a driver buys fuel for his car,
both he and the petrol station benefit. Yet cars emit carbon dioxide in their
wake, which suggests that it would be only fair for drivers to pay taxes to
offset the environmental damage they cause. Some policymakers argue that
people who engage in unhealthy habits also impose negative externalities,
since they tend to present taxpayers with bigger medical bills. In practice,
however, these costs tend to be overstated. While obese people probably do
present net costs to governments, smokers tend to die earlier, meaning that
they probably save governments money since they draw less from state pensions.
Policymakers should still consider implementing sin taxes if they intend to
intervene to change individuals’ behaviour. But they should be aware that the
bulk of the damage that smokers, drinkers and the obese do is to themselves,
and not to others.

### The Economist explains

Aug 10th 2018

by W.Z.

twitter icon

facebook icon

linkedin icon

mail icon

print icon

Reuse this content

About _The Economist_

  * ![Free exchange](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2019/06/articles/main/20190615_fnd000.jpg)

### Free exchangeHow compatible are democracy and capitalism?

Economic stress and demographic change are weakening a symbiotic relationship

  * ![Flying start](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2019/06/articles/main/20190608_wbp504.jpg)

### Flying startDrone deliveries are advancing in health care

  * ![After the annexation](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/print-edition/20190608_EUP002_0.jpg)

### After the annexationCrimea is still in limbo five years after Russia

seized it

  * ![Chained to tradition](https://cdn.static-economist.com/sites/default/files/images/2019/06/articles/main/20190615_map501.jpg)

### Chained to traditionThousands of children are abused in Senegal’s

religious schools

When it's a matter of opinion, make your opinion matter

Subscribe now

**Each week, over one million subscribers  
trust us to help them make sense of the world.**

Join them. Subscribe to _The Economist_ today

or Sign up to continue reading five free articles

  * Subscribe
  * Group subscriptions
  * Contact us
  * Help

#### Keep updated

  * facebook icon
  * twitter icon
  * linkedin icon
  * instagram icon
  * youtube icon
  * rss icon

mail iconSubscribe to The Economist newsletters

**Sign up to get more from _The Economist_**

Get 5 free articles per month, daily newsletters and more.

  * About _The Economist_
  * Advertise
  * Reprints
  * Careers
  * Media Centre

Published since September 1843 to take part in  
_“a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward,  
and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.”_

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy
  * Cookie Policy
  * Manage Cookies
  * Accessibility
  * Modern Slavery Statement

Copyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2019. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

