

![The Life Resources Charitable Trust ](../../../images/header.jpg)

# Suicide and Pain

One of the primal human instincts is that of survival. Even in the case of a
person who has deliberately decided to kill themselves, something in the
person's subconscious may work to sabotage the attempt.

The theme song from the movie M-A-S-H is titled "Suicide," and the lyrics go:
"Suicide is painless, It brings on many changes. . . ." The reality however is
that many suicides are botched and leave the person in pain, disabled or
disfigured.

The New England Journal of Medicine (Feb 22, 2001, Vol. 344, No. 8) dealing
with physician assisted euthanasia shows that even with expert medical advice,
things can and do go wrong. The study was conducted in the Netherlands, where
euthanasia is legal. Some of the statistics reported:

  * In 16% of cases where patients tried to kill themselves with drugs prescribed by a doctor, the medication did not work as expected
  * Technical problems or unexpected side effects occurred 7% of the time
  * Problems occurred so often that in 18% of cases a doctor had to intervene to ensure death
  * Even when a doctor performed the procedure, patients took longer to die than expected or awoke from a drug-induced coma that was meant to be fatal in 6% of cases

If a physician can't pull off a perfect suicide, what are the odds that you
will?

##### Surviving an attempt

The best is that you will live to discover the truth about depression: that it
really is a temporary condition. Circumstances change and medications work.
The old saying that suicide is a permanent solution to a temporary problem is
sage advice. When the blinders of depression are lifted you see very clearly
how true this is.

The worst result of a failed suicide is that you will be worse off than you
were before. Consider these facts:

  * If your brain goes without an oxygen supply for more than about three minutes, you will suffer permanent brain damage
  * Gunshot wounds that miss will leave you with permanent disfigurement and disability
  * Overdoses on many substances will leave you with damage to kidneys and liver
  * People who have swallowed caustic substances like lye can survive with severe burns to their GI tract

Just about all suicide methods have the risk of severe, possibly prolonged
pain if things go awry.

**The Hurt Doesn't Go Away**  
Perhaps the most common reason people commit suicide is to stop the pain the
are feeling inside. The thing is, the pain doesn't go away. It gets
transferred to those you love. Your parents, your spouse or significant other,
your kids, your friends and acquaintances.

Everybody you know is touched to some extent by suicide. Grief is one of the
strongest emotions a person can feel. Do you really want to make your loved
ones feel the sort of pain you are feeling? Think about it. If you are
convinced that people will be better off without you, you are dead wrong.

##### Dangers of drug overdoses and chemicals

Most suicides and suicide attempts take the form of drug overdoses. Writer Art
Kleiner describes what happens:

> The danger in all drug overdoses is that the brain may not get enough
oxygen. The airway to the lungs may get blocked off by the patient's vomit, or
by the tongue falling back into the throat, or by drug-induced slowÂ­down in
the part of the deep brain that controls the rate and depth of breathing.

>

> Permanent brain damage occurs when the brain is deprived of oxygen for three
to five minutes. Higher brain functions are the first to go -- memory is
destroyed, verbal skills are impaired -- and the longer the oxygen starvation
goes on, the more severe the retardation.

>

> Aspirin is one of the most common drugs used in botched suicide attempts,
probably because of its wide availability and our ignorance about the terminal
effectiveness of an overdose. One pharmacologist calls aspirin "one of the
messiest, most complicated overdoses you ever hope to see." Aspirin can burn
the gastrointestinal tract and can damage the kidneys, lungs, and liver.
Aspirin in sufficient quantity can produce a fever and seizures. People who
survive aspirin overdoses can suffer permanent liver damage and sometimes
suffer deafness or tinnitus (ringing in the ears).

>

> Tylenol (or acetaminophen) poisoning also destroys the liver This can result
in an especially painful death because patients often sleep off the initial
sickness, recover enough to realize they didn't really want to die, then
slowly slip off into a coma after five days because the liver has been
destroyed.

>

> Sedatives and alcohol are a common and dangerous combination in suicide
attempts. When taken together, alcohol and Valium, Seconal, or other sedatives
and mild tranquilizers produce nausea and vomiting. Instead of drifting off
into death, the suicidal person sucks vomit into the lungs. If the person
doesn't drown in vomit, they can become infected and develop pneumonia and
irreversible lung damage.

>

> The most painful form of a suicide attempt is swallowing lye, Drano, oven
cleaner, or some other form of household caustic agent. Very few people die
from swallowing lye or other caustics. "If they do die," says one physician,
"it's days, weeks, or even months later; of infection." Caustics like lye burn
the mouth, tongue, and may burn holes through the esophagus and into the chest
cavity. The resulting scar tissue can obstruct the gastrointestinal tract, and
patients may have to undergo years of painful corrective surgery.

##### Dangers of violent methods

"Violent death is so often portrayed as sudden and painless," Kleiner reports,
"but the human body is harder to kill than it seems."

Slitting the wrists, for example, rarely results in death. More often, tendons
and nerves are damaged, and the would-he suicide ends up with a weak or
deformed hand.

Those who cut their throats rarely die. They cut the nerve that controls their
voice box and larynx and end up voiceless.

Gunshot wounds can kill outright, but, remarkably enough, people frequently
miss the brain and blow out an eye or part of a jaw. People can live for hours
with a hole in the head the size of a half-dollar. One doctor said, "One man I
treated is completely paralyzed on his left side, and can't speak, walk, or
feed himself. It's as if he had a major stroke. He hit the area of the brain
which controls motor function."

While brain death comes fairly rapidly with oxygen deprivation, the brain can
survive bizarre assaults.

Hanging may seem to offer a fairly rapid demise, but those who try to hang
themselves may dangle and slowly choke. They don't always die but, like other
failed suicides, end up with irreversible brain damage.

Jumping from a high place can cause a nonfatal, but painful and permanent
injury.

In 1986, a world-class runner dropped out of the middle of a race and jumped
off a bridge. She did not kill herself, but her jump caused irreversible
injuries --she became quadriplegic. According to those who have studied
suicide attempts, people can fall over a hundred feet --and sometimes more --
without killing themselves. Jumpers who survive suffer multiple fractures --
crushed and shattered bones -- and ruptured internal organs. Because of the
fragility of the spine and brain, jumpers may be left totally paralyzed.

Botched suicides happen so frequently and have such unexpected and horrible
consequences.

  * Home
  * Suicide
    * About Suicide
    * F A Q - Suicide
    * Suicide Key Issues
    * Resources - Suicide
    * Suicide Stories
    * Considering Suicide?
    * Ministry Of Education Guidelines on Suicide
    * Suicide Organisations and Support
  * Abortion
  * Euthanasia
  * Bioethics
  * About Us
  * Sitemap
  * Contact Us

  * Home 

  * Sitemap 
  * Contact Us 

**The Life Resources Charitable Trust**  
(C) Copyright 2011 The Life Resources Charitable Trust. All rights Reserved.  
web page development by Internet Solutions Group Website Manager

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

