

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![Google](/images/branding/googlelogo/2x/googlelogo_color_92x30dp.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

지도

이미지

동영상

뉴스

더보기

쇼핑도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 2,340,000,000개 (0.34초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 번역 결과

영어

한국어

    
    
    actually
    

actually

    
    
    ˈakCHo͞oəlē
    
    
    사실은
    
    
    sasil-eun
    

번역 복사됨

    
    
    번역(여성형)
    
    
    (여성형)
    

번역 복사됨

    
    
    번역(남성형)
    
    
    (남성형)
    

번역 복사됨

* * *

'actually'의 번역

부사

* * *

실지로

actually, practically

* * *

참으로

indeed, actually, really, directly

* * *

현시점에서

actually

Google 번역에서 열기|

사용자 의견

\---|---

## 웹 검색결과

### ACTUALLY | Cambridge English Dictionary에서의 의미

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지

_actually_ 의미, 정의, _actually_ 의 정의: 1. in fact or really: 2. used in sentences
in which there is information that is in some way surprising or the opposite
of what ...

### actually | 영어를 한국어로 번역: Cambridge Dictionary

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어-한국어/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지

_actually_ 번역: 실제로, (사실을 강조하여)정말로, 사실은, (상대방을 공손하게 정정하며) 사실은. Cambridge 영어-
한국어 사전 에서 자세히 알아보기.

### actually - WordReference 영-한 사전

https://www.wordreference.com/enko/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지

연어: _actually_ [going, coming, working, studying], are you _actually_
[going]?, is _actually_ [used, required, provided], 더 보기… 제목에서 " _actually_
"단어에 관한 포럼 ...

### 동영상

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

1:07

[HOT] Preview love me actually ep.13, 호구의연애 20190609

MBCentertainment

YouTube - 2019. 6. 3.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

1:06

[HOT] Preview love me actually ep.14, 호구의연애 20190616

MBCentertainment

YouTube - 9시간 전

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

2:31

Love Actually (2003) - Official Trailer

thecultbox

YouTube - 2011. 2. 13.

## 웹 검색결과

### Actually Synonyms, Actually Antonyms | Thesaurus.com

https://www.thesaurus.com/browse/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Synonyms for _actually_ at Thesaurus.com with free online thesaurus, antonyms,
and definitions. Find descriptive alternatives for _actually_.

### actually | Definition of actually in English by Oxford Dictionaries

https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Definition of _actually_ \- as the truth or facts of a situation; really, used
to emphasize that something someone has said or done is surprising.

### Actually | Definition of Actually by Merriam-Webster

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Actually_ definition is - in act or in fact : really. How to use _actually_
in a sentence.

### actually - 위키낱말사전

https://ko.wiktionary.org/wiki/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

IPA [ˈæk.tʃu.ə.li]. 부사[편집]. 1. 실제로, 사실은, 현실적으로, 정말로. 참조: really, in reality,
in fact, in true; _Actually_ , there is no on-line application. 사실, 온라인 ...

### actually (adverb) definition and synonyms | Macmillan Dictionary

https://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/actually

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Define _actually_ (adverb) and get synonyms. What is _actually_ (adverb)?
_actually_ ( adverb) meaning, pronunciation and more by Macmillan Dictionary.

### actually adverb - Definition, pictures, pronunciation and usage notes ...

https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/.../actually

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Definition of _actually_ adverb in Oxford Advanced Learner 's Dictionary.
Meaning, pronunciation, picture, example sentences, grammar, usage notes,
synonyms ...

### 관련 검색: actually

actually 뜻

actually 예문

actually 발음

actually synonym

love actually

love actually 뜻

exactly

address

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

모든 언어

  * 모든 언어
  * 한국어 웹

모든 날짜

  * 모든 날짜
  * 지난 1시간
  * 지난 1일
  * 지난 1주
  * 지난 1개월
  * 지난 1년
  * 기간 설정...

기간 맞춤설정

시작일종료일

모든 결과

  * 모든 결과
  * 완전일치

1:08

[HOT] Preview love me actually ep.10, 호구의연애 20190519

MBCentertainment

YouTube - 2019. 5. 13.

12:57

Why your Avengers UHD BluRays aren't actually 4K | Upscaled

Engadget

YouTube - 4일 전

10:27

"Don't sigh, don't cry!" Emma Thompson on THAT Love Actually scene ...

BBC Radio 1

YouTube - 6일 전

1:45

Red Nose Day Actually - Trailer

Universal Pictures

YouTube - 2017. 5. 12.

15:42

What Actually Is A 'Constitutional Crisis?' | The Last Word | MSNBC

MSNBC

YouTube - 2019. 5. 10.

23:07

Well 와 Actually 차이

Gyopo TV

YouTube - 2015. 11. 27.

10:43

_UNBELIEVABLE_ THIS IS ACTUALLY BEYOND BROKEN!!! (1500+ ...

Professor Akali

YouTube - 2019. 5. 14.

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

