

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![Google](/images/branding/googlelogo/2x/googlelogo_color_92x30dp.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

지도

이미지

뉴스

동영상

더보기

쇼핑도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 73,100,000개 (0.41초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 지역 검색결과

![pharmacies 지도](/maps/vt/data=jqSUxj_nFjrq5j9_R1IGfH-

ukJSBLtnhQQR5pgWdjIb0zJpYz8WL1pcLzvO-

l-n3nOr1S-eY4yHnCZJX3u-LXpAh1GtdLqZgzLmhsd2E3oS1eb-1CYba0IgRxhiwBzQOPelmkkHrc0H9tB4kejkDeWPuuB0aOLK67MwEYKSXWvL421yeowLbc7XhlEmRqX79od4CKWgCx_cM2bSusmwKdgNGKNTzpI0MeHFC5Cc1lXNW5WarIGOmYju5yQTm7Y0P2yFOEGv2G3yhG4TokKuV0mFB-

GKmCW3iSh4YWce1yblD9cnfIyKJsMdG6R6La-

UbcV2XEt9teVSmRz3-RtBzyfpPFzInl0SyIZhHrgsntHXjOSD8WlOs6fYNjHGgv7mTgL-

idgBo8Cnzb-RZtL9nNGDWiVuY1SpDvd9RZ7xz_seEbNl-

uBaZl3GFVspyoChLV5_Lfl2TGsmD03yUXIfoWSeSGBXwdSN4VlepnrA-

eAx_-2gNPTlU6hyneJbHEv2mOmV3MH6MBrlWXQxIYBYoSn94BawXeJmK1pAlj3SNsibusdLq3rWZMg5bvHO0KQ27P0q_lWej43YZnDKHb3ptoLmApkTtmUxdQtGBVqDyQ3FvfOV3xc41XHQNM3HWWTgNYPnOItd-

BV2cp_ob4WncdPz1bYCO14PlvqR625juM2ZLe8RnRGbZ82KcihB6qLp-4kSjKTkK4DAd38nlk5kTaT0Rbb1TqrEKBWexhB2JRjCAE35ZhRRwcUsd5DLSkjPvaH5_7GjgR5lcdGHW7nwuLZl_6AKwFdOGj13mHj2sUOWLtGCHv21TdYjxDzL8RDB9uqAe1xiQBms2Am8mykul4MzsjNpF0pkePNW4XUz7OKMg7klZcVXkdiWWi7iBnpKiA4kmaFlZgJK7NQOSgAfnD2Qo6a2bibff0rbqfNVTiyh5gBDDkQp7aBUngMOCk7zm0TS-

zD_QdQ9U3vJxR3S0jl5_rpzg3CofoDUPHMdq1tzGpEc6X_C5pazVxI8dwbCwjGywfDRy5-zOLkn-

qc1btR7UAIfyZ-WhNGi2uohSR4abGQg7EOqrLpA_vzntVA7V23-BEoJZQOQ5iYAiCBNGoj-

Ldu3qsuNzRnM59oB5_jdL7RnJCDSUHsPgv3kBMxHeq3qCFrhGgEcuMjoBnXZ_vy-

sXNObZlbrF6t6u4Gte1h5hMohEeAYwG6I_6CBmfdwth6u--uKI-PXJtuLSN_DxG55XmhscpqXbfrE)

![map expand

icon](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAEgAAABICAYAAABV7bNHAAAAmElEQVR4Ae3a1xHDIBQAQfpvglLxr+M5572Z18AqC4YkSZIkSdF60DwzQIAAaQK6HWfBAXQVzmwgOKOA4AQQnAaC00BwGghOA8FpIDgNBKeB4ADaw9GEc74JR5Kkr39sy4ufT4e1N7fjAPo/nAaC00BwGghOA8FpIDgNBKeB4DQQnAKC00BwdoPTwfnlDd2AAAGSJEmSJGkDhfC3AD4fHSUAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

A

상록약국

약국

둔산2동 908 * 042-472-5858

길찾기

B

남강약국

약국

도룡동 399-8 * 042-861-5431

길찾기

C

한빛약국

약국

어은로 57 * 042-862-0110

길찾기

장소 더보기

## 웹 검색결과

### PHARMACY | Cambridge English Dictionary에서의 의미

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어/pharmacy

  1. 저장된 페이지

_pharmacy_ 의미, 정의, _pharmacy_ 의 정의: 1. a shop or part of a shop in which
medicines are prepared and sold 2. part of a hospital where medicines are
prepared ...

### pharmacy | Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English에서 ...

https://www.ldoceonline.com/ko/dictionary/pharmacy

  1. 저장된 페이지

_pharmacy_ 어의, 의미, _pharmacy_ 의 의미: a shop or a part of a shop where
medicin...: 자세히 알아보기.

### Pharmacy - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pharmacy

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Pharmacy_ is the science and technique of preparing, dispensing, and review
of drugs and providing additional clinical services. It is a health profession
that links ...

### Martella's Pharmacies

https://www.martellaspharmacy.com/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Locally owned family _pharmacies_ since 1964. The only Medi-Pac provider in
region, just tear, take and go!

### Find a pharmacy - Pharmacies

https://www.myprime.com/en/find-pharmacy.html

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Manage your _pharmacy_ benefits with Prime Therapeutics.

[PDF]

### National Chain Pharmacy Listing - Elevanta Health

https://www.elevantahealth.com/.../MRx_Pharmacy_Network_List...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

A and P _Pharmacy_. Albertsons. Aurora _Pharmacy_. Bashas ' United Drug.
Baylor Scott and White _Pharmacy_. Bi-Mart. Brookshire Brothers _Pharmacy_.
Brookshire ...

### Pharmacies in Ljubljana | Ljubljana.info

https://www.ljubljana.info/facts/pharmacies-in-ljubljana/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Most often you will find _pharmacies_ in Ljubljana run by “Lekarna Ljubljana”.
You will recognize them by a green cross on a white background you can see on
the ...

### Pharmacies - NHS Lothian

https://services.nhslothian.scot/Pharmacies/Pages/default.aspx

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

For expert health information and advice visit your local pharmacist. Your
community _pharmacy_ has highly trained staff who provide even more services
to ...

### Mac's Pharmacy | Hometown Pharmacies in Tennessee - Knoxville

https://www.macspharmacy.com/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Mac's _Pharmacy_ is a locally owned independent _pharmacy_ and an award-
winning LTC _pharmacy_ that uses industry-leading technology.

### Participating Pharmacies | Kroger Rx Savings Club powered by GoodRx

https://www.krogersc.com/directory

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

The Kroger Rx Savings Club can be used at any _pharmacy_ in the The Kroger
Company 's family of _pharmacies_. That 's more than 2,000 _pharmacies_ across
...

### 관련 검색: pharmacies

pharmacy 발음

pharmacy store

pharmacy 뜻

pharmacy online

pharmacist

pharmacy technician

pharmacy logo

pharmacy icon

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

