

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![Google](/images/branding/googlelogo/2x/googlelogo_color_92x30dp.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

이미지

뉴스

동영상

쇼핑

더보기

지도도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 1,970,000개 (0.42초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

수정된 검색어에 대한 결과: **_Aspirin_** can kill too, why not make that illegal?  
다음 검색어로 대신 검색: Asprin can kill too, why not make that illegal?

# 검색결과

### 동영상

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

6:36

How To Kill A Bazillion Squirrels (Probably Illegal)

An American Homestead

YouTube - 2017. 1. 13.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

3:41

This Much Will Kill You

AsapSCIENCE

YouTube - 2015. 8. 28.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

0:58

How to Kill Raccoons

ehowhome

YouTube - 2015. 5. 13.

## 웹 검색결과

### 10 Facts About Aspirin | Mental Floss

mentalfloss.com/article/64034/facts-about-aspirin

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

It's _not_ the same as acetaminophen (used in Tylenol), ibuprofen (used in ...
Adding sodium _to_ the _aspirin_ -and-car-battery combo _can cause_ an
explosion. 9. .... of pollution—did you know that even noise pollution
underwater _can kill_ marine life? ... Harmful microbeads are _banned_ in the
U.S. [PDF] for their impact on oceans ...

### Foreign Body

\- Google 도서 검색결과

https://books.google.co.kr/books?isbn=0996263039

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

Kathleen Taylor - 2015 - ‎Fiction

_Aspirin_ by itself, ingested in large enough quantities, _can kill_. But she
... _To have_ miscalculated and really _killed_ herself when that was _not_
her aim was a horror. ... Maybe affairs between teens and adults aren 't
_illegal_ in Sweden. Maybe she ...

### Teens and Reye's Syndrome National Reye's Syndrome Foundation

www.reyessyndrome.org/teens.html

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

I _have_ never kept _aspirin_ in my house because I know about Reye 's
Syndrome, ... and most report that prescription drugs are easier _to get_ than
_illegal_ drugs. ... the counter medications, many of which _can kill_ , or
_have_ life-long dibilitating side ... It is _not_ a disease that only affects
_very_ young children; it _can_ strike any child, teen ...

### How many aspirin tablets can I take a day for an abortion? - Quora

https://www.quora.com/How-many-aspirin-tablets-can-I-take-a-da...

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 9. 19. - Something over 100 _will kill_ your baby, along with _killing_
you. That is ... However, _too_ many _aspirin_ (short of a toxic dose) _could
have_ serious effects... ... If you use an _illegal_ form of abortion (and it
is _illegal_ in many places _to_ ...

### New Scientist

\- 1986. 12. 4. - 19페이지 - Google 도서 검색결과

https://books.google.co.kr/books?id=isQyedeIjLoC

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

Vol. 112, No. 1537 - ‎잡지

"I _didn 't_ think Disprin was _banned_. ... From 1 January, the manufacturers
of _aspirin will have to_ print a warning on the label of their products
saying that children ...

### Wendyl Nissen's Supermarket Companion: How to Bring Home Good Food

https://books.google.co.kr/books?isbn=0473251213

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

Wendyl Nissen - 2012 - ‎Health & Fitness

a guide _to_ our food codes T here they Authority the code _do_ is no in but
has ... people who _do_ a quick search and happily repeat information which is
_not_ well ... It was important _to_ me that this guide was the most accurate
I _could_ compile so I used ... are going _to kill_ you, but I chose _to take_
a cautious stance for this guide rather ...

### Breaking Bad and Philosophy: Badder Living Through Chemistry

https://books.google.co.kr/books?isbn=0812697642

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

David Richard Koepsell, ‎Robert Arp - 2012 - ‎Philosophy

ishing, wine _to_ those who are in anguish; let them drink and forget their
poverty ... Marijuana, or Walt 's bottle of tequila, for that matter, _can
have_ a medical purpose. ... Alcohol in moderate doses, _aspirin_ , and coffee
_don 't_ cloud the mind, and _can_ also _do_ ... whereas heavy drinking _can
kill_ cells in the fasciculus It 's Arbitrary?

### 9 human medicines that can be fatal to pets. - Lamond Veterinary Clinic

https://lamondvet.co.uk/9-human-medicines-that-can-be-fatal-to-...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2016\. 6. 7. - ... toxicologists is that “if it's poisonous _to_ humans, it
'll _kill_ pets; but if it 's safe for ... Any medication _will have_
potential side effects (if it _doesn 't_ , that probably ... Cats and dogs,
just like us, rely on their livers _to_ convert drugs into different ...
_Aspirin can_ also lead _to_ an abnormal rise in body temperature, difficulty
...

누락된 검색어: ~~illegal?~~

### Village Medical Manual: A Layman's Guide to Health Care in ...

https://books.google.co.kr/books?isbn=0878087788

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

Mary Vanderkooi - 2000 - ‎Community health aides

Sedation and muscle relaxation _can_ be essential _to_ treatment. This chapter
gives principles. Consult the Symptom Protocols Index for the diagnosis of
pain _not_ due _to_ injury. _have_ used ... Pain that does _not_ respond _to
aspirin_ , acetaminophen, ibuprofen, ... It is addictive and it is _illegal
to_ possess in most areas of the world.

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

