

Skip to Content

Menu Search

Cancer Helpline 800.227.2345

double-chat-bubble Live Chat

![American Cancer Society](/etc/designs/cancer.org/images/acs-logo.svg)

  * Latest News
  * English
    * Español
    * More Languages

Donate

Donate

  * Cancer A-Z
  * Stay Healthy
  * Treatment & Support
  * Our Research
  * Get Involved
  * Our Partners
  * About Us

  * News

English Español More Languages

Donate

double-chat-bubble Live Chat

Cancer Helpline

800.227.2345

Phone

Search

Search

CategoryTreatment & Support

  * Treatments and Side Effects
  * Complementary and Alternative Medicine

# Marijuana and Cancer

Marijuana is the name given to the dried buds and leaves of varieties of the
Cannabis sativa plant, which can grow wild in warm and tropical climates
throughout the world and be cultivated commercially. It goes by many names,
including pot, grass, cannabis, weed, hemp, hash, marihuana, ganja, and dozens
of others.

Marijuana has been used in herbal remedies for centuries. Scientists have
identified many biologically active components in marijuana. These are called
_cannabinoids_. The two best studied components are the chemicals
_delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol_ (often referred to as THC), and _cannabidiol_
(CBD). Other cannabinoids are being studied.

At this time, the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) lists marijuana and
its cannabinoids as Schedule I controlled substances. This means that they
cannot legally be prescribed, possessed, or sold under federal law. Whole or
crude marijuana (including marijuana oil or hemp oil) is not approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for any medical use. But the use of
marijuana to treat some medical conditions is legal under state laws in many
states.

Dronabinol, a pharmaceutical form of THC, and a man-made cannabinoid drug
called nabilone are approved by the FDA to treat some conditions.

## Marijuana

Different compounds in marijuana have different actions in the human body. For
example, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) seems to cause the "high" reported
by marijuana users, and also can help relieve pain and nausea, reduce
inflammation, and can act as an antioxidant. Cannabidiol (CBD) can help treat
seizures, can reduce anxiety and paranoia, and can counteract the "high"
caused by THC.

Different cultivars (strains or types) and even different crops of marijuana
plants can have varying amounts of these and other active compounds. This
means that marijuana can have different effects based on the strain used.

The effects of marijuana also vary depending on how marijuana compounds enter
the body:

  * When **taken by mouth** , such as in baked goods, the THC is absorbed poorly and can take hours to be absorbed. Once it’s absorbed, it’s processed by the liver, which produces a second psychoactive compound (a substance that acts on the brain and changes mood or consciousness) that affects the brain differently than THC.
  * When marijuana is **smoked or vaporized (inhaled)** , THC enters the bloodstream and goes to the brain quickly. The second psychoactive compound is produced in small amounts, and so has less effect. The effects of inhaled marijuana fade faster than marijuana taken by mouth.

### How can marijuana affect symptoms of cancer?

A number of small studies of smoked marijuana found that it can be helpful in
treating nausea and vomiting from cancer chemotherapy.

A few studies have found that inhaled (smoked or vaporized) marijuana can be
helpful treatment of neuropathic pain (pain caused by damaged nerves).

Smoked marijuana has also helped improve food intake in HIV patients in
studies.

There are no studies in people of the effects of marijuana oil or hemp oil.

Studies have long shown that people who took marijuana extracts in clinical
trials tended to need less pain medicine.

More recently, scientists reported that THC and other cannabinoids such as CBD
slow growth and/or cause death in certain types of cancer cells growing in lab
dishes. Some animal studies also suggest certain cannabinoids may slow growth
and reduce spread of some forms of cancer.

There have been some early clinical trials of cannabinoids in treating cancer
in humans and more studies are planned. While the studies so far have shown
that cannabinoids can be safe in treating cancer, they do not show that they
help control or cure the disease.

Relying on marijuana alone as treatment while avoiding or delaying
conventional medical care for cancer may have serious health consequences.

### Possible harms of marijuana

Marijuana can also pose some harms to users. While the most common effect of
marijuana is a feeling of euphoria ("high"), it also can lower the user’s
control over movement, cause disorientation, and sometimes cause unpleasant
thoughts or feelings of anxiety and paranoia.

Smoked marijuana delivers THC and other cannabinoids to the body, but it also
delivers harmful substances to users and those close by, including many of the
same substances found in tobacco smoke.

Because marijuana plants come in different strains with different levels of
active compounds, it can make each user’s experience very hard to predict. The
effects can also differ based on how deeply and for how long the user inhales.
Likewise, the effects of ingesting marijuana orally can vary between people.
Also, some chronic users can develop an unhealthy dependence on marijuana.

## Cannabinoid drugs

There are 2 chemically pure drugs based on marijuana compounds that have been
approved in the US for medical use.

  * **Dronabinol (Marinol®)** is a gelatin capsule containing delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) that’s approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy as well as weight loss and poor appetite in patients with AIDS.
  * **Nabilone (Cesamet®)** is a synthetic cannabinoid that acts much like THC. It can be taken by mouth to treat nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy when other drugs have not worked.

**Nabiximols** is a cannabinoid drug still under study in the US. It’s a mouth
spray made up of a whole-plant extract with THC and cannabidiol (CBD) in an
almost one to one mix. It’s available in Canada and parts of Europe to treat
pain linked to cancer, as well as muscle spasms and pain from multiple
sclerosis (MS). It’s not approved in the US at this time, but it’s being
tested in clinical trials to see if it can help a number of conditions.

### How can cannabinoid drugs affect symptoms of cancer?

Based on a number of studies, dronabinol can be helpful for reducing nausea
and vomiting linked to chemotherapy.

Dronabinol has also been found to help improve food intake and prevent weight
loss in patients with HIV. In studies of cancer patients, though, it wasn’t
better than placebo or another drug (megestrol acetate).

Nabiximols has shown promise for helping people with cancer pain that’s
unrelieved by strong pain medicines, but it hasn’t been found to be helpful in
every study done. Research is still being done on this drug.

### Side effects of cannabinoid drugs

Like many other drugs, the prescription cannabinoids, dronabinol and nabilone,
can cause side effects and complications.

Some people have trouble with increased heart rate, decreased blood pressure
(especially when standing up), dizziness or lightheadedness, and fainting.
These drugs can cause drowsiness as well as mood changes or a feeling of being
“high” that some people find uncomfortable. They can also worsen depression,
mania, or other mental illness. Some patients taking nabilone in studies
reported hallucinations. The drugs may increase some effects of sedatives,
sleeping pills, or alcohol, such as sleepiness and poor coordination. Patients
have also reported problems with dry mouth and trouble with recent memory.

Older patients may have more problems with side effects and are usually
started on lower doses.

People who have had emotional illnesses, paranoia, or hallucinations may find
their symptoms are worse when taking cannabinoid drugs.

Talk to your doctor about what you should expect when taking one of these
drugs. It’s a good idea to have someone with you when you first start taking
one of these drugs and after any dose changes.

## What does the American Cancer Society say about the use of marijuana in

people with cancer?

The American Cancer Society supports the need for more scientific research on
cannabinoids for cancer patients, and recognizes the need for better and more
effective therapies that can overcome the often debilitating side effects of
cancer and its treatment. The Society also believes that the classification of
marijuana as a Schedule I controlled substance by the US Drug Enforcement
Administration imposes numerous conditions on researchers and deters
scientific study of cannabinoids. Federal officials should examine options
consistent with federal law for enabling more scientific study on marijuana.

Medical decisions about pain and symptom management should be made between the
patient and his or her doctor, balancing evidence of benefit and harm to the
patient, the patient’s preferences and values, and any laws and regulations
that may apply.

The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN), the Society’s
advocacy affiliate, has not taken a position on legalization of marijuana for
medical purposes because of the need for more scientific research on
marijuana’s potential benefits and harms. However, ACS CAN opposes the smoking
or vaping of marijuana and other cannabinoids in public places because the
carcinogens in marijuana smoke pose numerous health hazards to the patient and
others in the patient’s presence.

  * Written by
  * References

![](/cancer-control-reference-components/footnote-

elements/_jcr_content/par/footnote_tabs/written_by/footnote_author_copy/image.img.png/1550074548031.png)

The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team

Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep
knowledge of cancer care as well as journalists, editors, and translators with
extensive experience in medical writing.

Abrams DI, Jay CA, Shade SB, et al. Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory
neuropathy: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. _Neurology_.
2007;68(7):515-521.

Ahmedzai S, Carlyle DL, Calder IT, Moran F. Anti-emetic efficacy and toxicity
of nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, in lung cancer chemotherapy. _Br J
Cancer_. 1983;48(5):657-663.

American College of Physicians. Supporting research into the therapeutic role
of marijuana. (Position paper, 2008.) Accessed at
www.acponline.org/advocacy/where_we_stand/other_issues/medmarijuana.pdf on
March 4, 2015.

Bhattacharyya S, Crippa JA, Allen P, et al. Induction of psychosis by
{delta}9-tetrahydrocannabinol reflects modulation of prefrontal and striatal
function during attentional salience processing. _Arch Gen Psychiatry._
2012;69(1):27-36.

Beal JE, Olson R, Laubenstein L, et al. Dronabinol as a treatment for anorexia
associated with weight loss in patients with AIDS. _J Pain Symptom Manage_.
1995;10(2):89-97.

Beal JE, Olson R, Lefkowitz L, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of
dronabinol for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-associated anorexia. _J Pain
Symptom Manage_. 1997;14(1):7-14.

Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group, Strasser F, Luftner D, Possinger K, et al.
Comparison of orally administered cannabis extract and
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in treating patients with cancer-related
anorexia-cachexia syndrome: a multicenter, phase III, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial from the Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-
Group. _J Clin Onc_. 2006;24:3394-3400.

Ellis RJ, Toperoff W, Vaida F, et al. Smoked medicinal cannabis for
neuropathic pain in HIV: a randomized, crossover clinical trial.
_Neuropsychopharmacology_. 2009;34(3):672-680.

Guzmán M, Duarte MJ, Blázquez C, et al. A pilot clinical study of
Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients with recurrent glioblastoma
multiforme. _Br J Cancer_. 2006;95(2):197-203.

Haney M, Rabkin J, Gunderson E, Foltin RW. Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV(+)
marijuana smokers: acute effects on caloric intake and mood.
_Psychopharmacology_. (Berl). 2005;181:170-178.

Haney M, Gunderson EW, Rabkin J, et al. Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV-
positive marijuana smokers. Caloric intake, mood,and sleep. _J Acquir Immune
Defic Syndr_. 2007;45(5):545-554.

Herman TS, Einhorn LH, Jones SE, et al. Superiority of nabilone over
prochlorperazine as an antiemetic in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy.
_N Engl J Med_. 1979;300(23):1295-1297.

Jatoi A, Windschitl HE, Loprinzi CL, et al. Dronabinol versus megestrol
acetate versus combination therapy for cancer-associated anorexia: a North
Central Cancer Treatment Group study. _J Clin Oncol_. 2002;20(2):567-573.

Johnson JR, Burnell-Nugent M, Lossignol D, et al. Multicenter, double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the efficacy, safety,
and tolerability of THC:CBD extract and THC extract in patients with
intractable cancer-related pain. _J Pain Symptom Manage._ 2010;39(2):167-179.

Johnson JR, Lossignol D, Burnell-Nugent M, Fallon MT. An open-label extension
study to investigate the long-term safety and tolerability of THC/CBD
oromucosal spray and oromucosal THC spray in patients with terminal cancer-
related pain refractory to strong opioid analgesics. _J Pain Symptom Manage_.
2013;46(2):207-218.

Karst M, Salim K, Burstein S, et al. Analgesic effect of the synthetic
cannabinoid CT-3 on chronic neuropathic pain: a randomized controlled trial.
_JAMA_. 2003;290:1757-1762.

Koppel BS, Brust JC, Fife T, et al. Systematic review: efficacy and safety of
medical marijuana in selected neurologic disorders: report of the Guideline
Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. _Neurology_.
2014;82(17):1556-1563.

Kramer JL. Medical marijuana for cancer. _CA Cancer J Clin_. 2014 Dec 10.

Meiri E, Jhangiani H, Vredenburgh JJ, et al. Efficacy of dronabinol alone and
in combination with ondansetron versus ondansetron alone for delayed
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. _Curr Med Res Opin._
2007;23(3):533-543.

Musty RE, Rossi R. Effects of Smoked Cannabis and Oral Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol
on Nausea and Emesis After Cancer Chemotherapy: A Review of State Clinical
Trials. _Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics_. 2001; 1(1): 29-56.

National Cancer Institute. Cannabis and Cannabinoids (PDQ®) Health
Professional Version, updated 12/17/14. Accessed at
www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/cam/cannabis/healthprofessional on March 4,
2015.

Portenoy RK, Ganae-Motan ED, Allende S, et al. Nabiximols for opioid-treated
cancer patients with poorly-controlled chronic pain: a randomized, placebo-
controlled, graded-dose trial. _J Pain_. 2012;13(5):438-449.

Radwan MM, Elsohly MA, Slade D, et al. Biologically active cannabinoids from
high-potency Cannabis sativa. _J Nat Prod._ 2009;72(5):906-911.

Rog DJ, Nurmikko TJ, Young CA. Oromucosal
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol for neuropathic pain associated with
multiple sclerosis: an uncontrolled, open-label, 2-year extension trial. _Clin
Ther._ 2007;29(9):2068-2079.

Ross SA, ElSohly MA, Sultana GN, et al. Flavonoid glycosides and cannabinoids
from the pollen of Cannabis sativa L. _Phytochem Anal_. 2005;16(1):45-48.

Smith PF. New approaches in the management of spasticity in multiple sclerosis
patients: role of cannabinoids. _Ther Clin Risk Manag_. 2010;6:59-63.

Tramér MR, Carroll D, Campbell FA, et al. Cannabinoids for control of
chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review.
_BMJ_. 2001;323:16-21.

Ware MA, Wang T, Shapiro S, et al. Smoked cannabis for chronic neuropathic
pain: a randomized controlled trial. _CMAJ_. 2010;182(14):E694-701.

Wilsey B, Marcotte T, Deutsch R, et al. Low-dose vaporized cannabis
significantly improves neuropathic pain. _J Pain_. 2013;14(2):136-148.

Woolridge E, Barton S, Samuel J, et al. Cannabis use in HIV for pain and other
medical symptoms. _J Pain Symptom Manage_. 2005;29:358-367.

Last Medical Review: March 4, 2015 Last Revised: March 16, 2017

American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For
reprint requests, please see our Content Usage Policy.

##

More In Treatment & Support

  * Understanding Your Diagnosis
  * Finding and Paying for Treatment
  * Treatments and Side Effects
  * Survivorship: During and After Treatment
  * Caregivers and Family
  * Children and Cancer
  * End of Life Care
  * Find Support Programs and Services in Your Area

BackTo Top

**Imagine a world free from cancer.** Help make it a reality.

DONATE

#### Cancer Information

  * Cancer Prevention & Detection
  * Cancer Basics
  * Signs & Symptoms of Cancer
  * Treatments & Side Effects
  * Cancer Facts & Statistics
  * News and Stories
  * Glossary
  * For Health Care Professionals

#### Programs & Services

  * Breast Cancer Support
  * TLC Hair Loss & Mastectomy Products
  * Hope Lodge® Lodging
  * Rides To Treatment
  * Online Support Communities

#### ACS FUNDRAISERS

  * Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walks
  * Relay For Life Events
  * College Relay For Life
  * Coaches vs. Cancer
  * Galas, Balls & Parties
  * Ways to Give
  * Memorial Giving
  * Planned Giving
  * Leadership Giving
  * Donate a Car

#### About ACS

  * Contact Us
  * Local Offices
  * Employment
  * Information for Suppliers
  * Report Fraud or Abuse
  * Global Health
  * ACS CAN
  * Sign Up for Email
  * Policies
  * Our Volunteers

#### More ACS Sites

  * Bookstore
  * Shop
  * Cancer Atlas
  * Press Room
  * Cancer Statistics Center
  * Volunteer Learning Center

#### Follow Us

Twitter Facebook Instagram

Cancer Information, Answers, and Hope. Available Every Minute of Every Day.

### 800.227.2345

Live Chat

#### Follow Us

Twitter Facebook Instagram

  * help 
  * site map 
  * privacy policy - 2018 
  * accessibility 
  * terms of use 
  * state fundraising notices 
  * Site Comments 

(C) 2019 American Cancer Society, Inc. All rights reserved. The American
Cancer Society is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. Cancer.org is
provided courtesy of the Leo and Gloria Rosen family.

Close

##### *

Close

Image **_*of_** *

Previous Next

Close

Close

#### Select A Hope Lodge

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

