

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![Google](/images/branding/googlelogo/2x/googlelogo_color_92x30dp.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

이미지

동영상

뉴스

지도

더보기

쇼핑도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 49,600,000개 (0.43초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 번역 결과

영어

한국어

    
    
    Jurisdictions
    

Jurisdictions

    
    
    관할 구역
    
    
    gwanhal guyeog
    

번역 복사됨

    
    
    번역(여성형)
    
    
    (여성형)
    

번역 복사됨

    
    
    번역(남성형)
    
    
    (남성형)
    

번역 복사됨

* * *

'Jurisdictions'의 번역

명사

* * *

관할권

jurisdiction

* * *

사법권

jurisdiction, judicial power, judicature

* * *

재판권

jurisdiction, judicature

Google 번역에서 열기|

사용자 의견

\---|---

## 사이트 링크가 있는 웹 검색결과

### Jurisdiction - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jurisdiction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Jurisdiction_ is the practical authority granted to a legal body to
administer justice within a defined field of responsibility, e.g., Michigan
tax law. In federations like ...

### Jurisdiction (area)

A jurisdiction is an area with a set of laws under the control of a ...

|

### Diversity jurisdiction

In the law of the United States, diversity jurisdiction is a form of ...

\---|---

wikipedia.org 검색결과 더보기 »

## 웹 검색결과

### JURISDICTION | Cambridge English Dictionary에서의 의미

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어/jurisdiction

  1. 저장된 페이지

_jurisdiction_ 의미, 정의, _jurisdiction_ 의 정의: 1. the authority of a court or
official organization to make decisions and judgments : 2. the official
authority to make ...

### What is jurisdiction? definition and meaning - BusinessDictionary.com

www.businessdictionary.com/definition/jurisdiction.html

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Definition of _jurisdiction_ : Power or right of a legal or political agency
to exercise its authority over a person, subject matter, or territory.
_Jurisdiction_ over a person ...

### Jurisdiction definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary

https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/jurisdiction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Jurisdiction_ definition: _Jurisdiction_ is the power that a court of law or
an official has to carry out legal... | Meaning, pronunciation, translations
and examples.

### jurisdiction - Wiktionary

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/jurisdiction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_jurisdiction_ (countable and uncountable, plural _jurisdictions_ ). The
power, right, or authority to interpret and apply the law. The power or right
to exercise authority.

### Jurisdiction: an overview | Practical Law

https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/3-502-0888

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

This note considers the _jurisdictional_ issues that arise when litigation has
a foreign element. It sets out the rules which determine whether the English
court will ...

### jurisdiction - Dictionary Definition : Vocabulary.com

https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/jurisdiction

  1. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Jurisdiction_ means having a legal right over something. A court can have
_jurisdiction_ over a legal question, and a government can have _jurisdiction_
over another ...

### Laws and Regulations by Jurisdiction | ICLG - ICLG.com

https://iclg.com/jurisdictions

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

The International Comparative Legal Guides provide current and practical
comparative legal information on several _jurisdictions_ in a Q  &A format.

### Jurisdictions - Courts and Tribunals Judiciary

https://www.judiciary.uk/about-the-judiciary/the.../jurisdictions/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Civil justice in England and Wales Civil justice in England and Wales is
mainly dealt with in the county courts and, in ... Find out more about Civil
...

### 관련 검색: Jurisdictions

jurisdiction meaning

jurisdiction 뜻

jurisdiction clause

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

