

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

이미지

동영상

뉴스

지도

더보기

쇼핑도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 192,000,000개 (0.45초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 웹 검색결과

### DRAINING | Cambridge English Dictionary에서의 의미

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어/draining

  1. 저장된 페이지

_draining_ 의미, 정의, _draining_ 의 정의: causing you to lose most of your energy;
very tiring: . 자세히 알아보기.

### 컨테이너 인스턴스 드레이닝 - Amazon Elastic Container Service

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ko_kr/AmazonECS/.../container-instance-
draining.html

  1. 저장된 페이지

컨테이너 인스턴스를 _DRAINING_ 으로 설정할 경우 Amazon ECS는 새 작업이 컨테이너 인스턴스에서 배치를 위해 예약되지 않도록
합니다. 드레이닝 컨테이너 ...

### Draining - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Draining

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Draining_ may refer to: Drainage, the natural or artificial process of water
removal from land; the urban exploration of sewers and storm drains ...

### Draining - Urban Dictionary

https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Draining

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

When someone is speaking ill of another person; to talk down on someone.
Therefore " _draining_ " them of their good vibes/ energy.

### draining - Dictionary Definition : Vocabulary.com

https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/draining

  1. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Something that's _draining_ tires you out, either physically or emotionally.
Some people thrive on spending long days with young children, while others
find it to be ...

### draining - WordReference 영-한 사전

https://www.wordreference.com/enko/draining

  1. 저장된 페이지

Korean 포럼에서 " _draining_ "과의 토론을 찾을 수 없습니다. Contemporary society is
characterized by the _draining_ of civic life  any content. - English Only ...

### Draining definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary

https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/draining

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

The man studied the _draining_ lamb for a moment, then crossed the barn
towards Hyde, the knife in front of him.Thomas, Craig THE LAST RAVEN ...

### draining - Wiktionary

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/draining

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_draining_ (countable and uncountable, plural drainings). (uncountable) The
practice of exploring drains, tunnels, or sewers. (countable) The process by
which ...

### drain | meaning of drain in Longman Dictionary of Contemporary ...

https://www.ldoceonline.com/dictionary/drain

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

She washed up and left the dishes to drain.well- _drained_ /poorly- _drained_
soil (=soil from which water ... Hurriedly _draining_ her cup, she reached for
her purse.

### Draining Synonyms, Draining Antonyms | Thesaurus.com

https://www.thesaurus.com/browse/draining

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Synonyms for _draining_ at Thesaurus.com with free online thesaurus, antonyms,
and definitions. Find descriptive alternatives for _draining_.

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 보완 검색결과

이것을 찾으셨나요?

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

배수 (공학)

배수는 어느 지역으로 부터 과잉지표수와 과잉지하수를 인공적으로 ...배수는 어느 지역으로 부터 과잉지표수와 과잉지하수를 인공적으로
...배수는 어느 지역으로 부터 과잉지표수와 과잉지하수를 인공적으로 제거하는 것이다.

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

