

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

이미지

동영상

뉴스

도서

더보기

지도쇼핑금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 114,000,000개 (0.32초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

도움말: _한국어_ 검색결과만 검색합니다. 환경설정에서 검색 언어를 지정할 수 있습니다.

# 검색결과

## 번역 결과

영어

한국어

    
    
    dysfunction
    

dysfunction

    
    
    disˈfəNGkSHən
    
    
    기능 부전
    
    
    gineung bujeon
    

번역 복사됨

    
    
    번역(여성형)
    
    
    (여성형)
    

번역 복사됨

    
    
    번역(남성형)
    
    
    (남성형)
    

번역 복사됨

* * *

'dysfunction'의 번역

Google 번역에서 열기|

사용자 의견

\---|---

## 웹 검색결과

### DYSFUNCTION | Cambridge English Dictionary에서의 의미

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ko/사전/영어/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지

_dysfunction_ 의미, 정의, _dysfunction_ 의 정의: 1. a problem or fault in a part of
the body or a machine: 2. failure to operate or work well: . 자세히 알아보기.

### Dysfunction | Definition of Dysfunction by Merriam-Webster

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Dysfunction_ definition is - impaired or abnormal functioning. How to use
_dysfunction_ in a sentence.

### Dysfunction - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Dysfunction_ can refer to: Abnormality (behavior) * Dysfunctional family *
Sexual _dysfunction_ * _Dysfunction_ (album), an album by the rock band
Staind; Manifest ...

### dysfunction - Wiktionary

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

A failure to function in an expected or complete manner. Usually refers to a
disorder in a bodily organ (e.g. erectile _dysfunction_ ), a mental disorder,
or the ...

‎English · ‎Noun

### dysfunction - WordReference 영-한 사전

https://www.wordreference.com/enko/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지

Korean 포럼에서 " _dysfunction_ "과의 토론을 찾을 수 없습니다. _Dysfunction_ vs Disfunction -
English Only forum _dysfunction_...grow... - English Only forum

### Dysfunction definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary

https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Dysfunction_ definition: If you refer to a _dysfunction_ in something such as
a relationship or someone 's behaviour... | Meaning, pronunciation,
translations and ...

### Definition of Dysfunction - MedicineNet

https://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Constitutional hepatic _dysfunction_ , (familial nonhemolytic jaundice),;
Dental _dysfunction_ (abnormal functioning of dental structures),; Minimal
brain _dysfunction_ ...

### Dysfunction | Definition of Dysfunction at Dictionary.com

https://www.dictionary.com/browse/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Dysfunction_ definition, malfunctioning, as of an organ or structure of the
body. See more.

### Dysfunction dictionary definition | dysfunction defined - YourDictionary

https://www.yourdictionary.com/dysfunction

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_dysfunction_ definition: _Dysfunction_ is defined as an abnormality or
impairment, or a deviation from accepted social behavior. (noun) When your
kidneys are not ...

### dysfunction - Dictionary Definition : Vocabulary.com

https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/dysfunction

  1. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

If there's _dysfunction_ , then things aren't working right. High blood
pressure is a medical _dysfunction_ , and fighting amongst teammates is a kind
of social ...

### 관련 검색: dysfunction

dysfunction 뜻

dysfunction meaning

disfunction

dysfunctional

dysfunctional family 뜻

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

