

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

뉴스

이미지

동영상

쇼핑

더보기

지도도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 169,000개 (0.45초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 웹 검색결과

### Why is marijuana legal in the Netherlands? - Quora

https://www.quora.com/Why-is-marijuana-legal-in-the-Netherlands

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

2019\. 1. 16. - Cannabis is not _legal_ in the _Netherlands_ , the buying and
selling of _it_ is only tolerated (gedoogd). ... Why _hasn 't_ marijuana been
_legalized_?

Why is marijuana **legal** in many countries?

답변 8개

2018년 12월 3일

Are drugs **legal** in the **Netherlands**?

답변 2개

2018년 2월 23일

Is weed delivery **legal** in the **Netherlands**?

답변 5개

2017년 12월 21일

Why is weed so popular in the **Netherlands**?

답변 3개

2016년 1월 4일

www.quora.com 검색결과 더보기

## 관련 질문

![로드 중...](//www.gstatic.com/ui/v1/activityindicator/loading_24.gif)

Which country legalized all drugs?

Are all drugs decriminalized in Amsterdam?

Are all drugs legal in Portugal?

Is Hash legal in Portugal?

사용자 의견

## 웹 검색결과

### Portugal's radical drugs policy is working. Why hasn't the world copied

...

https://www.theguardian.com/.../portugals-radical-drugs-policy-is-working-why-
hasnt-th...

2017\. 12. 5. - The long read: Since _it decriminalised_ all drugs in 2001,
Portugal has ... She received death threats from drug dealers, and _legal_
threats from ...

### In the Netherlands, 38 years of lessons on 'tolerating' pot | Al Jazeera

...

america.aljazeera.com/.../netherlands-cannabislessonscolorado.ht...

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2014\. 2. 21. - America Tonight travels to the _Netherlands_ to see the
benefits and challenges in being a ... If weed 's _legal_ , people will
partake in moderate ways, like French ... to be true in the _Netherlands_ in
the 38 years since _it decriminalized_ pot. ... media, van der Laan admitted
that _it hasn 't_ exactly worked out that way.

### Pimp State: Sex, Money and the Future of Equality

https://books.google.co.kr/books?isbn=0571278248

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

Kat Banyard - 2016 - ‎Social Science

And _it_ all took place through the _Netherlands_ ' visible, _legal_ ,
licensed ... 'We realize that this _hasn 't_ worked, that trafficking in women
continues,'34 he said. ... 'The regulation has hidden the _legalized_ sector
from the view of the criminal justice ...

### The statistics of drug legalization - Statistics Views

https://www.statisticsviews.com/.../The-statistics-of-drug-legalizati...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2014\. 3. 4. - A young man stops _his_ car just in front of the new store in
the block, that ... one of the two states within the United States that
recently _legalized_ .... Surprisingly, cannabis consumption in the
_Netherlands hasn 't_ exploded and _it_ is ...

### Holland's half-baked attempt to return to the marijuana vanguard

https://www.alternet.org/.../hollands-half-baked-attempt-to-return-...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2019\. 4. 12. - Beginning in the mid-1980s, _Holland_ became the world 's
marijuana mecca. ... And while no European country has completely _legalized
it_ , ...

### Legalizing Marijuana: Some Lessons from The Netherlands - The ...

themonkeycage.org/.../legalizing-marijuana-some-lessons-from-th...

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2012\. 11. 8. - Washington State and Colorado _legalized_ the recreational use
of .... officials that the DEA _hasn 't_ quite slammed the door in _their_
faces yet.

### Portugal decriminalised drugs 14 years ago – and now hardly anyone ...

https://www.independent.co.uk › News › World › Europe

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2015\. 6. 7. - Portugal _decriminalised_ the use of all drugs in 2001. ...
Still, _it 's_ very clear that decriminalisation _hasn 't_ had the severe
consequences that _its_ ...

### Weed: 420 Things You Didn't Know (or Remember) about Cannabis

https://books.google.co.kr/books?isbn=144050444X

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

I.M. Stoned - 2009 - ‎Reference

The Marijuana Policy in the _Netherlands Hasn 't_ Worked In short, if you're
an ... The _Dutch_ government has no intention to reverse _its_ stance on
_decriminalization_ ; the ... world proves that the _legalization_ of cannabis
has a wide range of support.

### Why hardly anyone dies from a drug overdose in Portugal - The ...

https://www.washingtonpost.com/.../why-hardly-anyone-dies-fro...

  1. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2015\. 6. 5. - Perhaps more significantly, the report notes that the use of "
_legal_ highs " -- like ... Still, _it 's_ very clear that _decriminalization
hasn 't_ had the severe ...

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

모든 언어

  * 모든 언어
  * 한국어 웹

모든 날짜

  * 모든 날짜
  * 지난 1시간
  * 지난 1일
  * 지난 1주
  * 지난 1개월
  * 지난 1년
  * 기간 설정...

기간 맞춤설정

시작일종료일

모든 결과

  * 모든 결과
  * 완전일치

Portugal

**Portugal** is the first country that has decriminalized the possession of
small amounts of drugs, to positive results. Anyone caught with any type of
drug in **Portugal** , if it is for personal consumption, will not be
imprisoned.

### Drug liberalization - Wikipedia

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drug_liberalization

관련 검색: Which country legalized all drugs?

You may be surprised to learn that recreational **drugs** are illegal in the
Netherlands. Yes, even pot. But an official policy of tolerance emerged and in
1976 the Dutch parliament **decriminalized** possession of less than 5 grams
of cannabis. That gave rise to a type of establishment found only in this
country. 2013. 7. 17.

### Amsterdam guide: What is legal in the Netherlands? | CNN Travel

https://www.cnn.com/travel/article/amsterdam-travel-legal-
parameters/index.html

관련 검색: Are all drugs decriminalized in Amsterdam?

Even if there are no criminal penalties, these changes did not legalize
**drug** use in **Portugal**. Possession has remained prohibited by
**Portuguese** law, and criminal penalties are still applied to **drug**
growers, dealers and traffickers.

### Drug policy of Portugal - Wikipedia

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drug_policy_of_Portugal

관련 검색: Are all drugs legal in Portugal?

**Legal** status of **cannabis** in **Portugal** – an overview. **Law** In
2001, **Portugal** famously overhauled its drugs policy to allow for a system
based on treatment rather than punitive penalties – making possession of
personal quantities of all drugs, including **cannabis** , a non-criminal
offence.2016. 5. 2.

### Legal status of cannabis in Portugal – an overview - Sensi Seeds

https://sensiseeds.com/en/blog/legal-status-cannabis-portugal-overview/

관련 검색: Is Hash legal in Portugal?

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

