

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

뉴스

이미지

동영상

쇼핑

더보기

지도도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 2,690,000개 (0.53초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

수정된 검색어에 대한 결과: legalizing drugs **_statistically_** lowers the crime rate
dramatically.  
다음 검색어로 대신 검색: legalizing drugs statistiacally lowers the crime rate
dramatically.

# 검색결과

## 웹 검색결과

### Legal marijuana cuts violence says US study, as medical-use laws ...

https://www.theguardian.com/.../legal-marijuana-medical-use-crime-rate-
plummets-us-st...

2018\. 1. 13. - _Murder_ and violent _crime_ found to have decreased most in
states bordering ... into methods to _reduce_ violent _crime_ related to
_drug_ trafficking.

누락된 검색어: ~~statistically~~ ‎ ~~dramatically.~~

[PDF]

### Does Legalizing Marijuana Reduce Crime? - Reason Foundation

https://reason.org/wp.../does-legalizing-marijuana-reduce-crime.p...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Proponents of _legalizing_ marijuana for recreational use say that it will
_reduce_ crime. .... 2017 study found that _crime rates_ fell _significantly_
in the neighborhood of ...

누락된 검색어: ~~statistically~~

### Legal Pot Is Linked to Less Crime - Pacific Standard

https://psmag.com/news/it-is-high-time-we-reduced-crime

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 4. 6. - A new study suggests it also _decreases_ other types of _drug_
use, including binge ... _crime statistics_ and data on alcohol and _drug_
consumption.

누락된 검색어: ~~dramatically.~~

### Colorado Division of Criminal Justice Publishes Report on Impacts of ...

https://www.colorado.gov/.../colorado-division-criminal-justice-p...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 10. 26. - The quantity of cases filed for serious marijuana-related
_crimes_ has remained ... might be in part because legislation changed the
_legal_ indoor plant count, ... The _percentage_ of CSP citations with
marijuana-only impairment has ... to the Rocky Mountain Poison and _Drug_
Center increased _significantly_ from ...

누락된 검색어: ~~lowers~~

### The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on Crime: Evidence from State ...

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3966811/

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

RG Morris 저술 - ‎2014 - ‎80회 인용 - ‎관련 학술자료

2014\. 3. 26. - Debate has surrounded the _legalization of_ marijuana for
medical purposes for decades. ... marijuana had a _significantly_ higher
number of referrals to juvenile court ... of Justice _Statistics_ Web site
(http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/dtd.htm). .... adopted MML after experiencing
_lower crime rates_ in a given year(s), ...

### What Caused Crime to Decline in the U.S.? - The Atlantic

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/...crime.../477408/

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2016\. 4. 15. - The crack- _cocaine_ epidemic in the mid-1980s added fuel to
the fire, and ... Did _lower_ unemployment rates lead to _lower crime rates_?
... Some researchers theorize that greater opportunity for _legal_ income
_reduces_ the need for illegal .... conducted by the federal Bureau of Justice
_Statistics_ — _significantly_ ...

### Study: Marijuana legalization doesn't increase crime | MSNBC

www.msnbc.com/all/does-marijuana-lower-the-crime-rate

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2014\. 4. 15. - Three months after Colorado residents _legalized_ recreational
marijuana with ... researchers from the University of Texas at Dallas argue it
may actually _reduce_ it. Using _statistics_ from the FBI 's Uniform _Crime_
Report and controlling for ... and recreational marijuana, public opinion has
changed _dramatically_.

### Two Years Later: Has the Legalization of Marijuana Affected Crime in ...

rogersandmoss.com/.../56-two-years-later-has-the-legalization-of-...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2016\. 2. 12. - It's been two years since Colorado _legalized_ marijuana. ...
One Area of _Dramatic_ Increase .... Tired of RIGHT WING Trumpers stating
false _statistics_ and lies with no evidence to ... Population increase and a
_crime rate decrease_.

### Legal marijuana: The world watches as Canada's massive social ...

https://newatlas.com/canada-legal-marijuana/56843/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 10. 20. - The argument is that legalization will _reduce_ crime,
eliminate the _drug 's_ black .... A broader crash and fatality rate study
shows almost no _statistical_ shift in ... of marijuana in the US has not
_dramatically_ altered _crime rates_.

[PDF]

### Crime and the Legalization of Recreational Marijuana

ftp.iza.org/dp10522.pdf

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

D Dragone 저술 - ‎2017 - ‎13회 인용 - ‎관련 학술자료

“ _reduce_ the role of criminals in producing and selling _drugs_ [and]
improve ... market not pay, thus _greatly_ reducing fertile ground for crime,
a central theme in Becker 's ... from _legalizing_ cannabis to _crime rates_
remains an elusive question because of .... for the missing data” when
building _statistics_ beyond the county level of ...

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

