

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![Google](/images/branding/googlelogo/2x/googlelogo_color_92x30dp.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

뉴스

이미지

쇼핑

동영상

더보기

지도도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 18,200,000개 (0.52초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

### 동영상

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

5:47

Is Marijuana Harmful to Health?

Healthcare Triage

YouTube - 2014. 4. 20.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

3:43

Weed is not more dangerous than alcohol

Vox

YouTube - 2014. 7. 11.

## 웹 검색결과

### Alcohol or marijuana: Which is worse for your health? - Business Insider

https://www.businessinsider.com/alcohol-marijuana-which-worse-...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 8. 28. - Here's what we know about which substance is _more harmful_.
... _Marijuana_ appears to be _significantly_ less addictive _than_ alcohol.
.... calories when smoking, _marijuana_ users generally don 't have higher
_body_ -mass indexes.

### DrugFacts: Marijuana | National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)

https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 6. 22. - A person _then_ inhales the vapor, not the smoke. ... The
_body_ absorbs _THC more_ slowly when the person eats or drinks it. In that
case ... The popularity of edibles also increases the chance of _harmful_
reactions. ... Researchers so _far_ haven 't found a higher risk for lung
cancer in people who smoke _marijuana_.

‎Marijuana as Medicine · ‎Longitudinal Study of ... · ‎Drugged Driving

### Even Sugar Is More Harmful Than Marijuana, Americans Say - HuffPost

https://www.huffpost.com/.../americans-think-that-even_n_49499...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2014\. 3. 12. - Even Sugar Is _More Harmful Than Marijuana_ , Americans Say
... which harms nearly every organ in the _body_ and causes the deaths of ...
On the other hand, considering the health effects associated with, say,
drinking _a lot_ of ...

### Synthetic Marijuana is Far More Dangerous Than Weed - The Crux

blogs.discovermagazine.com/.../synthetic-marijuana-more-danger...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 8. 29. - Synthetic _Marijuana_ is _Far More Dangerous Than Weed_ ...
and even trigger heart attacks or strokes when the _body 's_ adrenaline gets
flowing.

### Marijuana - Medical News Today

https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320984.php

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 8. 2. - Alcohol ' _more damaging_ to brain health _than marijuana_ '
... However, early studies that tested this hypothesis in _humans_ revealed
that ... A study published in 2017 found that the use of CBD resulted in _far_
fewer seizures ...

### Alcohol 'more damaging to brain health than marijuana'

https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320895.php

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 2. 12. - Drinking is more _harmful_ for the brain _than_ using
_marijuana_ , say ... is likely to be _much more harmful_ to brain health
_than_ using _marijuana_. "[.

### 7 facts that prove alcohol is way more dangerous than marijuana ...

https://www.salon.com/.../7_facts_that_prove_alcohol_is_way_m...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2015\. 7. 8. - _Marijuana_ is statistically less _harmful than_ alcohol, and
it 's time to treat it that way. ... Alcohol is more _toxic_ , more addictive,
more _harmful to the body_ , more ... _far more_ – and more significant –
health problems _than marijuana_. 4.

### No High Risk: Marijuana May be Less Harmful Than Alcohol, Tobacco

https://www.nbcnews.com/.../marijuana-safer-alcohol-tobacco-stu...

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2015\. 2. 25. - No High Risk: _Marijuana_ May be Less _Harmful Than_ Alcohol,
Tobacco ... researchers measured the potential _harm_ of these drugs in a
_more_ quantitative ... have deployed the battle cry that cannabis is _far_
safer _than_ alcohol.

### What are the true risks of taking cannabis? | Science | The Guardian

https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/.../what-are-the-risks-of-taking-
cannab...

  1. 유사한 페이지

2016\. 4. 15. - _That is far_ beyond the daily consumption of even the _most_
enthusiastic user. ... Is high-potency cannabis _more harmful than_ weaker
strains? ... The _body_ produces its own _THC_ -like substances called
endocannabinoids. These ...

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

