

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile
    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out

### Marijuana Home

  * Medical Reference
  * Features
  * Video
  * Slideshows & Images
  * Quizzes
  * News Archive

### Mental Health

  * Anxiety & Panic Disorders
  * Bipolar Disorder
  * Depression
  * Eating Disorders
  * Schizophrenia
  * Substance Abuse & Addiction
  * News & Features
  * Reference
  * Quizzes
  * Slideshows
  * Videos
  * Questions & Answers
  * Message Board
  * Find a Psychiatrist

### Related to Mental Health

  * ADHD
  * Crisis Assistance
  * Health & Balance
  * Living Healthy
  * Military Families Support
  * Personality Disorders
  * PTSD
  * Stress Management
  * More Related Topics

  * Mental Health

  * Reference

![](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/mobile/icons/target_icon.png)

##### Slideshow: Self-Care and Recovery After Trauma

# How Does Marijuana Affect You?

### In this Article

#### In this Article

#### In this Article

  * Key Chemicals
  * Ways to Use It
  * Benefits
  * Harms

Medical marijuana is now legal in a majority of states. A small but growing
number of states and cities have legalized recreational pot as well. Marijuana
still is the most commonly used illegal drug in the U.S.

## Video Transcript

American Cancer Society: “Marijuana and Cancer.”; Mayo Clinic: “Medical
marijuana,” “Is medical marijuana legal?”; American Lung Association:
“Marijuana and Lung Health.”

AREFA CASSOOBHOY: Medical marijuana. It's in the news as more and more states
legalize it. But what is it used for? Studies show that marijuana may help
several conditions. It's most commonly prescribed for chemotherapy side
effects like nausea, vomiting, or weight loss. Muscle spasms and stiffness
caused by multiple sclerosis. Various pain syndromes and seizures. It can be
taken several ways. Inhaled, either through smoke or vapor, as an edible like
in a cookie or an herbal tea, or as a liquid under the tongue. But marijuana
is not without side effects. It can cause dizziness, confusion, and
drowsiness. It can worsen some mental illnesses like depression. And like
cigarettes, when smoked, it can hurt your lungs. So if you live in a legal
state, talk to your doctor. Like any treatment, you can weigh the benefits and
risks to determine if medical marijuana is right for you. For WebMD, I'm Dr.
Arefa Cassoobhoy.

Marijuana has some well-proven benefits, including relief for long-term pain.
But smoking marijuana can have some bad effects on your health, including
making breathing problems worse.

The federal ban on marijuana makes it hard to study its effects on humans. For
example, very little research exists on edible marijuana.

## Key Chemicals

Marijuana comes from the dried flowers of cannabis plants. __It has more than
500 chemicals. Cannabis can have a psychoactive -- or mind-altering -- effect
on you.

**THC** : This is the main psychoactive agent in marijuana. Its full name is
delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol. When you smoke cannabis, THC goes from your
lungs into your bloodstream and then into your brain. It stimulates the part
of your brain that responds to sources of pleasure, like food and sex. That
lets loose a chemical called dopamine, which causes the high.

THC’s effects can vary depending on who you are, the potency of the strain,
whether you smoke it or eat it, and other things. It can:

  * Give you a relaxed sense of well-being
  * Heighten your senses, like make colors seem brighter
  * Change your sense of time
  * Make you anxious, afraid, or panicked
  * Make you hallucinate

**CBD**. Also called cannabidiol, this is another well-studied compound. It
doesn’t make you high. Instead, it can counteract the effects from THC and
bring you down from any paranoia or anxiety. It also has been found to have
beneficial uses in treatment the side effects of chemotherapy and treating
epilepsy.

## Ways to Use It

You can get cannabis into your body in two main ways: smoking and eating.

**Smoking**. This, along with inhaling (vaping), is the fastest way for
marijuana to work. Your bloodstream carries the THC to your brain so quickly
that you may start to feel high within seconds or minutes. The amount of THC
in your blood typically peaks in about 30 minutes, then tapers off in 1-4
hours.

#### Continued

Ways you can smoke cannabis include:

  * Rolled into a cigarette
  * In a pipe or water pipe, called a bong
  * In a cigar that has been hollowed out and refilled with marijuana, called a blunt
  * In the form of sticky resins that have been drawn from the cannabis plant. Resins often have much higher amounts of THC than regular marijuana.

**Eating or drinking**. This slows marijuana’s effects because the THC has to
go through your digestive system. It may take 30 minutes to 2 hours for you to
get high. But it will last longer -- up to 8 hours -- than if you smoked or
vaped pot. You can mix cannabis into brownies, cookies, candy, and other
foods, or brew it into a tea.

Whether you smoke cannabis or eat it, remember that it can:

  * Heighten alcohol’s effects on your body
  * Interact with medications. For example, it can raise the dangers of bleeding with blood thinners or make some antiviral drugs not work as well.
  * Hurt your concentration and motor skills. It’s dangerous to drive while you’re high.

## Benefits

People have turned to the cannabis plant as medicine for hundreds of years.
Researchers have found that cannabis can help with:

  * Ongoing pain (this is the most common use for medical marijuana)
  * Nausea or throwing up from chemotherapy
  * Seizures from epilepsy, Dravet syndrome or Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.
  * Stiff muscles or muscle spasms from multiple sclerosis. The evidence is stronger for self-reported symptoms by people with MS than for improvements measured by experts.

Evidence is limited that marijuana might help with:

  * Sleep problems in people with fibromyalgia, MS, long-term pain, and sleep apnea
  * Anxiety
  * Loss of appetite and weight loss in people with AIDS

## Harms

Researchers don’t fully understand all the ways cannabis can affect your mind
and body. That’s especially true when it comes to children and young adults
and their brains.

**Mind.** Some evidence suggests that marijuana hurts your learning, memory,
and attention for 24 hours after use. Evidence is less strong that your mental
skills will get worse with long-term marijuana use. Limited evidence shows
that marijuana hurts how you do in school or on the job.

#### Continued

**Cancer.** No link has been found between smoking marijuana and cancers in
the lung, head, or the neck. Limited evidence suggests that heavy marijuana
use may lead to one type of testicular cancer. Researchers don’t have enough
information whether cannabis affects other cancers, including prostate,
cervical, and bladder cancers and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

**Lungs.** Regular marijuana use can give you constant coughs and phlegm. They
may go away when you stop smoking. It’s unclear if marijuana can lead to
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder. Cannabis actually helps open
the airways at first. But evidence shows that regular marijuana use will make
your lungs not work as well.

**Mental health.** People with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders may
be more likely to use marijuana heavily, about twice a month. Researchers have
also found links between cannabis use and bipolar disorder, major depression,
and childhood anxiety. What’s hard to untangle is if marijuana use leads to
mental illness, or if it’s the other way around.

**See More:A Visual Guide to Schizophrenia**

**Babies and children**. Infants born to women who smoke marijuana while
pregnant are more likely to be underweight, be born too early, and need
neonatal intensive care. But researchers don’t have enough information to say
much about how the babies do later in life.

**Secondhand smoke**. You probably won’t get high by breathing in someone
else’s marijuana smoke. Very little THC is released in the air when they
breathe out. Chances are very small that secondhand cannabis smoke will cause
you to fail a drug test.

WebMD Medical Reference Reviewed by Neil Lava, MD on December 15, 2018

#### Sources

SOURCES:

Governing.com: “State Marijuana Laws in 2018 Map.”

National Institute on Drug Abuse: “What is marijuana?” “How does marijuana
work?”  
“Secondhand Marijuana Smoke?”

American Cancer Society: “Marijuana and Cancer.”

National Academies Press: “The Health Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids:
The Current State of Evidence and Recommendations for Research.”

Mayo Clinic: “Marijuana,” “Medical marijuana.”

_Harm Reduction Journal_ : “Cannabis and tobacco smoke are not equally
carcinogenic.”

© 2018 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

Pagination

### Top Picks

  * Tips for Living With OCD
  * Psychotic vs. Psychopathic: What's the Difference?
  * MS and Depression: How Are They Linked?
  * Alcohol Withdrawal Symptoms
  * Visual Guide to Binge Eating DIsorder
  * Feeling Anxious? Get the Scoop on GAD

### further reading

  * Slideshow: Celebrities Who Are Open About Addiction
  * Slideshow: Could You Be Hooked? Surprising Addictions
  * Video: How Does Smoking Marijuana Hurt Your Brain?
  * Recreational Marijuana FAQ
  * Medical Marijuana in Colorado
  * Infertility: Tobacco, Marijuana, and Other Drugs
  * What Is Marijuana Abuse?
  * Marijuana Topics

### Today on WebMD

![contemplation](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/_2012/04_2012/after_divorce_features/110x70_after_divorce_features.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### What Is Depression?

Differences between feeling depressed or feeling blue.

![lunar

eclipse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_bipolar_disorder_2_other/110x70_generic_bipolar_disorder_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Mood Swings? It Could Be Bipolar Disorder

Signs of mania and depression.

![man

screaming](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/_2011/12_2011/schizophrenia_or_bipolar_disorder_features/110x70_schizophrenia_or_bipolar_disorder_features.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Understanding Schizophrenia

Causes, symptoms, and therapies.

![woman looking into

fridge](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/community/whats_in_your_fridge_community/110x70_whats_in_your_fridge_community.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Binge Eating Disorder: An Overview

When food controls you.

### Recommended for You

![Woman standing in grass field barefoot, wind

blowi](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/depression_treatment_tips_features/69x75_depression_treatment_tips_features.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### 8 Depression Treatment Tips

![senior man eating a

cake](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/02_2012/calories_and_memory_loss/69x75_calories_and_memory_loss.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Curbing Compulsive Overeating

![Phobias](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/69x75_thumbnail_phobias_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### Phobias: What Are You Afraid Of?

![woman reading medicine

warnings](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/09_2012/k2_ongoing_problem_092512/69x75_k2_ongoing_problem_092512.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### How Marijuana Affects You

![depressed young

woman](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/_2012/07_2012/depression_the_second_time_around_features/69x75_depression_the_second_time_around_features.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Types of Mental Illness

![man with arms on

table](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/08_2012/psoriasis_increases_diabetes_risk/69x75_psoriasis_increases_diabetes_risk.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Sociopath vs. Psychopath

![veteran](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/08_2012/male_veteran_health/69x75_male_veteran_health.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### PTSD: Look for These Signs

![man cringing and covering

ears](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/10_2012/top_10_nasty_noises_10122012xml/69x75_top_10_nasty_noises_10122012xml.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### What Is Misophonia?

### Tools & Resources

  * What Is Gender Dysphoria?
  * Misophonia: Sensitive to Sounds
  * Time for a Mental Health Check
  * Why Am I So Angry?
  * Fear of of Public Places?
  * What 'Am I Crazy?' Really Means

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

