

# 접근성 링크

주요 콘텐츠로 이동접근성 도움말

접근성 관련 의견 보내기

몇 초 안에 이동하지 않는 경우 여기를 클릭하세요.

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

현재 사용 중인 Chrome은 이전 버전입니다.보안을 위해 즉시 업데이트

×

로그인

![여자 월드컵 2019 - Day 6](/logos/doodles/2019/2019-womens-world-cup-

day-6-5696430367309824-s.png)

![](/tia/tia.png)

  * 삭제

부적절한 예상 검색어 신고

# 검색 모드

전체

이미지

뉴스

동영상

지도

더보기

쇼핑도서금융

설정

검색 환경설정언어 (Languages)

세이프서치 사용 설정

고급검색검색 활동Google 검색에 표시되는 데이터검색 도움말

도구

검색결과 약 139,000,000개 (0.53초)

Looking for results in English?

Change to English  
한국어 계속 사용

언어 설정

# 검색결과

## 웹 검색결과

### Cardiovascular disease - Wikipedia

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardiovascular_disease

  1. 저장된 페이지
  2. 유사한 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Cardiovascular_ disease (CVD) is a class of diseases that involve the heart
or blood vessels. CVD includes coronary artery diseases (CAD) such as angina
and ...

**Treatment** ‎: ‎Treating high blood pressure, ‎high ...

**Prevention** ‎: ‎Healthy eating‎, exercise, avoiding ...

**Deaths** ‎: ‎17.9 million / 32% (2015)

**Usual onset** ‎: ‎Older adults

‎Types · ‎Risk factors · ‎Screening · ‎Prevention

### What is Cardiovascular Disease? | American Heart Association

https://www.heart.org/en/health.../what-is-cardiovascular-disease

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Cardiovascular_ disease can refer to a number of conditions: Heart disease.
Heart and blood vessel disease (also called heart disease) includes numerous
...

‎Top 10 Myths About ... · ‎Atherosclerosis · ‎Coronary Artery Disease

### WHO | Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) - World Health Organization

https://www.who.int/cardiovascular_diseases/en/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Cardiovascular_ diseases (CVDs) are disorders of the heart and blood vessels
and include coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, rheumatic heart
...

### Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) - World Health Organization

https://www.who.int › Newsroom › Fact sheets › Detail

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2017\. 5. 17. - WHO _cardiovascular_ diseases fact sheet providing key facts
and information on risk factors, symptoms, rheumatic heart disease, treatment
and ...

### Cardiovascular disease: Symptoms, types, treatments, and causes

https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/257484.php

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 1. 24. - What is _cardiovascular_ disease, and what are angina and
heart attack? Find out more about the symptoms, types, treatments, and common
...

### Heart disease - Symptoms and causes - Mayo Clinic

https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/.../syc-20353118

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2018\. 3. 22. - _Cardiovascular_ disease symptoms may be different for men and
women. For instance, men are more likely to have chest pain; women are more
...

### Cardiovascular disease - NHS

https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/cardiovascular-disease/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

_Cardiovascular_ disease (CVD) is a general term for conditions affecting the
heart or blood vessels. It 's usually associated with a build-up of fatty
deposits inside ...

### Heart and Cardiovascular Diseases - WebMD

https://www.webmd.com › Heart Disease › Guide

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

2017\. 7. 25. - It's the leading cause of death in the U.S. It's important to
learn about your heart to help prevent it. If you have it, you can live a
healthier, more ...

### Cardiovascular Systems, Inc. | CSI360

https://csi360.com/

  1. 저장된 페이지

이 페이지 번역하기

Leading the way by developing and commercializing innovative solutions for
treating peripheral artery disease (PAD) and coronary artery disease (CAD).

### Cardiovascular diseases - Latest research and news | Nature

https://www.nature.com › subjects

\- 이 페이지 번역하기

Glucose screening in pregnancy to predict future _cardiovascular_ risk ...
disease, and _cardiovascular_ diseases are an important health concern in this
setting.

### 관련 검색: cardiovascular

cardiovascular 뜻

cardiovascular disease 뜻

cardiovascular system

cardiovascular research

cardiovascular disease risk factor

cardiovascular exercise

cardiovascular journal

ischemic cardiovascular disease

cardiovascular risk

cardiovascular death

# 페이지 탐색

| 1| 2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9| 10| 다음  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---

# 보완 검색결과

## 지식 검색결과

심장학

연구 분야

![cardiovascular에 대한 이미지

검색결과](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

### 설명

심장학은 사람이나 짐승의 심장 질환을 다루는 의학의 분과이다. 이 분야는 선천성 심장병, 관상동맥질환, 심부전, 심장판막증, 전기생리의
진단과 치료를 포함한다. 위키백과

관련 검색어

5개 이상 항목 더보기5개 이상 항목 보기

![기도학](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

기도학

![종양학](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

종양학

![신장학](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

신장학

![내분비학](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

내분비학

![여성의학과](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///////yH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

여성의학과

사용자 의견

# 바닥글 링크

대한민국

\- - - 자세히 알아보기

도움말의견 보내기개인정보처리방침약관

  * Google 계정
  * 검색
  * 지도
  * YouTube
  * Play
  * 뉴스
  * Gmail
  * 주소록
  * 드라이브
  * 캘린더
  * 번역
  * 사진
  * 쇼핑

더보기

  * 문서
  * 도서
  * Blogger
  * Duo
  * 행아웃
  * Keep
  * Jamboard
  * 컬렉션

Google 제품 모두 보기

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

