

# Psychology Today

  * Find a Therapist 

# Find a Therapist

Therapists v

    
    
    * Therapists
    * Treatment Centers
    * Psychiatrists
    * Support Groups
    

x

Therapists: Log In | Sign Up

  * Get Help 

#### Mental Health

    
    
    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

#### Do I Need Help?

    
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

  * Magazine 

#### Current

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe

#### Recent

    
    
    *     *     *     * Issue Archive
    

  * Today 

#### News

    
    
    * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
    

#### Essential Reads

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)
    

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

#### Trending Topics

    
    
    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All
    

us

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

# Search

Search

Back

Psychology Today

  * Home
  * Find a Therapist
  * Get Help
  * Magazine
  * Today

Back

### Find a Therapist

#### Get Help

  *     * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
  * #### Members

    * Login
    * Sign Up
    * 

Back

### Get Help

#### Mental Health

  *     * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

    
    
    * #### Do I Need Help?
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

Back

### Magazine

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe Issue Archive

Back

### Today

#### News

  *     * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
  * #### Essential Reads

    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

  * #### Trending Topics

    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All

Go

![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/icons/icon-check-circle-gray.svg)
Verified by Psychology Today

# Cannabis/Marijuana

Cannabis, or marijuana, is a psychoactive herb that comes from the cannabis
plant. This mind-altering substance is an illegal drug in most states;
however, laws are changing, especially in the western regions. Marijuana is a
mixture of dried, shredded flowers, as well as leaves of the plant _Cannabis
sativa_. Stronger forms of cannabis include sinsemilla, hashish or hash, and
hash oil.

Marijuana is usually smoked, and can be found in electronic cigarettes as well
as in cigars that have been emptied of tobacco and refilled with marijuana,
known as blunts. Marijuana cigarettes or blunts sometimes include crack
cocaine, and some users mix marijuana in food or brew it in tea.

All forms of cannabis are mind-altering, psychoactive drugs, and all forms
contain delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the main active chemical in
marijuana. Marijuana's effect on the user depends on the amount of THC in
which the person is exposed. The potency of the drug is measured by the
average amount of THC in test samples confiscated by law enforcement agencies.
These samples showed the following:

  * Most ordinary marijuana contained, on average, 7 percent THC.
  * Sinsemilla, from buds, contained 12 percent THC on average, but ranged from less than 1 percent to 27 percent.
  * Hashish, the sticky resin from female flowers, had an average of 10 percent THC, but ranged from 1 percent to 26 percent.

In addition, research that appeared in _The Lancet Psychiatry_ has found that
in people who smoke cannabis regularly, or those who smoke it with a high THC
potency, are at more at risk for first psychotic episodes.

The Monitoring the Future Survey, conducted yearly, includes students from
middle through high school. An important finding from a recent survey is the
dramatic increase in vaping by adolescents. There has been a significant
increase in the vaping of all three substances nicotine, marijuana, as well as
flavoring alone. There has also been little change in marijuana use in this
age bracket. Marijuana prevalence rose by .5 percent points to 23.9 percent in
2018, while there was a significant increase in the prior year. Annual
prevalence stands at 11 percent, 28 percent, and 36 percent in grades 8, 10,
and 12 respectively.

  * What Medical Marijuana Is, and Is Not, Good for
  * New Risks in Smoking Marijuana
  * Some Types of Pain, but Not Others
  * Are Seniors Turning to Cannabis?

## Symptoms

Sign and symptoms as cataloged by the DSM-5:

A problematic pattern of cannabis use leading to clinically significant
impairment or dis­tress, as manifested by at least two of the following,
occurring within a 12-month period:

  * Cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than intended.
  * There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control cannabis use.
  * A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain cannabis, use canna­bis, or recover from its effects.
  * Craving or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis.
  * Recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfill major obligations at work, school, or home.
  * Continued cannabis use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interper­sonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of cannabis.
  * Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced be­cause of cannabis use.
  * Recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
  * Cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by cannabis.

Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:

  * A need for markedly increased amounts of cannabis to achieve intoxication or desired effect. 
  * Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of cannabis.
  * Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for cannabis; cannabis is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

Because some cannabis users are motivated to minimize their amount or
frequency of use, it is important to be aware of common signs and symptoms of
cannabis use and intox­ication so as to better assess the extent of use. As
with other substances, experienced users of cannabis develop behavioral and
pharmacological tolerance such that it can be difficult to detect when they
are under the influence. Signs of acute and chronic use include red eyes
(conjunctival injection), cannabis odor on clothing, yellowing of finger tips
(from smoking joints), chronic cough, burning of incense (to hide the odor),
and exaggerated craving and impulse for specific foods, sometimes at unusual
times of the day or night.

With adolescent users, changes in mood stability, energy level, and eating
patterns are commonly observed. These signs and symptoms are likely due to the
direct effects of can­nabis use (intoxication) and the subsequent effects
following acute intoxication (coming down), as well as attempts to conceal use
from others. School-related problems are com­monly associated with cannabis
use disorder in adolescents, particularly a dramatic drop in grades, truancy,
and reduced interest in general school activities and outcomes.

Cannabis use disorder among adults typically involves well-established
patterns of daily cannabis use that continue despite clear mental health or
medical problems. Many adults have experienced repeated desire to stop or have
failed at repeated cessation attempts. Milder adult cases may resemble the
more common adolescent cases in that cannabis use is not as frequent or heavy
but continues despite potential significant consequences of sustained use.
Meanwhile, the rate of use among middle-age and older adults appears to be
increasing.

Early onset of cannabis use (prior to age 15 years) is a robust predictor of
the de­velopment of cannabis use disorder and other types of substance use
disorders and mental disorders during young adulthood. Such early onset is
likely related to concurrent other externalizing problems, most notably
conduct disorder symptoms. However, early onset is also a predictor of
internalizing problems and probably reflects a general risk factor for the
development of mental health disorders.

## Causes

Associated features, development, and course as cataloged by the DSM-5:  
Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report that it is being used to
cope with mood, sleep, pain, or other physiological or mental health problems,
and those diagnosed with cannabis use disorder frequently do have other
concurrent mental disorders. Careful assessment typically reveals reports of
cannabis use contributing to exacerbation of these same symptoms, as well as
other reasons for frequent use (to experience euphoria, to forget about
problems, in response to anger, as an enjoyable social activity). Related to
this issue, some individuals who use cannabis multiple times per day for the
aforementioned reasons do not perceive themselves as (and thus do not report)
spending an excessive amount of time under the influence or recovering from
the effects of cannabis, despite be­ing intoxicated on cannabis or coming down
from it effects for the majority of most days. An important marker of a
substance use disorder diagnosis, particularly in milder cases, is continued
use despite a clear risk of negative consequences to other valued activities
or relationships (school, work, sport activity, partner or parent
relationship).

The onset of cannabis use disorder can occur at any time during or following
adolescence, but onset is most commonly during adolescence or young adulthood.
Although much less frequent, onset of cannabis use disorder in the preteen
years or in the late 20s or older can occur. Recent acceptance by some of the
use and availability of "medical marijuana" may increase the rate of onset of
cannabis use disorder among older adults.

Generally, cannabis use disorder develops over an extended period of time,
although the progression appears to be more rapid in adolescents, particularly
those with pervasive conduct problems. Most people who develop a cannabis use
disorder typically establish a pattern of cannabis use that gradually
increases in both frequency and amount. Cannabis, along with tobacco and
alcohol, is traditionally the first substance that adolescents try. Many
perceive cannabis use as less harmful than alcohol or tobacco use, and this
percep­tion likely contributes to increased use. Moreover, cannabis
intoxication does not typically result in as severe behavioral and cognitive
dysfunction as does significant alcohol intox­ication, which may increase the
probability of more frequent use in more diverse situa­tions than with
alcohol. These factors likely contribute to the potential rapid transition
from cannabis use to cannabis use disorder among some adolescents and the
common pattern of using throughout the day that is commonly observed among
those with more severe problems.

Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adolescents, and young adults is
typically ex­pressed as excessive use with peers that is a component of a
pattern of other delinquent behaviors usually associated with conduct
problems. Milder cases primarily reflect continued use despite clear problems
related to disapproval of use by other peers, school ad­ministration, or
family, which also places the youth at risk for physical or behavioral
consequences. In more severe cases, there is a progression to using alone or
using through­out the day such that use interferes with daily functioning and
takes the place of previ­ously established, prosocial activities.

## Treatment

Each individual is different, and treatment is tailored to a person's needs.
First, individuals need to acknowledge whether they have a problem, which will
make controlling their cravings easier. People in treatment can learn
behavioral strategies to change habits. Sometimes, medications are part of the
treatment regimen.

  * Treatment should enable patients to reduce drug use.
  * Improve the person's ability to function.
  * Minimize complications for people with additional medical problems such as heart disease or others.
  * Adopt healthier lifestyles.

Treatments for marijuana dependence can include:

  * Detoxification
  * Behavioral therapies
  * Counseling
  * Support groups

There are currently no medications for treating marijuana dependence. Drug
treatment researchers are identifying which characteristics of users are
predictors of treatment success and which approaches to treatment can be most
helpful.

**Find a Treatment Program here**.

#### References

  * American Psychiatric Association—Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
  * National Institute on Drug Abuse, Child Abuse and Neglect (NIDA)
  * National Institute on Drug Abuse
  * National Institutes of Health - U.S. National Library of Medicine
  * Monitoring the Future Survey
  * The Lancet Psychiatry

Last reviewed 02/22/2019

## Cannabis/Marijuana Resources

### Get Help

Find a substance abuse therapist.

### Diagnosis

  * Substance-Related Disorders
  * Hallucinogens

### Test Yourself

  * Self-Control and Self-Monitoring Test

### Connected Topics

  * Addiction

advertisement

## Find a Therapist

Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from Psychology
Today.

### Cities:

  * Atlanta, GA
  * Austin, TX
  * Baltimore, MD
  * Boston, MA
  * Brooklyn, NY
  * Charlotte, NC
  * Chicago, IL
  * Columbus, OH
  * Dallas, TX
  * Denver, CO
  * Detroit, MI
  * Houston, TX
  * Indianapolis, IN
  * Jacksonville, FL
  * Las Vegas, NV
  * Los Angeles, CA
  * Louisville, KY
  * Memphis, TN
  * Miami, FL
  * Milwaukee, WI
  * Minneapolis, MN
  * Nashville, TN
  * New York, NY
  * Oakland, CA
  * Omaha, NE
  * Philadelphia, PA
  * Phoenix, AZ
  * Pittsburgh, PA
  * Portland, OR
  * Raleigh, NC
  * Sacramento, CA
  * Saint Louis, MO
  * San Antonio, TX
  * San Diego, CA
  * San Francisco, CA
  * San Jose, CA
  * Seattle, WA
  * Tucson, AZ
  * Washington, DC

Are you a Therapist?

Get Listed Today

advertisement

Psychology Today

![Facebook](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-facebook.svg)

![Twitter](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-twitter.svg)

![Instagram](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-instagram.svg)

## Recent Issues

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Subscribe Today!

  * About
  * Privacy
  * Terms

United States ![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/actions/country-switcher-

body.svg) v

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Psychology Today (C) 2019 Sussex Publishers, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

