

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile
    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out

Drugs & Medications

# Dronabinol Solution

COMMON BRAND(S): Syndros

GENERIC NAME(S): Dronabinol

Read Reviews (19)Find Lowest Prices

  * Uses
  * Side Effects
  * Precautions
  * Interactions
  * Overdose
  * Images

  * Uses

  * Side Effects
  * Precautions
  * Interactions
  * Overdose
  * Images

Uses

## Uses

Dronabinol is used to treat nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy.
It is used when other drugs usually used to control nausea and vomiting have
not worked well. Dronabinol is also used to treat loss of appetite and weight
loss in people with HIV infection. Dronabinol (also called THC) is a man-made
form of a natural substance in marijuana.

### How to use Dronabinol Solution

Read the Patient Information Leaflet and Instructions for Use if available
from your pharmacist before you start taking dronabinol and each time you get
a refill. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.

Take this medication by mouth as directed by your doctor, usually up to 4 to 6
times daily if you are taking it to control nausea and vomiting, or twice
daily (1 hour before lunch and 1 hour before dinner) if you are taking it to
treat loss of appetite. Drink a full glass of water (8 ounces/240 milliliters)
right after taking each dose. Follow your doctor's instructions carefully.

Carefully measure the dose using a special measuring device/spoon. Do not use
a household spoon because you may not get the correct dose.

The dosage is based on your medical condition and response to treatment. If
you are taking this medication to control nausea and vomiting, your dosage may
also be based on your body size.

Do not increase your dose or use this drug more often or for longer than
prescribed. Your condition will not improve any faster, and your risk of
serious side effects will increase.

If you suddenly stop using this medication, you may have withdrawal symptoms
(such as irritability, trouble sleeping, restlessness, hot flashes, diarrhea).
To help prevent withdrawal, your doctor may lower your dose slowly. Withdrawal
is more likely if you have used dronabinol for a long time or in high doses.
Tell your doctor or pharmacist right away if you have withdrawal.

Though it helps many people, this medication may sometimes cause addiction.
This risk may be higher if you have a substance use disorder (such as overuse
of or addiction to drugs/alcohol). Take this medication exactly as prescribed
to lower the risk of addiction. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more
details.

Tell your doctor if your condition does not get better or if it gets worse.

### Related Links

What conditions does Dronabinol Solution treat?

Find Lowest Prices

* * *

Read More

Side Effects

## Side Effects

Dizziness, drowsiness, confusion, feeling "high," an exaggerated sense of
well-being, lightheadedness, nausea, vomiting, or stomach/abdominal pain may
occur as your body adjusts to the medication. If any of these effects last or
get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.

To reduce the risk of dizziness and lightheadedness, get up slowly when rising
from a sitting or lying position.

Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has
judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many
people using this medication do not have serious side effects.

Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including:
fainting, fast/pounding heartbeat, mental/mood changes (such as anxiety,
nervousness, hallucinations, abnormal thoughts, paranoia).

A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical
help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction,
including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat),
severe dizziness, trouble breathing.

This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other
effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.

In the US -

Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side
effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.

In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may
report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.

### Related Links

List Dronabinol Solution side effects by likelihood and severity.

Find Lowest Prices

* * *

Read More

Precautions

## Precautions

Before taking dronabinol, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic
to it; or to marijuana; or if you have any other allergies. This product may
contain inactive ingredients (such as alcohol), which can cause allergic
reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.

Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical
history, especially of: personal or family history of a substance use disorder
(such as overuse of or addiction to drugs/alcohol), heart disease, high blood
pressure, mental/mood disorders (such as mania, depression, schizophrenia),
seizures.

This drug may make you dizzy or drowsy or may affect your judgment. Alcohol or
marijuana can worsen these effects. Do not drive, use machinery, or do
anything that needs alertness until you can do it safely. Avoid alcoholic
beverages. Talk to your doctor if you are using marijuana.

Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you
use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal
products).

Children may be more sensitive to the side effects of this drug, especially
drowsiness and mental/mood changes.

Older adults may be more sensitive to the side effects of this drug,
especially drowsiness, dizziness, lightheadedness, and mental/mood changes.

During pregnancy, this medication should be used only when clearly needed.
Discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor.

This medication passes into breast milk. Breast-feeding while using this drug
is not recommended. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding.

### Related Links

What should I know regarding pregnancy, nursing and administering Dronabinol
Solution to children or the elderly?

Find Lowest Prices

* * *

Read More

Interactions

## Interactions

Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk
for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug
interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including
prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your
doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any
medicines without your doctor's approval.

Dronabinol solution contains alcohol. Certain medications (such as disulfiram,
metronidazole) should not be taken within 2 weeks before, during, or 7 days
after taking dronabinol solution. Doing so can lead to a reaction that may
include flushing, throbbing headache, breathing problems (such as shortness of
breath, fast breathing), nausea, vomiting, dizziness, extreme tiredness,
fainting, fast/irregular heartbeat, or blurred vision. Consult your doctor or
pharmacist for details.

Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking other products that cause
drowsiness such as opioid pain or cough relievers (such as codeine,
hydrocodone), alcohol, marijuana, drugs for sleep or anxiety (such as
alprazolam, lorazepam, zolpidem), muscle relaxants (such as carisoprodol,
cyclobenzaprine), or antihistamines (such as cetirizine, diphenhydramine).

Check the labels on all your medicines (such as allergy or cough-and-cold
products) because they may contain ingredients that cause drowsiness. Ask your
pharmacist about using those products safely.

### Related Links

Does Dronabinol Solution interact with other medications?

Find Lowest Prices

* * *

Read More

Overdose

## Overdose

If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or
trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right
away. US residents can call their local poison control center at
1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center.
Symptoms of overdose may include: severe drowsiness/dizziness, fast heartbeat,
mental/mood changes, seizures.

### Notes

Do not share this medication with others. It is against the law.

Keep this medication in a safe place to prevent theft, misuse, or abuse.

Keep all medical and lab appointments.

### Missed Dose

If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is near the time of
the next dose, skip themissed dose. Take your next dose at the regular time.
Do not double the dose to catch up.

### Storage

Store the unopened bottle in the refrigerator away from light or moisture.
After opening, store in the refrigerator or at room temperature and discard
any unused portion after 28 days. Do not freeze this medication or store it in
the bathroom. Keep all medications away from children and pets.

Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless
instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no
longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal
company.Information last revised July 2017. Copyright(c) 2017 First Databank,
Inc.

Find Lowest Prices

* * *

Read More

Images

Sorry. No images are available for this medication.

Previous:

Next: Side Effects

Drug Survey

Are you taking Dronabinol Solution?

YesNo

Are you considering switching to Dronabinol Solution?

YesNo

How satisfied are you with the results?

VERY POOR

POOR

FAIR

GOOD

EXCELLENT

Are you planning to see a doctor about switching your medication?

Yes, In the next 30 days

Yes, In the next 3 months

Yes, In the distant future

No, I'm not planning to see a doctor

How long have you been taking Dronabinol Solution?

Less than a year

1-5 years

5-10 years

10+ years

Are you planning to see a doctor about switching your medication?

Yes, In the next 30 days

Yes, In the next 3 months

Yes, In the distant future

No, I'm not planning to see a doctor

Thanks for taking our survey!

Recommended For You

Find a doctor near you

Recommended For You

Medications for Migraine Relief

#### More Resources for Dronabinol Solution

  * Find Lowest Prices on ![](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images//webmdrx/assets/web-m-d-rx-beta.svg)
  * Check Interactions 
  * Read Reviews (19) 

Free Rx Coupon

Save up to 80% on your prescriptions.

View free coupon

### Search for another Drug

  * Adderall
  * Celexa
  * Cipro
  * Cymbalta
  * Flexeril
  * Hydrocodone
  * Prilosec
  * Prozac
  * Seroquel
  * Synthroid
  * Tramadol
  * Trazodone
  * Lexapro
  * Lisinopril
  * Mobic
  * Naproxen
  * Neurontin
  * Pradaxa
  * Prednisone
  * Vicodin
  * Warfarin
  * Wellbutrin
  * Xanax
  * Zocor
  * Zoloft

Show More Show Less

### You Might Also Like

  * Medications for Migraine Relief
  * Cold or Flu? How to Tell
  * Essential Tips to Manage Diabetes
  * Follow a Healthy Path
  * Treating Opioid Use Disorder With Medications
  * 15 Ways to Get Protein at Breakfast
  * Constipated? 12 Medicines That Could Help
  * Finding the Right HIV Meds
  * How to Know if Your HIV Meds Are Working
  * 6 Tips to Beat a Headache

### Find More Drugs Used to Treat these Conditions

  * Loss of Appetite with HIV
  * Nausea and Vomiting caused by Cancer Drugs

Show MoreShow Less

Selected from data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank,
Inc. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data
provider and is not for distribution, except as may be authorized by the
applicable terms of use.

**CONDITIONS OF USE:** The information in this database is intended to
supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of healthcare
professionals. The information is not intended to cover all possible uses,
directions, precautions, drug interactions or adverse effects, nor should it
be construed to indicate that use of a particular drug is safe, appropriate or
effective for you or anyone else. A healthcare professional should be
consulted before taking any drug, changing any diet or commencing or
discontinuing any course of treatment.

### Today on WebMD

![tired woman on

couch](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/fighting_lupus_fatigue_and_boosting_energy_other/110x70_fighting_lupus_fatigue_and_boosting_energy_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Medications That Make You Tired

Common culprits and what you can do.

![woman with pill

bottles](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/drugs_slow_ra_progression_ref_guide/110x70_drugs_slow_ra_progression_ref_guide.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Pharmacy and Medication Tips

Things to remember when you fill your prescription.

![woman holding medication

bottles](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/are_your_medications_managing_your_seizures_other/110x70_are_your_medications_managing_your_seizures_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Medication Side Effects

Tips for dealing with them.

![woman looking at

medication](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/cholesterol_lowering_medication_ref_guide/110x70_cholesterol_lowering_medication_ref_guide.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Reading Medicine Labels

How to make sense of them.

### More About Drugs and Medications

  * Pill Identifier
  * My Medicine
  * Interaction Checker
  * Drugs and Medications A-Z
  * Drugs and Medical Conditions
  * Latest Drug News
  * Find a Pharmacy
  * Find a Vitamin

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

