

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » DrugFacts » Marijuana as Medicine

# Marijuana as Medicine

Email Facebook Twitter

Revised June 2018

## What is medical marijuana?

![Photo of marijuana

leaves.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/mj_leaves.jpg)Photo
by (C)Shutterstock.com/Atomazul

The term _medical marijuana_ refers to using the whole, unprocessed marijuana
plant or its basic extracts to treat symptoms of illness and other conditions.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not recognized or approved the
marijuana plant as medicine.

However, scientific study of the chemicals in marijuana, called _cannabinoids_
, has led to two FDA-approved medications that contain cannabinoid chemicals
in pill form. Continued research may lead to more medications.

Because the marijuana plant contains chemicals that may help treat a range of
illnesses and symptoms, many people argue that it should be legal for medical
purposes. In fact, a growing number of states have legalized marijuana for
medical use.

## Why isn't the marijuana plant an FDA-approved medicine?

The FDA requires carefully conducted studies (clinical trials) in hundreds to
thousands of human subjects to determine the benefits and risks of a possible
medication. So far, researchers haven't conducted enough large-scale clinical
trials that show that the benefits of the marijuana plant (as opposed to its
cannabinoid ingredients) outweigh its risks in patients it's meant to treat.

Read more about the various physical, mental, and behavioral effects of
marijuana in our _Marijuana DrugFacts_.

### Can Medical Marijuana Legalization Decrease Prescription Opioid Problems?

Some studies have suggested that medical marijuana legalization might be
associated with decreased prescription opioid use and overdose deaths, but
researchers don 't have enough evidence yet to confirm this finding. For
example, one study found that Medicare Part D prescriptions filled for all
opioids decreased in states with medical marijuana laws.1 Another study
examined Medicaid prescription data and found that medical marijuana laws and
adult-use marijuana laws were associated with lower opioid prescribing rates
(5.88 percent and 6.88 percent lower, respectively).2

Additionally, one NIDA-funded study suggested a link between medical marijuana
legalization and fewer overdose deaths from prescription opioids.3 These
studies, however, are population-based and can't show that medical marijuana
legalization caused the decrease in deaths or that pain patients changed their
drug-taking behavior.4,5 A more detailed NIDA-funded analysis showed that
legally protected medical marijuana dispensaries, not just medical marijuana
laws, were also associated with a decrease in the following:6

  * opioid prescribing 
  * self-reports of opioid misuse 
  * treatment admissions for opioid addiction 

Additionally, some data suggests that medical marijuana treatment may reduce
the opioid dose prescribed for pain patients,7,8 while another recent NIH-
funded study suggests that cannabis use appears to increase the risk of
developing and opioid use disorder.9 NIDA is funding additional studies to
determine the link between medical marijuana use and the use or misuse of
opioids for specific types of pain, and also its possible role for treatment
of opioid use disorder. Read more in our _Marijuana Research Report_.

## What are cannabinoids?

Cannabinoids are chemicals related to _delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol_ (THC),
marijuana 's main mind-altering ingredient that makes people "high." The
marijuana plant contains more than 100 cannabinoids. Scientists as well as
illegal manufacturers have produced many cannabinoids in the lab. Some of
these cannabinoids are extremely powerful and have led to serious health
effects when misused. Read more in our _Synthetic Cannabinoids (K2/Spice)
DrugFacts_.

The body also produces its own cannabinoid chemicals. They play a role in
regulating pleasure, memory, thinking, concentration, body movement, awareness
of time, appetite, pain, and the senses (taste, touch, smell, hearing, and
sight).

### Are People with Health- and Age-Related Problems More Vulnerable to

Marijuana's Risks?

State-approved medicinal use of marijuana is a fairly new practice. For that
reason, marijuana 's effects on people who are weakened because of age or
illness are still relatively unknown. Older people and those suffering from
diseases such as cancer or AIDS could be more vulnerable to the drug's harmful
effects, but more research is needed.

## How might cannabinoids be useful as medicine?

Currently, the two main cannabinoids from the marijuana plant that are of
medical interest are THC and CBD.

THC can increase appetite and reduce nausea. THC may also decrease pain,
inflammation (swelling and redness), and muscle control problems.Unlike THC,
CBD is a cannabinoid that doesn't make people "high." These drugs aren't
popular for recreational use because they aren't intoxicating. It may be
useful in reducing pain and inflammation, controlling epileptic seizures, and
possibly even treating mental illness and addictions. Many researchers,
including those funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), are
continuing to explore the possible uses of THC, CBD, and other cannabinoids
for medical treatment.

![Photo of a female and male scientist conducting

research.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/researchers_0.jpg)Photo
by (C)iStock.com/AlexRaths

For instance, recent animal studies have shown that marijuana extracts may
help kill certain cancer cells and reduce the size of others. Evidence from
one cell culture study with rodents suggests that purified extracts from
whole-plant marijuana can slow the growth of cancer cells from one of the most
serious types of brain tumors. Research in mice showed that treatment with
purified extracts of THC and CBD, when used with radiation, increased the
cancer-killing effects of the radiation.10

Scientists are also conducting preclinical and clinical trials with marijuana
and its extracts to treat symptoms of illness and other conditions, such as:

  * diseases that affect the immune system, including: 
    * HIV/AIDS 
    * multiple sclerosis (MS), which causes gradual loss of muscle control 
  * inflammation 
  * pain 
  * seizures 
  * substance use disorders 
  * mental disorders 

Read more about the NIH's marijuana research:

  * Marijuana and Cannabinoid Research at NIDA
  * NIH Research on Marijuana and Cannabinoids

### Using Medical Marijuana During and After Pregnancy

Some women report using marijuana to treat severe nausea they have during
pregnancy. But there's no research that shows that this practice is safe, and
doctors generally don't recommend it.

Pregnant women shouldn't use medical marijuana without first checking with
their health care provider. Animal studies have shown that moderate amounts of
THC given to pregnant or nursing women could have long-lasting effects on the
child, including abnormal patterns of social interactions11 and learning
issues.12,13 Read more in our _Substance Use in Women Research Report_.

## What medications contain cannabinoids?

Two FDA-approved drugs, dronabinol and nabilone, contain THC. They treat
nausea caused by chemotherapy and increase appetite in patients with extreme
weight loss caused by AIDS. Continued research might lead to more medications.

The FDA approved a CBD-based liquid medication called Epidiolex® for the
treatment of two forms of severe childhood epilepsy, Dravet syndrome and
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome

The United Kingdom, Canada, and several European countries have approved
nabiximols (Sativex®), a mouth spray containing THC and CBD. It treats muscle
control problems caused by MS, but it isn't FDA-approved.

### Points to Remember

  * The term _medical marijuana_ refers to treating symptoms of illness and other conditions with the whole, unprocessed marijuana plant or its basic extracts. 
  * The FDA has not recognized or approved the marijuana plant as medicine. 
  * However, scientific study of the chemicals in marijuana called _cannabinoids_ has led to two FDA-approved medications in pill form, dronabinol and nabilone, used to treat nausea and boost appetite. 
  * Cannabinoids are chemicals related to _delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol_ (THC), marijuana 's main mind-altering ingredient. 
  * Currently, the two main cannabinoids from the marijuana plant that are of interest for medical treatment are THC and _cannabidiol_ (CBD). 
  * The body also produces its own cannabinoid chemicals. 
  * Scientists are conducting preclinical and clinical trials with marijuana and its extracts to treat symptoms of illness and other conditions. 

## Learn More

For more information about marijuana and its health effects, visit our:

  * _Marijuana Research Report_
  * _Marijuana DrugFacts_

## References

  1. Bradford AC, Bradford D, Abraham AJ, Bagwell Adams G. **** Association Between US State Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Prescribing in the Medicare Part D Population. _JAMA Intern Med._ April 2018. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.0266 
  2. Wen H, Hockenberry J. Association of Medical and Adult-Use Marijuana Laws With Opioid Prescribing for Medicaid Enrollees. _JAMA Intern Med._ doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.1007 
  3. Bachhuber MA, Saloner B, Cunningham CO, Barry CL. Medical cannabis laws and opioid analgesic overdose mortality in the United States, 1999-2010. _JAMA Intern Med_. 2014;174(10):1668-1673. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.4005. 
  4. Finney JW, Humphreys K, Harris AHS. What ecologic analyses cannot tell us about medical marijuana legalization and opioid pain medication mortality. _JAMA Intern Med_. 2015;175(4):655-656. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.8006. 
  5. Bachhuber MA, Saloner B, Barry CL. What ecologic analyses cannot tell us about medical marijuana legalization and opioid pain medication mortality--reply. _JAMA Intern Med_. 2015;175(4):656-657. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.8027. 
  6. Powell D, Pacula RL, Jacobson M. _Do Medical Marijuana Laws Reduce Addiction and Deaths Related to Pain Killers?_ RAND Corporation; 2015. https://www.rand.org/pubs/external_publications/EP67480.html. Accessed April 6, 2017. 
  7. Abrams DI, Couey P, Shade SB, Kelly ME, Benowitz NL. Cannabinoid-opioid interaction in chronic pain. _Clin Pharmacol Ther_. 2011;90(6):844-851. doi:10.1038/clpt.2011.188. 
  8. Lynch ME, Clark AJ. Cannabis reduces opioid dose in the treatment of chronic non-cancer pain. _J Pain Symptom Manage_. 2003;25(6):496-498. 
  9. Olfson M, Wall MM, Liu S-M, Blanco C. Cannabis Use and Risk of Prescription Opioid Use Disorder in the United States. _Am J Psychiatry._ 2017;175(1):47-53. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.17040413 
  10. Scott KA, Dalgleish AG, Liu WM. The combination of cannabidiol and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances the anticancer effects of radiation in an orthotopic murine glioma model. _Mol Cancer Ther_. 2014;13(12):2955-2967. doi:10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0402. 
  11. Trezza V, Campolongo P, Cassano T, et al. Effects of perinatal exposure to delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the emotional reactivity of the offspring: a longitudinal behavioral study in Wistar rats. _Psychopharmacology (Berl)_. 2008;198(4):529-537. doi:10.1007/s00213-008-1162-3. 
  12. Antonelli T, Tomasini MC, Tattoli M, et al. Prenatal exposure to the CB1 receptor agonist WIN 55,212-2 causes learning disruption associated with impaired cortical NMDA receptor function and emotional reactivity changes in rat offspring. _Cereb Cortex N Y N 1991_. 2005;15(12):2013-2020. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhi076. 
  13. Mereu G, F a M, Ferraro L, et al. Prenatal exposure to a cannabinoid agonist produces memory deficits linked to dysfunction in hippocampal long-term potentiation and glutamate release. _Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A_. 2003;100(8):4915-4920. doi:10.1073/pnas.0537849100. 

This publication is available for your use and may be reproduced **in its
entirety** without permission from the NIDA. Citation of the source is
appreciated, using the following language: Source: National Institute on Drug
Abuse; National Institutes of Health; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.

This page was last updated June 2018

![DrugFacts](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/drugfacts.jpg)

## More DrugFacts

### Health Effects of Specific Drugs

Anabolic Steroids

Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products

Cocaine

Electronic Cigarettes (E-cigarettes)

Fentanyl

Hallucinogens

Heroin

Inhalants

Kratom

Marijuana

Marijuana as Medicine

MDMA (Ecstasy/Molly)

Methamphetamine

Over-the-Counter Medicines

Prescription CNS Depressants

Prescription Opioids

Prescription Stimulants

Synthetic Cannabinoids (K2/Spice)

Synthetic Cathinones ("Bath Salts")

### Effects of Drug Use

Comorbidity: Substance Use Disorders and Other Mental Illnesses

Drug Use and Viral Infections (HIV, Hepatitis)

Drugged Driving

Understanding Drug Use and Addiction

### Survey Data

Drug-Related Hospital Emergency Room Visits

Monitoring the Future Survey: High School and Youth Trends

Nationwide Trends

Treatment Statistics

### Prevention and Treatment

Lessons from Prevention Research

Substance Abuse in the Military

Treatment Approaches for Drug Addiction

## Get this Publication

  * Español
  * PDF (731KB)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, June 27). Marijuana as Medicine. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana-medicine

NIDA. "Marijuana as Medicine." _National Institute on Drug Abuse_ , 27 Jun.
2018, https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana-medicine.

NIDA. Marijuana as Medicine. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana-medicine. June 27,
2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Additional Drug Facts

![Drug Facts for

Teens](http://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/n4t_webbadge_235px.jpg)  
![Easy-to-read Drug

Facts](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/easyread-

badge.jpg)

## Marijuana and Cannabinoids: A Neuroscience Research Summit

![Brain](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/mj-

summit.jpg) March 22-23, 2016

**Meeting Summary**

## Other Articles of Interest

### NIDA Notes

  * Cannabis Dependence Is Associated With Changes in Neural Circuitry That May Contribute to Psychopathology

  * Research Links Adolescent Substance Use to Adult Brain Volumes

### Nora's Blog

  * FDA Approves First Drug Derived from Marijuana

  * The Concerning Link Between Inadequate Sleep and Adolescent Substance Use

### Science Highlight

  * Stopping marijuana use improves memory

  * How cannabis use disorder affects working memory

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## Research Report

![Marijuana Research Report

Cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/mj_rrs_cover_thumb.gif)

### Marijuana

Explores the latest research on marijuana, including the scope of marijuana
use in the U.S., health consequences, its effects on every-day activities,
available treatments.

Read more

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

