

  * VICE
  * VICE News
  * VICELAND
  * I-D
  * Broadly

United Statesen

  * Video
  * Podcasts
  * News
  * Tech
  * Music
  * Food
  * Health
  * Money
  * Drugs
  * Identity
  * Games
  * Entertainment
  * Environment
  * Travel
  * Horoscopes
  * Sex
  * More

Drugs

|

by David Bienenstock

|

Feb 5 2014, 2:50pm

# Nope, Still No Such Thing as a Fatal Marijuana Overdose

## By all accounts, 31-year-old mother of three Gemma Moss recently smoked

half a joint to help her sleep, and then she never woke up: a tragic passing
that quickly yielded giddy tabloid headlines touting her as “the first woman
in Britain to be poisoned...

  * ![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/icons/facebook-square.svg)SHARE
  * ![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/icons/twitter.svg)TWEET

by David Bienenstock

|

Feb 5 2014, 2:50pm

![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/images/blank.png)

  * ![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/icons/facebook-square.svg)SHARE
  * ![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/icons/twitter.svg)TWEET

![](https://assets.vice.com/content-images/contentimage/134788/killed-by-

cannabis.jpg?resize=320:*)

_Photo by BNPS_

By all accounts, 31-year-old mother of three Gemma Moss recently smoked half a
joint to help her sleep, and then she never woke up: a tragic passing that
quickly yielded giddy tabloid headlines touting her as “the first woman in
Britain to be poisoned to death by cannabis.”

As though some incredible sports record had just been achieved.

And really, the headlines could have gone even further, proclaiming poor Ms.
Moss “the first person in recorded history to die of a marijuana overdose!”
Which, given the fact that humans have been ingesting the plant in one form or
another for more than 10,000 years, certainly sounds like a scoop. Especially
when science had previously pegged the dose you'd need to ingest in order to
suffer a fatal overdose at considerably higher than half a joint.

According to a 1988 ruling from US Drug Enforcement Agency administrative law
judge Francis Young:

_Drugs used in medicine are routinely given what is called an LD-50. The LD-50
rating indicates at what dosage fifty percent of test animals receiving a drug
will die as a result of drug induced toxicity. A number of researchers have
attempted to determine marijuana’s LD-50 rating in test animals, without
success. Simply stated, researchers have been unable to give animals enough
marijuana to induce death._

_At present it is estimated that marijuana’s LD-50 is around 1:20,000 or
1:40,000. In layman terms this means that in order to induce death a marijuana
smoker would have to consume 20,000 to 40,000 times as much marijuana as is
contained in one marijuana cigarette.... **A smoker would theoretically have
to consume nearly 1,500 pounds of marijuana within about 15 minutes to induce
a lethal response.**_

So if the rather notably anti-marijuana DEA considers fatally overdosing on
chronic nigh well impossible, and if even the world's most rabid drug warriors
can't point to a single previous medically confirmed OD, how the heck did we
end up with last week's definitive headlines? Is it possible that Gemma Ross
rolled up a 3,000-pound joint and then consumed half of it in one sitting?

Well, the British press didn't report on the exact size of her spliff, but
it's hard to imagine they make rolling papers that large. No, instead these
breathlessly reported stories all relied on the wisdom of one small-town
coroner and a local pathologist who share a perhaps less than fully evolved
understanding of how marijuana effects the human body.

“The postmortem could find no natural cause for her death"—Sheriff Payne,
coroner of Bournemouth, England, wrote in his postmortem—“with the balance of
probability that it is more likely than not that she died from the effects of
cannabis.”

To which attending pathologist Dr. Kudair Hussein added: "The physical
examination and the examination of various organs, including the heart and the
liver, showed no abnormality that could account for her death. The level of
canabinoids in the blood were 0.1 to 0.15 miligrams per liter; this is
considered as moderate to heavy cannabis use. I looked through literature, and
it's well known that cannabis is of very low toxicity. But there are reports
which say cannabis can be considered as a cause of death because it can induce
a cardiac arrest."

So did they list the cause of death as “cardiac arrest?”

No, because as clearly stated, there's absolutely no evidence to demonstrate
that.

Did they list the cause of death as “cannabis poisoning,” as widely reported
in newspaper stories that quickly went viral?

No, because as they clearly stated, there's absolutely no evidence to
demonstrate that. And there's much evidence showing such “poisoning” to be
scientifically impossible.

Instead they concluded the cause of death to be “cannabis abuse.” Again,
absolutely no evidence to prove this, but since the authorities couldn't come
up with anything else to explain a seemingly healthy woman dying in her sleep,
why not blame the reefer?

Of course, needless to say, not all of the experts agreed.

“There’s been no history of any verified reports of a death from cannabis
ever,” Dr. Alan Shackelford, a Harvard-trained physician and leading medical
marijuana advocate in Colorado told the _Denver Post_. “Cannabis can cause an
increased heart rate, and there’s a possibility that it could cause a problem
with someone with a pre-existing heart disease—for example, somebody with an
elevated heart rate. But there’s no known dose of cannabis that could kill a
human... We see unexplained deaths not infrequently. [In this case] the
cannabis is a red herring and an incidental finding... I have no idea what
caused her death, but I can say with near 100-percent certainty that it wasn’t
the cannabis that killed her.”

Meanwhile, David Nutt, former chairman of the British government's Advisory
Council on the Misuse of Drugs, doesn't entirely discount the chance that
cannabis had some small role in Ms. Moss's untimely expiration, but he says
that such a “freak fatality” shouldn't change the way we think about the
plant's incredible safety record.

“I cannot begin to understand the pathologist’s certainty that cannabis killed
Gemma Moss, but neither do I wish to contradict him outright,” Nutt wrote on
the blog of his Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs. “Taking any amount
of cannabis, like all drugs, like so many activities, puts some stresses on
the body. Cannabis usually makes the heart work a little harder and subtly
affects its rate and rhythm. Any minor stress on the body can be the straw
that breaks the camel’s back, the butterfly’s wingbeat that triggers the
storm. Ms. Moss had suffered with depression, which itself increases the risk
of sudden cardiac death. It is quite plausible that the additional small
stress caused by that cannabis joint triggered a one-in-a-million cardiac
event, just as has been more frequently recorded from sport, sex, saunas and
even straining on the toilet.”

To which all a concerned citizen can say is: _no shit_.

![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/images/blank.png)

  * ![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/icons/facebook-square.svg) SHARE
  * ![](https://vice-web-statics-cdn.vice.com/icons/twitter.svg) TWEET

  * Tagged:

  * Weed
  * MARIJUANA
  * england
  * overdose
  * Vice Blog

### Stories

## Newsletters are the new newsletters.

Sign up for the best of VICE, delivered to your inbox daily.

Subscribe

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

