

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile
    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out

### Pain Topics

  * Abdominal Pain
  * Arthritis
  * Back Pain
  * Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
  * Fibromyalgia
  * Hip Pain
  * Knee Pain
  * Foot Pain
  * Lupus
  * Migraine
  * Nerve Pain
  * Osteoarthritis
  * Rheumatoid Arthritis

### Pain Management Guide

  * Types of Pain
  * Symptoms & Causes
  * Diagnosis & Tests
  * Treatment & Care
  * Living & Managing
  * Support & Resources

### More Pain Resources

  * News
  * Reference
  * Slideshows
  * Quizzes
  * Videos
  * Questions & Answers
  * Message Board
  * Find a Neurologist
  * Find an Orthopaedist
  * Medications
  * Pill Identifier
  * Check for Drug Interactions

  * Pain Management

  * Feature Stories

# Medical Marijuana

By Anne Harding

From the WebMD Archives

More states are passing laws that allow people to use medical marijuana. So
what does it treat, and who can and should use it?

Pain is the main reason people ask for a prescription, says Barth Wilsey, MD,
a pain medicine specialist at the University of California Davis Medical
Center. It could be from headaches, a disease like cancer, or a long-term
condition, like glaucoma or nerve pain.

If you live in a state where medical marijuana is legal and your doctor thinks
it would help, you’ll get a “marijuana card.” You will be put on a list that
allows you to buy marijuana from an authorized seller, called a dispensary.

Doctors also may prescribe medical marijuana to treat:

  * Muscle spasms caused by multiple sclerosis
  * Nausea from cancer chemotherapy
  * Poor appetite and weight loss caused by chronic illness, such as HIV, or nerve pain
  * Seizure disorders
  * Crohn's disease

The FDA has also approved THC, a key ingredient in marijuana, to treat nausea
and improve appetite. It's available by prescription Marinol (dronabinol) and
Cesamet (nabilone).

## How Does It Work?

Your body already makes marijuana-like chemicals that affect pain,
inflammation, and many other processes. Marijuana can sometimes help those
natural chemicals work better, says Laura Borgelt, PharmD, of the University
of Colorado.

## How Is It Used?

Medical marijuana may be:

  * Smoked
  * Vaporized (heated until active ingredients are released, but no smoke is formed)
  * Eaten (usually in the form of cookies or candy)
  * Taken as a liquid extract 

## Side Effects

Side effects of marijuana that usually don’t last long can include:

  * Dizziness
  * Drowsiness
  * Short-term memory loss
  * Euphoria

More serious side effects include severe anxiety and psychosis.

## Risks and Limits

Medical marijuana is not monitored like FDA-approved medicines. When using it,
you don’t know its potential to cause cancer, its purity, potency, or side
effects.

Only people who have a card from a doctor should use medical marijuana.
Doctors will not prescribe medical marijuana to anyone under 18. Others who
should not use it:

  * People with heart disease
  * Pregnant women
  * People with a history of psychosis

WebMD Feature Reviewed by Arefa Cassoobhoy, MD, MPH on November 04, 2013

#### Sources

SOURCES:

Barth Wilsey, MD, associate physician, Department of Medicine & Physical
Rehabilitation, University of California Davis Medical Center.

Laura Borgelt, PharmD, associate professor, Departments of Clinical Pharmacy
and Family Medicine, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Colorado.

Zajicek, J.P. _Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry,_ November
2012.

Slatkin, N.E. _Journal of Supportive Oncology,_ May 2007.

Walsh, Z. _International Journal of Drug Policy,_ Sept. 9, 2013.

Department of Justice Fact Sheet.

Igor Grant, MD, professor and executive vice-chair of the Department of
Psychiatry at the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine;
director of the HIV Neurobehavioral Research Program.

Tashkin, David P. _Annals of the American Thoracic Society,_ June 2013.

Grotenhermen, F. _Deutsches Artzeblatt International.,_ July 2012.

Wang, T. _Canadian Medical Association Journal,_ June 2008.

Callaghan, R.C. _Cancer Causes Control,_ October 2013.

Wang, G.S. _JAMA Pediatrics,_ July 2013.

_American Journal of Psychiatry_ , 2012.

© 2013 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

### Top Picks

  * Muscle Spasms & Multiple Sclerosis
  * Manage Your Migraine
  * RA Pain Relief Tips
  * Treating and Preventing Migraines
  * When Pain Affects Your Relationship
  * Knee Arthritis: Treatment Advances

### Today on WebMD

![pain in brain and

nerves](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/chronic_pain_causes_and_solutions_slideshow/110x70_chronic_pain_causes_and_solutions_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Why You’re In Pain

Top causes and how to find relief.

![knee

exercise](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/knee_exercises_slideshow/110x70_knee_exercises_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Get Moving

8 exercises for less knee pain.

![acupuncture needles in

back](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/acupuncture_overview_slideshow/110x70_acupuncture_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Acupuncture Guide

How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain.

![painkillers

triptych](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/the_truth_about_painkillers_rmq/110x70_the_truth_about_painkillers_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Truth About Painkillers

How much do you know about your meds?

### Recommended for You

![illustration of

hand](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/carpal_tunnel_syndrome_overview_slideshow/69x75_carpal_tunnel_syndrome_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### 3 Symptoms of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome

![lumbar

spine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/lower_back_pain_overview_slideshow/69x75_lower_back_pain_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### What's Causing Your Low Back Pain?

![prescription

pad](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/06_2012/kids_prescription_drug_trends/69x75_kids_prescription_drug_trends.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Antidepressants for Pain?

![eating a red

chili](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/03_2012/hot_peppers_help_heart/69x75_hot_peppers_help_heart.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### 10 Foods That Fight Pain

![Acupunture](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/alternative_treatments_for_chronic_pain_features/69x75_alternative_treatments_for_chronic_pain_features.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### Alternative Treatments for Long-Term Pain

![bunion

sling](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/brace_yourself_slideshow/69x75_brace_yourself_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### Should You Use a Brace?

![woman icing

knee](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/ra_pain_relief_ref_guide/69x75_ra_pain_relief_ref_guide.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Slideshow

#### Tips for Common Aches and Pains

![ibuprofen

tablets](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/05_2012/painkillers_protect_against_cancer/69x75_painkillers_protect_against_cancer.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Video

#### NSAIDs: What They Are & How They Work

### Tools & Resources

  * Chronic Pain Solutions
  * Personalized Tips for Managing Migraine
  * Video: How to Do Tennis Elbow Exercises
  * 14 Tips to Relieve Back Pain
  * Quiz: Everyday Aches and Pains
  * Video: 5 Natural Ways to Ease Back Pain

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

