

#

  * News

    *       * US
    * World
    * Politics
    * Entertainment
    * Health
    * MoneyWatch
    * Technology
    * Science
    * Crime
    * Sports
    *       *         * Jon Stewart to House: "You should be ashamed of yourselves"
      * House votes to enforce subpoenas for Trump administration officials
      * 2020 Daily Trail Markers: Trump, Biden exchange barbs in Iowa
      * Pilot in helicopter crash wasn't authorized to fly in poor weather
      * Trump Jr. to testify before Senate Intel Committee
      * Trump calls Biden "weak mentally" as they both stump in Iowa
      * New York could become first state to decriminalize sex work
      * Jury deadlocks on border activist charged with helping migrants
      * Southern Baptist Church addresses sexual abuse at annual convention
  *     * Shows
    * CBS This Morning
    * CBS Evening News
    * 60 Minutes
    * Face The Nation
    * Sunday Morning
    * 48 Hours
    * CBSN Originals
    * NCIS: The Cases They Can't Forget
    *       * Live
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/81793425-57dc-4351-9e00-c2d515e0c45c/thumbnail/100x100/7f7f34333981766af2683ca0c015cdd1/logo-cbsn-1920x1080-new.jpg#)

### Latest headlines

Latest headlines

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/d0b656c8-f79a-4492-946a-68278fcda687/thumbnail/100x100/c101c312e7ab9236c00d7805ad6f72f6/logo-cbsnny-1920x1080-new.jpg#)
    

### CBSN New York

CBSN New York

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/f864d4e3-8707-4b99-9cc0-ba1778552e15/thumbnail/100x100/c9a2498b6f0c74255d22bd80460c812b/logo-cbsnla-1920x1080-new.jpg#)
    

### CBSN Los Angeles

CBSN Los Angeles

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/dad0b33e-13cb-4470-8c12-4c1fc69a0106/thumbnail/100x100/609c00acd1c1c941b5cf163dd72f9a50/logo-sports-alt-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### CBS Sports HQ

CBS Sports HQ

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/03214531-586b-4683-813e-a3252999e063/thumbnail/100x100/979bdc5ee0c75e8f700fe63beffc3e96/et-live-logo-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### ET Live

ET Live

  * LIVE
  * More
    *       * Latest
    * Video
    * Photos
    * Podcasts
    * In Depth
    * Local
    *       * Log In
    * Alerts
    * Mobile
    * RSS
    * Shop
  * 

Live

Watch CBSN Live

![](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/2014/05/26/72f0a899-fe80-446c-91ba-

bfff70c4ca2d/125706881.jpg)

# How are authorities destroying seized drugs?

  *     *       * 

By Crimesider Staff

May 26, 2014 / 12:01 PM / AP

Cardboard boxes and paper envelopes packed with marijuana, cocaine and other
drugs line warehouse-style shelves at the State Highway Patrol's Ohio crime
laboratory, where seizures large and small are stored for safekeeping for
sometimes years until they're no longer needed as evidence.

Then comes a tricky task: How do you destroy it all?

Most often by incineration, but where and how varies, according to police
spokesmen and officers who oversee evidence. Arranging evidence burns can be
tricky because rules are different everywhere, allowing more leeway in some
places than others.

#### Trending News

  * Jon Stewart Testifies
  * Women's World Cup
  * Trump Slams Biden
  * Unknown Mass On Moon

Police have used crematories, foundries, hospital incinerators or specialized
businesses -- and even torched drugs in 55-gallon drums.

Troopers in Ohio used to destroy thousands of pounds of seized drugs -- for
free -- at factories where they could be vaporized in molten steel. But the
companies worried about it potentially affecting the quality of their product
and producing emissions: the kind that create environmental concerns and the
kind that could skew employee drug tests, said Capt. David Dicken, a director
at the crime lab.

"If we're throwing 940 pounds of marijuana into the vat, you know, it flares
up," he said.

To maintain a dedicated drug destroyer, the agency switched last year to a
paid contract with a federally permitted company that handles hazardous
materials.

Federal standards regulate waste incinerators that burn pharmaceuticals, but
those used only for contraband are exempt from those rules, said Dina Pierce,
a spokeswoman for the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.

Various local environmental and safety rules can apply, creating a complicated
regulatory picture for evidence-management officers sorting out what
destruction methods are allowed, said Joseph Latta, an instructor and
executive director at the Burbank, California-based nonprofit International
Association for Property and Evidence Inc.

"During the class, we say, 'Here are the ways that we've heard of. Here are
the legal ways. Here are some maybe unorthodox ways that we've had to do,"
Latta said.

U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, which seizes millions of pounds of illegal
narcotics, pays contractors to destroy the drugs or turns them over to other
agencies, such as the Drug Enforcement Agency, said Jaime Ruiz, a CBP
spokesman.

DEA destroys marijuana at EPA-approved incinerators because those seizures are
generally bulkier, and it burns other contraband drugs at its labs, said
Special Agent Rich Isaacson, spokesman for the agency's Detroit division.

In California, where environmental regulations tend to be stricter, the legal
option is usually limited to EPA-approved energy-plant incinerators that
operate under emissions and security standards, Latta said. But reaching those
sites could be impractical for smaller, more rural law enforcement agencies
that take in lesser amounts of drugs, he said, acknowledging some "have
probably taken shortcuts."

It can be a dilemma for officers who must either arrange for destruction or
allow drug evidence to accumulate, which risks making the storage area a
potential theft target, Latta said.

Other jurisdictions have more choices: State police in the Detroit area use a
metal forging plant's high-temperature furnace, but smaller posts use burn
barrels. Indiana State Police have similar options. Pennsylvania State Police
handle drug destruction internally, such as with a small incinerator. New York
State Police use an outside contractor they won't disclose.

In West Virginia, some authorities may use fire pits, state police Capt. Joe
White said.

Drug destruction arrangements with steel facilities still work for some
agencies, including Columbus, Ohio, police and the FBI's Cleveland division.
Cincinnati police are using that option for the first time this year because
the university facility they used in the past stopped providing the service,
department spokeswoman Sgt. Julian Johnson said.

Especially when drug-destruction work is pro bono, police tend to be tight-
lipped about details to protect security, the businesses involved and
sometimes the arrangements themselves.

"The word gets out there that this facility does it, then 50 other agencies
want to go there ... and that gets to be too much for that place to handle,
and then you lose that place. And then you've got to go find another one,"
said Sgt. Jeff Yaney, who oversees evidence for Dayton, Ohio, police.

Yaney wouldn't divulge where the department destroys drugs. It used to take
advantage of the incinerator that burned classified materials at nearby
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, but the base replaced it with a shredder
rather than paying for changes to meet environmental rules a few years ago.

Representatives for two federally permitted hazardous waste incinerators in
Ohio, Ross Environmental Services Inc. near Elyria and the patrol's vendor,
Heritage Environmental Services in East Liverpool, said they provide a more
controlled, secure destruction process with environmental protections and
benefits not necessarily found at other types of facilities.

For that, though, agencies generally must pay. Heritage has destroyed about
10,000 pounds of drugs and paraphernalia since July for the patrol, at a cost
of roughly $22,000, said Lt. Craig Cvetan, a patrol spokesman. The funding
came from seized drug money, which is also used for drug enforcement and drug-
abuse prevention programs.

First published on May 26, 2014 / 12:01 PM

AP

### U.S.

More U.S.

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### Americans taking on Thailand in first World Cup match

The U.S. women open up group play today

15M ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/40e7766d-372a-45b6-b3e1-062e27ae957e/thumbnail/640x360/dd9c6e38b513e41dd877778ca3aa3145/ap-19162752258207.jpg#)

#### Men accused of killing Native women allegedly took child hostage

The child managed to escape; the men were later arrested and face assault
charges related to the Saturday killings

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### U.S. women's team breaks World Cup records in win over Thailand

The United States Women's National Team opened its 2019 World Cup title
defense with authority

updated 16M ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/65f4c34a-b434-4281-8636-e14033525326/thumbnail/640x360/32cc06694fd4fc6cfbabf594baebb848/img-20190611-151837-072.jpg#)

#### Presidential candidate Yang gives $1,000 a month to Iowa family

Kyle Christensen, 41, says he will use the stipend to help his disabled mother
settle her medical bills

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/23/f5c15d92-a9c9-4e6d-9482-d804fae1f153/thumbnail/640x360/0c331a88003977fe89c1fe682ce6e8fa/gettyimages-512015968.jpg#)

#### Facebook will pay users for info on their app usage

A new app, called Study, is the social network's third attempt to get users to
knowingly share this personal data

1H ago

More in U.S.

### Politics

More Politics

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/65f4c34a-b434-4281-8636-e14033525326/thumbnail/640x360/32cc06694fd4fc6cfbabf594baebb848/img-20190611-151837-072.jpg#)

#### Presidential candidate Yang gives $1,000 a month to Iowa family

Kyle Christensen, 41, says he will use the stipend to help his disabled mother
settle her medical bills

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/d1314ff1-b0ca-4035-8380-0e79ccc5d625/thumbnail/640x360/b550be6924f75eba34e888f34e668c6a/trail-

markers-graphic-presidential.jpg#)

#### 2020 Daily Trail Markers: Trump, Biden exchange barbs in Iowa

After campaigning throughout the Hawkeye state today, President Trump​ and Joe
Biden​ each have one event in Iowa Tuesday evening

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/564adcaf-5151-4044-8b43-56db0bd2221d/thumbnail/640x360/2e60a4075badccee49a74b84416ee565/gettyimages-935039722.jpg#)

#### Trump administration to defend Saudi arms deal before House committee

Some members of Congress, including many Republicans, have criticized the
Trump administration for bypassing congressional review of the deal

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/01fa51b0-4c58-45f3-89d3-9b50eb4fe6d9/thumbnail/640x360/6ed27707ebaf86810528bf8f8cb19806/gettyimages-1148240291.jpg#)

#### Justice Dept to ask Trump to invoke privilege over census documents

The House Oversight Committee has subpoenaed administration officials
requesting documents related to the 2020 census

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/03/29/c3041637-cc06-4441-86e5-257dd51caaf3/thumbnail/640x360g3/cf91b1485eaf21798c8a1215255d9bcc/gettyimages-1138956761.jpg#)

#### Trump Jr. to testify before Senate Intel Committee on Wednesday

Trump Jr. reached an agreement to testify before the committee after he was
subpoenaed

4H ago

More in Politics

### World

More World

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### Americans taking on Thailand in first World Cup match

The U.S. women open up group play today

15M ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/05/12/224eb2d4-610f-4faa-947e-701fe18a9b25/thumbnail/640x360/121409b83fba1fd04c2a0b3eb7fc2c7b/ap-17132571185428.jpg#)

#### Uganda confirms first Ebola case outside outbreak in Congo

A child in Uganda has tested positive for Ebola in the first cross-border case
of the deadly virus since an outbreak started in neighboring Congo last year

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/4af16446-a863-4893-95b1-558e40a7414f/thumbnail/640x360/a78b177f3c0c95604a18100fc4df4ad3/gettyimages-1149321360.jpg#)

#### U.S. women's team breaks World Cup records in win over Thailand

The United States Women's National Team opened its 2019 World Cup title
defense with authority

updated 16M ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/41bf8de0-7886-4fde-a661-001d5825d82b/thumbnail/640x360/7f2669f6b7192ccffbcf03bf4fa421df/gettyimages-1148534270.jpg#)

#### Mexico begins cracking down on Central American migrants

There's a plan to send 6,000 members of the National Guard to areas known to
be migrant routes

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/02/19/16b15989-2e32-4aef-847b-b8b444a2468c/thumbnail/640x360g2/a60793a0730b4d941ffe910d7d8c2d21/n-korea-

ap-17046196133744.jpg#)

#### Kim Jong Un's murdered half-brother accused of being a CIA informant

Kim Jong Nam was killed when two women came up behind him at a Malaysian
airport, and rubbed chemicals over his face

2H ago

More in World

### Entertainment

More Entertainment

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/1cfed6ab-9794-4133-b445-703adf220cea/thumbnail/640x360/a6da79dead675371c1f3210d4c81808a/untitled-

collage-2.jpg#)

#### Kendall Jenner's alleged stalker deported back to Canada

John Ford was arrested for trespassing at Jenner's home twice; one time he was
found in her swimming pool

7H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/01/17/2599127e-7d5f-46bf-

abc2-d7c04b36e4ba/thumbnail/640x360/884cdbe6ce560968b03f73bad7faa8ae/star-

wars-the-force-awakens-depsvi-1.jpg#)

#### Highest-grossing movies of all time, ranked

What's the highest-grossing movie of all time? It might be one of your
favorites

Jun 4 27 photos

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/5aff9f32-c62a-43ec-

ae32-9413a64c06d0/thumbnail/640x360/eb54dbb7d8defe8a67b687f61fa6b8c6/screen-

shot-2019-06-11-at-10-00-44-am.png#)

#### Brand new full-length "Frozen II" trailer released

The new trailer, much like the earlier teaser, looks ominous, with Elsa in a
precarious situation

10H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/10/4eb0ed24-8648-4c56-9e6d-bbb76f1493cc/thumbnail/640x360/4808d50f2a35ade72d43177f460c39b5/gettyimages-601352064.jpg#)

#### Kim Kardashian West shares first close-up image of new baby

The photo shows little Psalm sleeping on a blanket

Jun 10

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/fd16e28f-6014-4cad-

ac36-51dfe1bfd690/thumbnail/640x360/ab2947ef95bfc869b0c7b3a4ae92cc49/0610-billyporter-1871081-640x360.jpg#)

#### Billy Porter wears curtain dress to Tonys

Pink tulle spilled out from underneath the embellished red dress, which was
custom made for Billy Porter for the Tony Awards. The outfit was crafted from
a curtain used in "Kinky Boots"

Jun 10 01:12

More in Entertainment

### Technology

More Technology

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/23/f5c15d92-a9c9-4e6d-9482-d804fae1f153/thumbnail/640x360/0c331a88003977fe89c1fe682ce6e8fa/gettyimages-512015968.jpg#)

#### Facebook will pay users for info on their app usage

A new app, called Study, is the social network's third attempt to get users to
knowingly share this personal data

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/04/0a28f2a1-489f-4f32-891f-62d118a599d1/thumbnail/640x360/4eb9a25a288c84b22dd08ac66e1f5b78/rts256q3.jpg#)

#### Elon Musk: Buying gasoline car like "riding a horse and using a flip

phone"

Can Tesla ever be consistently profitable? Musk insisted to shareholders that
public policy is on the company's side

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/edc7eb68-b715-44d1-bec6-2672faa2bc1f/thumbnail/640x360/036a415e5f0b361e7d0dd22afa22874e/anne-

frank-letters-digitize-02.jpg#)

#### Letters from Anne Frank's father to be digitized

An antiques dealer and artist who struck up a correspondence with Otto Frank
is making a donation to the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C.

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2014/01/20/b9925afd-0dd6-4926-95b9-a294803fd87e/thumbnail/640x360/1241c773b7d9b1d3d04461ffd27a0761/1209156-amazon_logo.jpg#)

#### Amazon tops Apple and Google as world's most valuable brand

Ecommerce giant tops ranking for the first time, with tech players dominating
the list

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/f7d977e4-b705-4e3d-a079-ce78db8b12d6/thumbnail/640x360/24c4766fcb6f22a9b45d34ada9757a2e/sprint-

gettyimages-154162440.jpg#)

#### 10 states file suit to block T-Mobile merger with Sprint

Deal to combine two of the largest wireless carriers would cost subscribers at
least $4.5 billion per year, states claim

5H ago

More in Technology

### Science

More Science

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/10/09/a70bf942-65b2-4a3f-b390-3c3771143675/thumbnail/640x360g2/11152eac7d34c36ac17adae98b3904f5/istock-524154682.jpg#)

#### Study: Nitrates in drinking water linked to cancers

Environmental Working Group says the chemicals could be to blame for over
12,000 cases of cancer in the U.S. each year

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/06/23/f02e2f90-01fe-4bd8-9c56-790177f1cc0a/thumbnail/640x360/688af4ccff93ad6d3a7ecfa6b8cc7428/coral-

rock-full-of-life-mauricio-handler-620.jpg#)

#### Study: One-sixth of marine life at risk from climate change

The study argues losses could be offset by a reduction in carbon pollution

7H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/10/8d98a7f7-6868-45aa-

bf1d-b4324d48aafb/thumbnail/640x360/384c839396bc797fc87f8cd2d3b4dc47/plastic-

gettyimages-941859784.jpg#)

#### Canada to ban single-use plastics as early as 2021

Inspired by an earlier EU move, Canada's government may ban items like plastic
bags, water bottles, straws and earbuds

8H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/09bafbbb-

bfdf-4624-bb9a-8419cccd80be/thumbnail/640x360/a17c255a6a449127cf37a92e40506e9f/zombie-

snake.jpg#)

#### "Zombie snake" found in U.S. can roll over and play dead

To deter predators, the snake goes belly up and opens its mouth to "play
dead," but it's all just a very dramatic act

8H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/11/45b75684-3c9f-42e9-a4c4-8342a45cb1f4/thumbnail/640x360g8/adafb8b89b64fa48c75df5c19347f5fc/041119-moon.jpg#)

#### Unknown mass larger than Hawaii discovered on moon

Scientist think it could be leftover metal from a previous asteroid strike

10H ago

More in Science

### Health

More Health

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/05/12/224eb2d4-610f-4faa-947e-701fe18a9b25/thumbnail/640x360/121409b83fba1fd04c2a0b3eb7fc2c7b/ap-17132571185428.jpg#)

#### Uganda confirms first Ebola case outside outbreak in Congo

A child in Uganda has tested positive for Ebola in the first cross-border case
of the deadly virus since an outbreak started in neighboring Congo last year

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/10/09/a70bf942-65b2-4a3f-b390-3c3771143675/thumbnail/640x360g2/11152eac7d34c36ac17adae98b3904f5/istock-524154682.jpg#)

#### Study: Nitrates in drinking water linked to cancers

Environmental Working Group says the chemicals could be to blame for over
12,000 cases of cancer in the U.S. each year

5H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/0ed8455d-87a2-49ca-

ae22-df5c003165ba/thumbnail/640x360/484556e8c9b4a1996f1adb5e71d4dc33/0611-ctm-

elderhood-aronson-1871308-640x360.jpg#)

#### "Elderhood" author on why older people are happier

We should "look at the final third of life with the same concern, curiosity,
creativity, and rigor as we view the first two-thirds," Dr. Louise Aronson
writes

7H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/71df1ce4-b4ee-4586-bdd9-6e8e6499bac5/thumbnail/640x360/8637a2ebdf07cd7dbc7ec05e79190041/ap-19162542641934.jpg#)

#### Jon Stewart to House: "You should be ashamed of yourselves"

"Accountability appears to not be something that occurs in this chamber,"
Stewart admonished at hearing on 9/11 responders bill

updated 24M ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2013/12/11/b5215cae-

eb0e-4d32-b3f1-008fd5b37e1e/thumbnail/640x360/f00b18cc365e1e850cc34e9d75b9620a/57619315.jpg#)

#### Target's expanded paid family leave includes part-time workers

As labor market tightens, the retailer offers new family-care perks to all its
360,000 full-time and part-time employees

9H ago

More in Health

### MoneyWatch

More MoneyWatch

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/65f4c34a-b434-4281-8636-e14033525326/thumbnail/640x360/32cc06694fd4fc6cfbabf594baebb848/img-20190611-151837-072.jpg#)

#### Presidential candidate Yang gives $1,000 a month to Iowa family

Kyle Christensen, 41, says he will use the stipend to help his disabled mother
settle her medical bills

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/23/f5c15d92-a9c9-4e6d-9482-d804fae1f153/thumbnail/640x360/0c331a88003977fe89c1fe682ce6e8fa/gettyimages-512015968.jpg#)

#### Facebook will pay users for info on their app usage

A new app, called Study, is the social network's third attempt to get users to
knowingly share this personal data

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/04/0a28f2a1-489f-4f32-891f-62d118a599d1/thumbnail/640x360/4eb9a25a288c84b22dd08ac66e1f5b78/rts256q3.jpg#)

#### Elon Musk: Buying gasoline car like "riding a horse and using a flip

phone"

Can Tesla ever be consistently profitable? Musk insisted to shareholders that
public policy is on the company's side

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/03/07/644cf87c-aa94-4f87-bd40-23b19e960de9/thumbnail/640x360/e546206c2b7eb998a069783b5e5ac98d/0307-social-

mcdonalds-1516698-640x360.jpg#)

#### Senators tell McDonald's: Franchisees need harassment policies

Lawmakers say the fast-food chain must do more to protect workers at more than
14,000 locations across U.S.

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/03/29/c3477bfd-b200-41e2-a945-f28ff27acc56/thumbnail/640x360/fa92dac886751d317334310a099d7165/rifle.jpg#)

#### Gun seller United Sporting goes bust, partly blaming Trump's election

The 85-year-old company anticipated that increased weapons sales would follow
a victory by Hillary Clinton in 2016

5H ago

More in MoneyWatch

### Crime

More Crime

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/74e7f78b-f5de-4d1d-8a78-a201253b7f96/thumbnail/640x360/fb33f3f43169a071436b9ed9b277573b/centralfivethumb-1871705-640x360.jpg#)

#### Crime

#### Central Park Five prosecutor disputes series

Just weeks after the release of the Netflix miniseries about five teenagers
accused of rape in 1989, the investigating prosecutor went on the attack. In
an op-ed, Linda Fairstein said "When They See Us" is full of "falsehoods."
Michelle Miller reports.

updated 23M ago 02:00

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/02/19/16b15989-2e32-4aef-847b-b8b444a2468c/thumbnail/640x360g2/a60793a0730b4d941ffe910d7d8c2d21/n-korea-

ap-17046196133744.jpg#)

#### Kim Jong Un's murdered half-brother accused of being a CIA informant

Kim Jong Nam was killed when two women came up behind him at a Malaysian
airport, and rubbed chemicals over his face

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/7df587bc-4304-4f99-a115-4b93d021c02b/thumbnail/640x360/5dc217fc946c64a3dcabe934b7587c86/calf-

being-kicked-1559784575892-jpg-7357159-ver1-0-1280-720.jpg#)

#### 3 charged in connection with Fair Oaks Farms animal abuse video

Officials said other persons of interest are being interviewed​; the
investigation is still considered active

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/9b84ce4a-98dc-41a3-a577-c53382acaabc/thumbnail/640x360/9221ce9373c9d3836f6363a6aba16641/ap-19140701756996.jpg#)

#### Judge declares mistrial on 8 charges against Kellen Winslow Jr.

The judge also denied a defense motion to dismiss the undecided allegations
involving the alleged rapes of a hitchhiker and an unconscious teen

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/5747521a-2115-47dc-a64e-69626603871d/thumbnail/640x360/6d81c64bf11df61455b8003f70b56d36/gettyimages-520447856.jpg#)

#### David Ortiz has more surgery in Boston after shooting

Ortiz, 43, is expected to stay in intensive care for at least 48 hours

7H ago

More in Crime

### Space

More Space

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/11/45b75684-3c9f-42e9-a4c4-8342a45cb1f4/thumbnail/640x360g8/adafb8b89b64fa48c75df5c19347f5fc/041119-moon.jpg#)

#### Unknown mass larger than Hawaii discovered on moon

Scientist think it could be leftover metal from a previous asteroid strike

10H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/07/17/2168b564-9b66-426d-af23-038e963562d1/thumbnail/640x360/57e8d5318ce9acddcf6075a2e12f431f/071718-jupiter.jpg#)

#### Tonight is the best night of 2019 to see Jupiter

NASA has a message for space lovers this month: Look up

23H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/12/11/824fa766-8267-43d9-8bd5-b1c23ae5c56c/thumbnail/640x360g2/fbeb1dbe65e725e3cac49192cb60558c/121117-trump.jpg#)

#### Trump criticizes NASA moon plans he approved

In a tweet, the president disparaged NASA's moon mission plan that his
administration had endorsed

Jun 7

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/ca120298-21fb-475e-b67b-d18d0777e5c0/thumbnail/640x360/dbe3eb37c29ce04f1f0efb45996208f9/cbsn-

fusion-space-watch-nasa-to-allow-private-citizens-on-the-international-space-

station-thumbnail-1869451-640x360.jpg#)

#### NASA to allow private astronauts on space station

NASA's plan could make way for visits by private-sector astronauts to the
International Space Station as early as next year

Jun 7

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/ca120298-21fb-475e-b67b-d18d0777e5c0/thumbnail/640x360/dbe3eb37c29ce04f1f0efb45996208f9/cbsn-

fusion-space-watch-nasa-to-allow-private-citizens-on-the-international-space-

station-thumbnail-1869451-640x360.jpg#)

#### NASA opening access to space station

CBS News space consultant Bill Harwood joins CBSN to discuss NASA's
announcement that commercial astronauts will be allowed to travel to the
International Space Station starting next year.

Jun 7 06:04

More in Space

### Latest Galleries

More Latest Galleries

![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/09/e5016bf3-eff3-43ad-

bd9c-b6aad1d9e5fd/thumbnail/640x360/66bdfd2317fc3070b93a56b16cd43890/lucyliugetty.jpg#)

#### Tony Awards 2019: Red carpet looks from your favorite stars

See Broadway stars walk the red carpet at Radio City Music Hall in New York
City at the 73rd Annual Tony Awards

Jun 9 39 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/b1931ab7-67f9-4d03-9a69-36ff03cecb38/thumbnail/640x360/7356be26a26595445c830fe1c8e271f3/closs-

evidence-bed.jpg#)

#### Jayme Closs case: Recently released evidence photos

At Jake Patterson's sentencing hearing, prosecutors showed a select few
evidence photos to the court and asked that Patterson be sentenced to life in
prison for the murders of Jayme Closs' parents and the 13-year-old's
kidnapping

Jun 8 14 photos

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/03/48c4a063-e100-40c8-93a9-c6480d17316e/thumbnail/640x360/d759c2d8afb8a5aeb85d0e5c0e97084b/summer-

music-2019-garbage-face-the-music-benefit-riviera-theatre-chicago-

il-5202019-b48a7818.jpg#)

#### Summer music 2019

It's summertime - time for music at festivals and venues across the country

Jun 8 35 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/e36c9c2a-fc87-4a2f-9fa4-dbde11783386/thumbnail/640x360/1f543e6018f690a5349c2ae23a6c462d/my-

post-14.png#)

#### 11 photos of former NICU babies show how far they've come

These babies proudly hold photos of their former selves to celebrate their
amazing progress since graduating from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit

Jun 5 11 photos

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/12/12/153393e7-6b65-4524-b6ca-04849c595c03/thumbnail/640x360/1f9df4f8ccdc2e8d9c174fcd344415b5/huisentruit5.jpg#)

#### Evidence photos in the disappearance of Jodi Huisentruit

Jodi Huisentruit, the morning news anchor at Iowa's KIMT-TV was reported
missing on June 27, 1995. Mason City Police are still at work trying to solve
this case 23 years later.

Jun 1 26 photos

More in Latest Galleries

### Popular

More Popular

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/12/8f5d6718-ce44-45c7-807c-4e41f6efd0e9/thumbnail/640x360/5751a1925e801914216a47bf8e2af84d/0530-rnb-

full-1871753-640x360.jpg#)

#### Popular

#### 6/11/19: Red and Blue

House to vote on holding Barr & McGahn in contempt; Amtrak to introduce new
Acela trains in 2021

updated 8M ago 45:53

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/673bdc9c-64b5-4c2a-b98e-2ef3b1667e95/thumbnail/640x360/8b81443dc93ff9a3b6b61d0e18f28e00/0611-cbsn-

bigtechwash-1871735-640x360.jpg#)

#### Congress holds first hearing on Big Tech

Congress held the first hearing Tuesday into the investigation into Big Tech,
and focused on the impact these big companies are having on the news industry.
Natalie Brand joined CBSN with more on what these small publishing companies
are fighting for.

updated 22M ago 07:16

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/b4b6c015-f918-41da-8e29-2e9290b47e5e/thumbnail/640x360/953942204576082b966a8163119ba5b0/0611-en-

homelesstoharvard-miller-1871720-640x360.jpg#)

#### Teen speaks about journey to Harvard

One teen's journey to college took an unexpected path. Athena Capo-Battaglia
was living in a homeless shelter with her mom when she found out she earned a
full ride to Harvard University. Michelle Miller has her story.

1H ago 02:12

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/74e7f78b-f5de-4d1d-8a78-a201253b7f96/thumbnail/640x360/fb33f3f43169a071436b9ed9b277573b/centralfivethumb-1871705-640x360.jpg#)

#### Central Park Five prosecutor disputes series

Just weeks after the release of the Netflix miniseries about five teenagers
accused of rape in 1989, the investigating prosecutor went on the attack. In
an op-ed, Linda Fairstein said "When They See Us" is full of "falsehoods."
Michelle Miller reports.

updated 23M ago 02:00

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/11/ee06a1ab-a2b7-4f6c-bd14-13670ca1c42f/thumbnail/640x360/b5e19d0e7a5526e029af15271df612e8/0611-en-

southernbaptist-villarreal-1871702-640x360.jpg#)

#### Southern Baptist Convention to address abuse

Leaders of the Southern Baptist Convention are gathered in Alabama this week,
addressing sexual abuse in their church. A recent investigation found more
than 700 people have been assaulted over the past 20 years. Mireya Villarreal
reports.

updated 22M ago 02:02

More in Popular

Copyright (C) 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved.

  * Privacy Policy
  * Ad Choice
  * Terms of Use
  * Mobile User Agreement
  * About
  * Advertise
  * Closed Captioning
  * CBS News Store
  * Site Map
  * Contact Us
  * Help

  *     *       *         * 

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

