

Skip to main content

En español

                
                                      * Research
                      * Medical & Health Professionals
                      * Patients & Families
                      * Parents & Educators
                      * Children & Teens
                

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

                
                                      * Cocaine
                      * Heroin
                      * Opioids
                      * Marijuana
                      * MDMA (Ecstasy)
                      * Methamphetamine
                      * Prescription Medicines
                

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
                      * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
                      * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
                      * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl
                

Related Topics

                
                                      * Addiction Science
                      * Comorbidity
                      * Drugged Driving
                      * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
                      * Prevention
                      * Treatment
                      * Trends & Statistics
                

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
                      * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
                      * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
                      * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides
                

Publications

                
                                      * DrugFacts
                      * Research Reports
                      * Mind Over Matter
                      * Science of Addiction
                      * Policy Briefs
                

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
                      * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
                      * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment
                

Research

                
                                      * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
                      * Clinical Research
                      * Research Training & Career Development
                      * Resources for Grants & Contracts
                      * NIH Policies & Guidance
                      * Research Data, Measures, & Resources
                

More Research

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
                      * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
                      * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
                      * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
                      * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)
                

Funding

                
                                      * NIDA Funding Opportunities
                      * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
                      * Contracts and Small Businesses
                

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
                      * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
                      * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
                      * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
                      * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)
                

News

                
                                      * News Releases
                      * Nora's Blog
                      * NIDA Notes
                      * Public Education Projects
                      * NIDA in the News
                      * Subject Area Experts
                

More News

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
                      * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
                      * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
                      * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office
                

About NIDA

                
                                      * Director's Page
                      * Organization
                      * Legislative Activities
                      * Advisory Boards & Groups
                      * Working at NIDA
                      * Directions to NIDA
                

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

                
                                      * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
                      * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
                      * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
                      * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us
                

__Search

__Share

* * *
                
                                      * Print
                

Home » Publications » Research Reports » Marijuana » Is marijuana a gateway
drug?

# Marijuana

Email Facebook Twitter

## Is marijuana a gateway drug?

Some research suggests that marijuana use is likely to precede use of other
licit and illicit substances46 and the development of addiction to other
substances. For instance, a study using longitudinal data from the National
Epidemiological Study of Alcohol Use and Related Disorders found that adults
who reported marijuana use during the first wave of the survey were more
likely than adults who did not use marijuana to develop an alcohol use
disorder within 3 years; people who used marijuana and already had an alcohol
use disorder at the outset were at greater risk of their alcohol use disorder
worsening.47 Marijuana use is also linked to other substance use disorders
including nicotine addiction.

Early exposure to cannabinoids in adolescent rodents decreases the reactivity
of brain dopamine reward centers later in adulthood.48 To the extent that
these findings generalize to humans, this could help explain the increased
vulnerability for addiction to other substances of misuse later in life that
most epidemiological studies have reported for people who begin marijuana use
early in life.49 It is also consistent with animal experiments showing THC's
ability to "prime" the brain for enhanced responses to other drugs.50 For
example, rats previously administered THC show heightened behavioral response
not only when further exposed to THC but also when exposed to other drugs such
as morphine--a phenomenon called _cross-sensitization_. 51

These findings are consistent with the idea of marijuana as a "gateway drug."
However, the majority of people who use marijuana do not go on to use other,
"harder" substances. Also, cross-sensitization is not unique to marijuana.
Alcohol and nicotine also prime the brain for a heightened response to other
drugs52 and are, like marijuana, also typically used before a person
progresses to other, more harmful substances.

It is important to note that other factors besides biological mechanisms, such
as a person's social environment, are also critical in a person's risk for
drug use. An alternative to the gateway-drug hypothesis is that people who are
more vulnerable to drug-taking are simply more likely to start with readily
available substances such as marijuana, tobacco, or alcohol, and their
subsequent social interactions with others who use drugs increases their
chances of trying other drugs. Further research is needed to explore this
question.

Prev Index Next

This page was last updated June 2018

![Is marijuana a gateway

drug?](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/rr-marijunana-

cover-thumb_1.jpg)

## Contents

                
                                      * Letter From the Director
                      * What is marijuana? 
                      * What is the scope of marijuana use in the United States?
                      * What are marijuana effects?
                      * How does marijuana produce its effects?
                      * Does marijuana use affect driving?
                      * Is marijuana addictive?
                      * What are marijuana's long-term effects on the brain?
                      * Is marijuana a gateway drug?
                      * How does marijuana use affect school, work, and social life?
                      * Is there a link between marijuana use and psychiatric disorders?
                      * What are marijuana's effects on lung health?
                      * What are marijuana’s effects on other aspects of physical health?
                      * Is marijuana safe and effective as medicine?
                      * What are the effects of secondhand exposure to marijuana smoke?
                      * Can marijuana use during and after pregnancy harm the baby?
                      * Available Treatments for Marijuana Use Disorders
                      * Where can I get further information about marijuana?
                      * References
                

## Get this Publication

                
                                      * English
                      * PDF (782KB)
                      * ePub (298KB)
                      * Kindle (706KB)
                      * Online Only
                

## Ordering Publications

Call **1-877-643-2644** or:  
![NIDA Drug

Pubs](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/feat_drug_pubs%281%29.png)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, June 25). Marijuana. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana

NIDA. "Marijuana." _National Institute on Drug Abuse_ , 25 Jun. 2018,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana.

NIDA. Marijuana. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana. June 25,
2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Featured Publications

![Cover art for Opioid Facts for

Teens](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/opioidsforteenscover.jpg?itok=j4M3QgvB)

Opioid Facts for Teens

![Science of Addiction

Cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/soa_cover_2018_0.gif?itok=ZFYtyFxC)

Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction

![](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/pinkandblue_pr_1.jpg?itok=y-uXmu4a)

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...

![Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to

Know](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/parents_mj_facts_cover.png?itok=doAsxOEp)

Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## ​Research Reports

This series of reports simplifies the science of research findings for the
educated lay public, legislators, educational groups, and practitioners. The
series reports on research findings of national interest.

View all ​Research Reports

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

                
                                      * NIDA Home
                      * Site Map
                      * Accessibility
                      * Privacy
                      * FOIA
                      * Working at NIDA
                      * FAQs
                      * Contact
                      * Subscribe
                      * Archives
                

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

