

  * ![Global](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/shaw-globalnews/_img/logos/news_2x.png)
  * **Menu** ****
  * ### National ____Change Location

Change Location

### Select Location __

    
    
    * Barrie
    * BC
    * Calgary
    * Durham
    * Edmonton
    * Guelph
    * Halifax
    * Hamilton
    * Kingston
    * Kitchener
    * Lethbridge
    * London
    * Montreal
    * New Brunswick
    * Okanagan
    * Ottawa
    * Peterborough
    * Regina
    * Saskatoon
    * Toronto
    * Winnipeg
    * News
    * Weather
    * National Video
    * Contests
    * Traffic
    

  * ### TV News Programs __

Newscasts & Videos

### TV

    
    
    * Global National
      * Global National
      * The West Block
      * The Morning Show
      * More …
    * Personalities
    * Video Centre
    

  * __ Go
  * ![](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/shaw-globalnews/_img/ad-choices.png) Ad Choices 

### Topics

  * World
  * Canada
  * Local
    * News
    * Weather
    * National Video
    * Contests
    * Traffic
  * Politics
  * Smart Living
  * Money
  * Entertainment
  * Health
  * Video
  * Podcast
  * Trending
  * Cannabis
  * Commentary
  * Sports
  * Contests
  * Live
  * Tech
  * __ Like
  * __ Follow

###

  * ![](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/shaw-globalnews/_img/ad-choices.png) Ad Choices 

Cannabis

November 18, 2018 9:00 am

Updated: November 26, 2018 12:42 pm

# Is alcohol or pot healthier for you? Some Canadians considering switching

away from booze

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/leslie-young-

headshot.jpg?quality=60&strip=all&w=55&h=55&crop=1) By Leslie Young Senior
National Online Journalist, Health Global News

![](https://i2.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/587/375/FINAL-

CANNABISALCOHOL.jpg?w=670&quality=70&strip=all)

**Cannabis vs. alcohol? Which one is worse for your long-term health?**

![]() ![]()

#####

#####

* * *

#####

X

#####

* * *

  * A A +

Roughly one month after cannabis legalization, Canadians can now legally reach
for a vaporizer as easily as a beer after a long day at work — at least, once
supply issues are resolved.

But which is the healthier choice?

According to a new poll conducted by Ipsos exclusively for Global News, nearly
half of cannabis users — 45 per cent — say they will drink less alcohol now
that pot is legal.

Story continues below

### Related

  * ### ![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/drinking.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=70&h=46&crop=1) Alcohol is killing Canadians, so why are we still drinking?

  * ### ![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2017/08/05676710.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=70&h=46&crop=1) Cannabis IQ: Everything you need to know about marijuana and your health

Jennifer McLeod Macey, vice-president of Ipsos Public Affairs, isn’t sure that
will actually happen, though.

“There’s differences between what we think we’re going to do and what we’re
actually going to do,” she said.

In other areas, Ipsos hasn’t found much difference in behaviour pre- and post-
legalization.

However, there's some evidence that people might be serious. One working paper
study of U.S. counties that implemented medical marijuana laws found that
alcohol sales fell once the laws came into effect. A 2016 review of studies on
the subject found evidence that some people substitute alcohol for marijuana,
and some people just use both.

**WATCH: Is weed good or bad for you? Everything we know about the health
effects of cannabis**

![](https://i1.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/45/603/gettyimages-874461140_848x480_1270290499612.jpg?w=670&quality=70&strip=all)

Replacing alcohol with marijuana might be the healthier choice, according to
Jason Busse, associate director of the Michael G. DeGroote Centre for Medical
Cannabis Research at McMaster University.

> “When you look at the evidence we do have, it does seem to appear that
alcohol is more risky than cannabis,” he said.

In the short term, at very high quantities, alcohol can be dangerous.

“You can drink yourself to death. You can binge drink and die fairly quickly.
It doesn’t happen often but it does happen,” Busse said.

> “Cannabis, on the other hand, you can’t fatally overdose on.”

A lot of the short-term risks of either cannabis or alcohol depend on how much
you have, how often you have it, how fast you consume it, who you’re with and
what you’re doing, according to Dr. Peter Selby, chief of medicine in
psychiatry at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.

“If somebody had a joint, and even if they were hallucinating or getting
paranoid, but they were at home, safe, had somebody with them — pretty much
that would pass, and you wouldn’t come to too much harm,” Selby said.

**READ MORE: Cannabis IQ: Almost half of Canadian pot users say they use
daily. Here's why regular use is risky**

Similarly, if someone drank too much but had others around and was in a safe
environment, they probably wouldn’t get too hurt, he said.

And you don’t want to drive in either case, he said.

### Long-term effects

Long-term, both Busse and Selby agree, alcohol is worse for you than cannabis.

> “I think if you take a look at the addictiveness from use and from long-
term, then clearly the harms associated from alcohol far outweigh those
associated with cannabis,” Selby said.

Chronic exposure to alcohol is associated with cancer and liver cirrhosis,
falls and injuries, strokes, gastritis and other problems, he said. “We
haven’t seen that with cannabis use.”

“You’re more likely to become addicted to alcohol. You’re more likely to
suffer a disability due to alcohol,” said Busse.

Around 77,000 Canadians were hospitalized for conditions directly caused by
alcohol in 2015-2016 — more than for heart attacks — according to a recent
study by the Canadian Institute for Health Information.

**READ MORE: 77,000 Canadians hospitalized because of alcohol in 2016**

That doesn’t mean that cannabis is perfectly safe, though. Smoking it can harm
your lungs, and in young people who are prone to psychosis, it can trigger an
early onset of symptoms, he said. Some people can also develop hyperemesis, a
condition characterized by excessive vomiting.

Roughly 10 per cent of people also become addicted to cannabis, Selby said.

And given that there isn’t a lot of research on cannabis, there may be other
harms we don’t know about yet, said Busse. “One of the reasons that we might
have a bit of a rosy picture about cannabis is it hasn’t seen as much study as
alcohol.”

**READ MORE: Alcohol is killing Canadians, so why are we still drinking?**

Both substances have issues, Busse said.

> “I don’t think anyone should be consuming alcohol or cannabis with the
expectation it’s risk-free. We certainly can say with firm conclusion that’s
not true.”

Selby agrees. “If you’re truly concerned about your health, you’d recommend
neither, because none of them have a health benefit," he said. "They have a
personal benefit in the short-term for people who want to use it.”

He’s not against that, though. “Our universal precaution is: use if you must,
and if you do use, use less and use safely and don’t use daily.”

_Exclusive Global News Ipsos polls are protected by copyright. The information
and/or data may only be rebroadcast or republished with full and proper credit
and attribution to “Global News Ipsos.”_

_This Ipsos poll on behalf of Global News was an online survey of 2,402
Canadians conducted between Nov. 1-6, 2018. The results were weighted to
better reflect the composition of the adult Canadian population, according to
census data. The precision of Ipsos online polls is measured using a
credibility interval. In this case, the poll is considered accurate to within
plus or minus 2.3 percentage points, 19 times out of 20._

### Sign up for our Cannabis IQ newsletter

(C) 2018 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc.

Report an error

alcohol health effects

Cannabis

cannabis iq

health of marijuana

is alcohol healthier than pot

is alcohol or marijuana worse for you

is alcohol worse for your health than marijuana

is pot healthier than alcohol

Marijuana

marijuana and health

Marijuana legalization

pot or alcohol

### Editor's Picks

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/joe-p-6.png?w=276)

Investigations

#### Alleged gang kingpin may have used Liberal MP’s law firm to launder

money through B.C. condo deal

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/x20180503-imgl9615-copy.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=276)

Canada

#### Military's internal prison in Edmonton 'vastly underutilized,' report

says

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/04/20819557.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=276)

Canada

#### RCMP explores crimes against humanity charges for Canadian ISIS members

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/sidlee_raptors7.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=276)

Canada

#### We the North: A black flag, a Raptor's claw, and the branding of

Canadian basketball

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/3elaa_tu_gfx_northwest_passage_claim.png?w=276)

Canada

#### Canada's Northwest Passage claim isn't settled — but it's not

'illegitimate,' like the U.S. says it is

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/1000w_q95-1.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=276)

Canada

#### Former door guard at Trudeau and GG's residences fighting RCMP security

screening allegations

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/img_6258-copy-2.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=276)

Cannabis

#### Can a game-based impairment app tell if you're stoned? Not always, we

found

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/raw_3fkv_kwok-chung-

tam-id.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=276)

Investigations

#### How Canada’s legal system helped an alleged Chinese gangster avoid

deportation for decades

### FLYERS

More Weekly Flyers

### Comments

Want to discuss? Please read our Commenting Policy first.

![Go Raptors!](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/go-

raptors.jpg) ![](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/shaw-

globalnews/images/gnlive-ads/default.png)

### Popular Now

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/joe-p-6.png?w=115&h=115&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/joe-p-6.png?w=300&h=200&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/joe-p-6.png?w=150)

### Alleged gang kingpin may have used Liberal MP’s law firm to launder money

through B.C. condo deal

  * 49218 

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/cpt129548055-1.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=115&h=115&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/cpt129548055-1.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=300&h=200&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/cpt129548055-1.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=150)

### In 'urgent letter,' 6 premiers tell Trudeau national unity would be

threatened if bills C-48, C-69 become law

  * 22804 

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/21247700.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=115&h=115&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/21247700.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=300&h=200&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/21247700.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=150)

### Warriors force NBA Finals Game 6 after 106-105 win against Raptors

  * 19308 

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/21248808.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=115&h=115&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/21248808.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=300&h=200&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/21248808.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=150)

### Warriors slam 'classless' Raptors fans who cheered for Durant injury

  * 14458 

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/hb_sutherland.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=115&h=115&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/hb_sutherland.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=300&h=200&crop=1)

![](https://shawglobalnews.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/hb_sutherland.jpg?quality=70&strip=all&w=150)

### ​Kiefer Sutherland lashes out at Premier Doug Ford: 'You, sir, are no

Tommy Douglas'

  * 13619 

### Sponsored content

### Popular Videos

![Global News Live:

Calgary](https://i0.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/349/131/Global%20News__946999.png?w=150&quality=70&strip=all)

### Global News Live: Calgary

  * WATCH NOW 

![Osoyoos boat collision caught on surveillance video

camera](https://i1.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/939/950/raw_video_of_crash_848x480_1535363651594.jpg?w=150&quality=70&strip=all)

### Osoyoos boat collision caught on surveillance video camera

  * WATCH NOW 

![Osoyoos boat crash eye witness describes ‘horrific’

crash](https://i1.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/328/615/carmen%20martins.jpg?w=150&quality=70&strip=all)

### Osoyoos boat crash eye witness describes 'horrific' crash

  * WATCH NOW 

![4 geese, 35 goslings on parade in south

Edmonton](https://i1.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/184/495/GOOSEVIDEOCOURTESTYSUSE_848x480_1535643715719.jpg?w=150&quality=70&strip=all)

### 4 geese, 35 goslings on parade in south Edmonton

  * WATCH NOW 

![Four-year-old boy calls out woman for bad plane

etiquette](https://i0.wp.com/media.globalnews.ca/videostatic/170/483/StinkyFeetStoryfulSite_848x480_1533483587868.jpg?w=150&quality=70&strip=all)

### Four-year-old boy calls out woman for bad plane etiquette

  * WATCH NOW 

![Global News](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/shaw-

globalnews/_img/social-impulse/large/facebook/national.gif)

### Jump to a Region

  * Barrie
  * BC
  * Calgary
  * Durham
  * Edmonton
  * Guelph
  * Halifax
  * Hamilton
  * Kingston
  * Kitchener
  * Lethbridge
  * London
  * Montreal
  * New Brunswick
  * Okanagan
  * Ottawa
  * Peterborough
  * Regina
  * Saskatoon
  * Toronto
  * Winnipeg

### Connect

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Google+
  * Instagram
  * LinkedIn
  * Tumblr
  * Pinterest
  * RSS
  * Contact Us
  * @ Newsletter
  * Youtube
  * Alexa
  * Notifications

### Global News

  * About Us
  * Privacy Policy
  * Principles & Practices
  * Copyright
  * Corus Entertainment
  * Advertise
  * Advertising Standard Terms
  * Terms of Use
  * Branded Content
  * Open Data

(C) 2019 Global News, a division of Corus Entertainment Inc. Corus News. All
rights reserved.

![Powered by WordPress.com VIP](https://s2.wp.com/wp-

content/themes/vip/plugins/vip-do-not-include-on-wpcom/vip-powered-

wpcom/images/vip-powered-light-small.png)

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005660&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cv=2.0&cj=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

