

__

## Login to your account

* * *

Email or Remote login

Password

Forgot password?

Keep me logged in

New User

__

## Create a new account

Email

Returning user

Can't sign in? Forgot your password?

Enter your email address below and we will send you the reset instructions

Email

Cancel

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with
instructions to reset your password

Close

__

## Request Username

Can't sign in? Forgot your username?

Enter your email address below and we will send you your username

Email

Close

If the address matches an existing account you will receive an email with
instructions to retrieve your username

__

## Change Password

Old Password

New Password

Too Short Weak Medium Strong Very Strong Too Long

## Password Changed Successfully

Your password has been changed

![Health Affairs](/pb-

assets/images/logos/HA_logo_header_470x157px-1503945835990.png)

Donate

  * Subscribe
  * For Authors
  * 0 Cart

  * Sign in

____Home

  * Topics
  * Journal
    * Ahead of Print
    * Current Issue
    * Archive
    * Article Series
    * Aging & Health
    * Considering Health Spending
    * DataGraphic
    * DataWatch
    * EntryPoint
    * Eye On Health Reform
    * GrantWatch
    * Leading To Health
    * Narrative Matters
    * Overview
    * Policy Insight
    * Research Article
    * The Practice Of Medicine
    * More ...
  * Blog

    * Archive
    * Blog Series __
    * Considering Health Spending
    * Elsewhere@Health Affairs
    * Following the ACA
    * Global Health Policy
    * GrantWatch
    * Once In A Weil
    * Workforce In The Community
    * More...
  * SearchADVANCED SEARCH

  * * * *

  * ![](/pb-assets/images/logos/HA_logo_footer_320x74px-1503947084287.png)

7500 Old Georgetown Road, Suite 600

Bethesda, Maryland 20814

T 301 656 7401

F 301 654 2845

customerservice@healthaffairs.org

##### Topics

    
    
    * Access & Use
    * Costs & Spending
    * Health Reform
    * Quality Of Care
    * More Topics
    

##### Content

    
    
    * Journal
    * Blog
    * Briefs
    * Events
    * Podcasts
    

##### Information For

    
    
    * Authors
    * Request For Abstracts
    * Reviewers
    * Subscribers
    * Advertisers
    * Media News Room
    * Funders
    * Event Attendees
    

##### Services & Resources

    
    
    * Submit Content
    * Subscribe/Renew
    * Manage My Account
    * Purchase Content
    * Permissions
    * Alerts
    * Newsletter Sign Up
    * Advertising Rate Kit
    

##### Health Affairs

    
    
    * About
    * Terms & Conditions
    * Privacy Policy
    * Jobs At Health Affairs
    * Contact Us
    
    * Terms and conditions
    * Privacy
    * Project HOPE
    

Health Affairs is pleased to offer Free Access for low-income countries, and
is a signatory to the DC principles for Free Access to Science. Health Affairs
gratefully acknowledges the support of many funders.

![Project HOPE](https://www.healthaffairs.org/pb-

assets/images/logos/project_hope_footer_logo.png)

Project HOPE is a global health and humanitarian relief organization that
places power in the hands of local health care workers to save lives across
the globe. Project HOPE has published Health Affairs since 1981.

Copyright 1995 - by Project HOPE: The People-to-People Health Foundation,
Inc., eISSN 1544-5208.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

