

Get personalized support for your family **1-855-378-4373 1-855-378-4373**

![Where Families Find Answers on Substance Use  |  Partnership for Drug-Free

Kids](https://drugfree.org/wp-content/themes/PDFK/img/logo.png)

# Where Families Find Answers on Substance Use | Partnership for Drug-Free

Kids

Sign Up![](/wp-content/themes/PDFK/img/email_1.png)

Donate

Search Toggle navigation Menu

Search for:

  * Get Help & Support
    * Get Personalized Help
    * Connect with Our Helpline
    * Connect with Peer Support
    * Get Help & Hope by Text
    * Is Your Child Using?
    * Look for Warning Signs
    * "Just Experimenting?"
    * Prepare to Take Action
    * Have a Conversation, Not a Confrontation
    * Set Limits & Monitor
    * Encourage Behavior Change
    * Treatment & Recovery
    * Suggesting Treatment
    * Navigating the Treatment System
    * What are the Treatment Options?
    * Finding a Treatment Provider
    * Medication-Assisted Treatment
    * Risk of Relapse & Overdose
    * Reverse an Overdose with Naloxone (Narcan)
    * Following Treatment
    * Keep Yourself & Family Healthy
    * Skills to Help Your Child & Family Heal
    * Self-Care Isn't Just for Yourself
    * Coping with Fear and Anger
    * Find Support from Other Parents
    * Read the Parent Blog
    * Ask a Parent Who's Been There
    * Discover Stories of Hope
    * Find eBooks, Guides & More
    * Recursos en Español
  * Learn More
    * Prevention
    * Tips for Every Age
    * How to Address Underage Drinking
    * How to Talk About Marijuana
    * How To Talk About Vaping
    * Safeguard Against Medicine Abuse
    * All About the Teen Years
    * Brain Development & Teen Behavior
    * Risk Factors & Why Teens Use
    * Connecting With Your Teen
    * How to Talk With Your Teen
    * Healthy Risk Taking
    * Limits & Monitoring
    * Spotting Signs of Drug Use
    * Addressing Drug Use
    * Find eBooks, Guides & More
    * Review the Parent Drug Guide
    * Browse Book Recommendations
    * Get the Latest Drug & Alcohol News
    * Access Research & Reports
  * Get Involved
    * Advocate for Change
    * Take Action: Demand Insurance Coverage for Addiction Treatment
    * Take Action: Oppose Budget Cuts to ONDCP
    * Host a Film Screening
    * Beautiful Boy Discussion Guide
    * View & Share PSAs
    * Volunteer with Us
    * Become a Parent Coach
    * Share Your Story
    * Become a Social Media Ambassador
    * Connect Your Community
    * Lend Your Expertise
    * Become a Local Partner
    * Help Fund Our Work
    * Donate Now
    * Start a Fundraiser
    * Create a Tribute or Memorial
    * 2019 TCS New York City Marathon Official Charity Partner
    * Other Ways to Give
    * Attend an Event
    * Gala
    * All-Star Events
  * Read the Parent Blog
  * The Opioid Epidemic
    * Opioids & Their Risks Explained
    * Protect Your Family
    * Get Help for a Loved One
    * Help Your Community Address the Epidemic
    * Medicine Abuse Project
    * What's Happening & Why
    * Take Action to Address Medicine Abuse
    * Resources for Parents, Educators & Prescribers
    * How We're Doing: 2017 Project Report
    * Medicine Abuse Project Partners
    * Save a Life with Naloxone
    * Learn about Medication-Assisted Treatment
    * Get Support & Resources by Text
  * About Us
    * What We Do
    * Our Story
    * Our Partners
    * Careers
    * Our People
    * Staff
    * Volunteers
    * Board of Directors
    * Newsroom
    * Annual Report & Financials
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Contact

Search for: Search

![Partnership for Drug-Free Kids – Where Families Find

Answers](https://stage.drugfree.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/Partnership_logo_notag1.jpg) \+ ![Center on

Addiction](https://stage.drugfree.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/CNTRONADD_Logo_Color_300px.jpg)

##### Exciting Changes are Coming

We are merging with Center on Addiction to transform how our nation addresses
addiction. Learn more >>

×

close

* * *

  * Home
  * Learn
  * Drug & Alcohol News Items
  * Prescription Drugs Including Opioids Responsible for Most Overdose Deaths

# Prescription Drugs Including Opioids Responsible for Most Overdose Deaths

November 8, 2018 by Partnership News Service Staff

![pills and heroin](https://drugfree.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/pills-and-

heroin-10-25-18.jpg)

A new report from the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) finds controlled
prescription drugs, including opioids, are responsible for the largest number
of overdose deaths of any illicit drug class since 2001.

“Traffickers are now disguising other opioids as controlled prescription drugs
to gain access to this market,” the DEA said in a news release.

A total of 63,632 people died from drug poisoning in 2016 in the United
States, USA Today reports. More than 40,000 deaths involved prescriptions
including opioids. Fentanyl and other synthetic opioids were involved in
almost 20,000 deaths last year, the article noted.

The DEA also reported Mexican cartels continue to make large quantities of
cheap methamphetamine that makes its way to the United States.

## Heroin & the Opioid Epidemic: From Understanding to Action

Heroin and other opioids are ravaging communities across America. Heroin-
related deaths increased by more than five times between 2010 and 2017, and
drug deaths from fentanyl and other synthetic opioids are seeing a sharp rise
as well.

Take action against this epidemic now

![opioid-heroin-rx](https://drugfree.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Opioids-

webpage-thumbnail-300x200.png)

Tags Drug Overdose Fentanyl Heroin Opioids & Opiates Prescription Drug Abuse

## Related Posts

# Measure to Classify All Versions of Fentanyl as Illegal Gains Support

A proposed measure that would classify all chemically tweaked versions of
fentanyl as illegal received support from Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman
Lindsey Graham this week, Reuters reports.

# Some Hospitals Giving Fewer Opioids After C-Sections

Some hospitals are beginning to turn to alternatives to opioids for new
mothers who have just had a cesarean section, The Wall Street Journal reports.

# Patients Seeking Buprenorphine Treatment Face Significant Barriers

A new study using “secret shoppers” found patients who are uninsured or
covered by Medicaid often have a difficult time getting an appointment with a
doctor who prescribes the opioid addiction medication buprenorphine.

# 15 Percent of Teens and Young Adults Prescribed Opioids During ER Visit

Almost 15 percent of teens and young adults are prescribed opioids during an
emergency room visit, according to a new study.

### Leave a Comment Cancel reply

Please leave a comment below to contribute to the discussion. If you have a
specific question, please contact a Parent Specialist, who will provide you
with one-on-one help.

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name*

Email*

Connect

  *     *       *         * 

Support Us

Help us provide resources and hope to families struggling with addiction.

Donate Now

Get Help  
One-on-One Support  
Parent Coaching  
Spot Early Use  
Intervene  
Find Treatment  
Support Recovery

More Resources  
Help & Hope by Text  
Parent Blog  
eBooks & How Tos  
Parent Drug Guide  
Latest Drug & Alcohol News  
Recursos En Espanol

Get Involved  
Advocate  
Volunteer  
Donate  
Fundraise

About Us  
Our Story  
Our Partners  
Our People  
Newsroom  
Annual Report  
FAQs  
Careers  
Contact Us

Thanks to SAG-AFTRA and its members for their ongoing generosity and support
of the organization and our cause.

Privacy Policy | Terms of use | Newsroom

©2018 Partnership for Drug-Free-Kids- Where Families Find Answers. All rights
reserved.

  *     * 

![](https://drugfree.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/2019-Spring-Appeal-Parent-

Coach-300x300.png)

Join us as we transform the way our nation addresses addiction.

Donate Today

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

