

  * __
  * Sections __
  * __
  * Home

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

  * Try 1 month for $1
  * Username
  * Sign In

* * *
    
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    

  * My Post __
  * My Reading List __
  * Account Settings __
  * Newsletters & alerts __
  * Gift subscriptions __
  * Contact us __
  * Help desk __

  * Accessibility for screenreader

Economic Policy Analysis

__

**Analysis** Interpretation of the news based on evidence, including data, as
well as anticipating how events might unfold based on past events

# More people were arrested last year over pot than for murder, rape,

aggravated assault and robbery — combined

Add to list

In my list

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/dYP5Vk1KrPJCCkCkWUfIY1SZSzs=/960x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/ZFCPTT5RHM5VNMRQAQSHVLORAE.jpg)  
A marijuana plant is seen in a greenhouse in Mendocino County, Calif., in
April. (Josh Edelson/AFP)

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

By Christopher Ingraham

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham

Reporter covering all things data

Email **Bio __Follow**

September 26, 2017

In 2016 more people were arrested for marijuana possession than for all crimes
the FBI classifies as violent, according to 2016 crime data released by the
agency on Monday.

Marijuana possession arrests edged up slightly in 2016, a year in which voters
in four states approved recreational marijuana initiatives and voters in three
others approved medical marijuana measures.

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/TXJKur-

cQ3m4AF9lqk_kkjfemkk=/3x2/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

These figures should be regarded as estimates, because not all law enforcement
agencies provide detailed arrest information to the FBI. But they do show that
the annual number of marijuana arrests is down from their peak in the
mid-2000s and stands at levels last seen in the mid 1990s. Marijuana use,
particularly among adults, rose during this time.

Marijuana possession remains one of the single largest arrest categories in
the United States, accounting for over 5 percent of all arrests last year.
More than one in 20 arrests involved a marijuana possession charge, amounting
to more than one marijuana possession arrest every minute.

This article is roughly 500 words long. Assuming an average adult reading
speed of around 250 words per minute, that means that in the time it takes you
to finish this story, an average of two Americans will be arrested for
marijuana possession.

Overall in 2016, roughly 1.5 million people were arrested for drug-related
offenses, up slightly year-over-year. Advocates for a more public health-
centered approach to drug use say numbers like these show the drug war never
really went away.

“Criminalizing drug use has devastated families across the US, particularly in
communities of color, and for no good reason,” said Maria McFarland Sánchez
Moreno, executive director of the Drug Policy Alliance, in a statement. “Far
from helping people who are struggling with addiction, the threat of arrest
often keeps them from accessing health services and increases the risk of
overdose or other harms.”

The question of what to do about drug use has become particularly urgent in
recent years as deaths from opioid overdoses have skyrocketed. The Drug Policy
Alliance points out that Portugal, where the personal possession and use of
drugs was decriminalized in 2001, has one of the lowest drug overdose rates in
western Europe.

In the United States, on the other hand, most drug use remains criminalized.
The current attorney general, Jeff Sessions, wants to crack down further on
drug use. Among other things he's reinstated mandatory minimum sentences for
certain drug offenses, recruited a drug war hard-liner to review current
marijuana policy, and spoken out repeatedly against the current state-level
trend toward marijuana legalization.

Many public health experts have called for illicit drug use to be
decriminalized in the United States, arguing that many of the negative effects
of the drug trade — crime, disease, over-incarceration — are a result of
strict policies that leaves drug users nowhere to turn but the black market.
This is particularly true for substances like marijuana, whose effects at the
individual and societal level are typically less harmful than even legal
substances like alcohol.

National polling shows support for recreational marijuana use hovering around
60 percent. Eight states plus the District of Columbia now allow recreational
use of the drug. But the latest FBI numbers suggest that, at the national
level at least, this hasn't yet led to significant changes to pot policing in
other states.

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham Christopher Ingraham writes about all things data. He
previously worked at the Brookings Institution and the Pew Research Center.
Follow __

Market Watch

Dow 26,048.51

Today 0.05%

S&P 2,885.72

Today 0.03%

NASDAQ 7,822.57

Today 0.01%

Last Updated:5:23 PM 06/12/2019

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

