

  * Contact Us
  * Intervention
  * Outside Consultants
  * Story & Mission
  * Corporate Leadership
  * Facility Leadership
  * Contributors
  * Media
  * Investor Relations
  * Academic Scholarship
  * Facility Reviews
  * Research
  * Why AAC?
  * Our 90 Day Promise
  * Treatment Services
  * Thought Leadership & Treatment Innovation
  * Drug Addiction Treatment Programs
  * Labs/Pharmacogenetics/DNA Testing
  * Admissions
  * Schedule
  * Payment Options
  * All Treatment Centers
  * Laguna Treatment Hospital
  * Oxford Treatment Center
  * Greenhouse Treatment Center
  * Recovery First
  * Recovery First
  * River Oaks Treatment Center
  * Desert Hope Treatment Center
  * AdCare Rhode Island
  * AdCare Outpatient
  * AdCare Hospital
  * Sunrise House Treatment Center
  * Resolutions - Recovery Residences
  * General Detox
  * Alcohol
  * Ambien
  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Hydrocodone
  * Opiate
  * Suboxone
  * Tramadol
  * Valium
  * Vicodin
  * Xanax
  * OxyContin
  * Addiction Is a Disease
  * Alcohol
  * Ambien
  * Barbiturate
  * Benzodiazepine
  * Cocaine
  * Fentanyl
  * Heroin
  * Inhalants
  * Marijuana
  * Meth
  * Opiates
  * OxyContin
  * Prescription Drugs
  * Stimulant
  * Suboxone
  * Synthetics
  * Valium
  * Xanax
  * Drug Rehab Guide
  * Detox Help
  * Outpatient Programs
  * Residential Centers
  * Addiction Therapy
  * Aftercare Services
  * Co-Occurring Disorders
  * Treatment Medications
  * Insurance Coverage
  * Health Complications
  * Overdose Risks
  * For LGBTQIAPK
  * For Families
  * Trending In Addiction
  * Blog

  * __

  * Disease of Addiction
  * About Us

›

  * Our Approach

›

  * Admissions

›

  * Treatment Centers

›

  * Detox

›

  * Addiction

›

  * Rehab

›

  * Discover

›

  * Alumni
  * Treatment Professionals
  * Our Research
  * Search

Call (888) 966-8152

  * searchCreated with Sketch.

Search

  * Menu

**Ready to get help?** Our Admission Navigators are available **24/7.**
**(888) 966-8152**

  * Home
  * marijuana rehab
  * is it addictive

right-arrow copy

# Marijuana Addiction Facts: Is Marijuana Physically Addictive?

Edited by Kristina Ackermann

Reviewed by Scot Thomas, M.D.

Last Updated: June 10, 2019

Call (888) 966-8152

### Table of Contents

  * The Prevalence of Marijuana Use
  * Marijuana's Addictiveness
  * Signs of Abuse and Addiction

About the editor

Kristina Ackermann![american addiction centers

photo](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/Kristina-Ackermann-150x150.jpg)

Kristina Ackermann, B.A., is a professional writer and editor. Her
professional experience includes evidence-based research for peer-reviewed
medical journals, with an emphasis in prehospital care.

### Does your loved one need help?

You’ve come to the right place. We’ll check your insurance information to help
find the best option for your family member.

Get Started Now right-arrow copy

Regular marijuana users are known to develop tolerance, dependence, and
experience signs of withdrawal when they stop taking the drug. Many marijuana
users develop compulsive patterns of problematic use—finding it difficult to
stop using the drug, even when they want to do so. All of these features are
hallmarks of addictive drugs.

The addictiveness of a drug is characterized by a compulsive drive to seek out
and continue using the substance despite harm caused by the drug to the user’s
health, relationships, financial well-being, or other areas of life. Many
drugs of abuse have a restricted status under the Controlled Substances Act
(CSA) of 1990. Marijuana is currently classified as a Schedule I drug, which
means that it has no recognized medicinal value while at the same time carries
a high risk of abuse.

The idea that marijuana does not have any legitimate therapeutic value may be
surprising to many because several states have legalized marijuana for
medicinal or even recreational purposes. Additionally, there is some case
report evidence and numerous personal/anecdotal accounts of marijuana’s
utility in helping people with certain medical issues such as cancer (e.g.,
cancer-related pain, chemotherapy-induced nausea/vomiting). In order to
reconcile the Schedule I classification with the different public views on
marijuana, it is necessary to understand that this drug is highly politicized.
Under federal law, marijuana is illegal to produce, distribute, or consume;
however, different states have different laws on marijuana.

Marijuana laws continue to evolve but, as of the start of 2019, 33 states
(plus Guam and Washington, D.C.) had laws in place that had at least partially
legalized certain aspects of cultivation, distribution, and consumption of
marijuana. States have taken different approaches to marijuana laws; some
states have opted for decriminalization, whereas others restrict marijuana to
use for medical purposes (e.g., New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania, Florida, and
others). The most permissive states have legalized recreational use of
marijuana (these states include Washington, Oregon, California, Colorado, and
others). Some states, such as Texas, have not passed new marijuana laws, which
means that federal laws prevail, and marijuana is therefore illegal.

The variations in laws is a potential source of confusion for the American
public. Some Americans may perceive the legality of marijuana, at least in
some jurisdictions, to mean that this drug is not addictive. This is not true,
as marijuana can lead to addiction in some users.

![myths of drug use and addiction

rehab](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/5-Myths-of-Drug-Use-vFinal.png)

## The Prevalence of Marijuana Use

![Silver Afghan Medicinal Medical Marijuana](/wp-

content/uploads/2015/09/bigstock-Silver-Afghan-Medicinal-

Medica-95007596-250x158.jpg)Marijuana has many street names, but “cannabis”
comes closest to the botanical name of the plant source ( _Cannabis sativa_ )
from which the primary psychoactive substances in marijuana and marijuana-
related products are derived. As the National Institute on Drug Abuse
explains, the main psychoactive component in marijuana is THC
(delta-9-tetrahydro-cannabinol). The cannabis plant produces THC, which can be
found in the plant's leaves and buds.

THC mimics a naturally occurring chemical messenger (neurotransmitter) called
anandamide. Both THC and anandamide are classified as cannabinoids. THC, like
anandamide, binds with the brain's cannabinoid receptors. This complex of
receptors is involved in activities such as short-term memory, learning, and
coordination. THC’s interaction with the endocannabinoid system results in the
intoxicating effects associated with marijuana use, as well as certain side
effects like dulling of mental abilities and memory recall.

The National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) is one of the most
comprehensive and reliable sources of information on patterns of drug use in
America. Despite the fact that marijuana remains illegal in many
jurisdictions, according to the 2017 NSDUH, marijuana is the most commonly
used illicit drug in the nation.

The following provides statistical insight into marijuana use in the US:

  * In the 12+ age group, an estimated 40.9 million Americans had used marijuana in the year prior to the survey (this represents 15 percent of the population).
  * Individuals who use marijuana may be more likely to use other drugs as well. In fact, the 2013 NSDUH results indicated that 80.6 percent of current illicit drug users consumed marijuana in combination with other drugs of abuse.
  * An estimated 22.1 percent of young Americans in the 18-25 age group had used marijuana in the past month.
  * Roughly 2.6 million, or 7.6 percent of young adults in the US report daily or near-daily use of marijuana.

![Smoking marijuana](/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/bigstock-Smoking-

marijuana-99250013-250x167.jpg)National surveys like these make clear that
there is little likelihood marijuana use will cease in America. Not only is
marijuana use prevalent, but it also manages to recruit an estimated 6,600 new
users each day. The lack of a unified legal view on marijuana as well as its
common usage may be used as a defense among illicit users. It is important,
however, to understand the biological nature of marijuana and the potential
harms associated with problematic use.

Despite this drug's controversial politics and widespread popularity, it is
important to keep in mind that marijuana is a drug with addiction potential.

## Marijuana's Addictiveness

![Marijuana Macro](/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/bigstock-Marijuana-

Macro-84376379-250x167.jpg) Two indicators of what’s known as a substance use
disorder are tolerance and dependence/withdrawal—both are factors to consider
in association with marijuana use. Over time, individuals who consume a drug
will typically need more of it to achieve the desired effects (this is known
as building a physical tolerance). As use continues and, perhaps, increases
(in an attempt to overcome tolerance) over time, physiological dependence will
additionally take hold. At this point, when the drug use ceases, or the
familiar amount is significantly reduced, regular users of drugs, including
marijuana, will likely experience withdrawal symptoms.

Though the presence of tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal on their own is
not enough to make a diagnosis of marijuana addiction (for instance, not
everyone who develops some amount of dependence to marijuana will necessarily
begin to compulsively use it), together they are strong indicators of the type
of problematic use that could ultimately lead to the development of a
substance use disorder.

Individuals who do become addicted to a drug will give it a high priority in
their lives, even though doing so may lead to personal conflicts and an
inability to successfully fulfill important obligations. People who have
reached this point may find it difficult to quit without seeking professional
treatment.

#### Are These Drugs Addictive?

  * How Addictive
  * Baclofen
  * Cocaine
  * Ecstasy
  * Klonopin
  * Kratom
  * Suboxone
  * Xanax

According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, an estimated 9 percent of
marijuana users will become dependent on this drug. The age of initiation into
marijuana use is relevant to the potential for addiction. Approximately 17
percent of individuals who began using marijuana in their teens will become
dependent. If marijuana use occurs on a daily basis, the likelihood of forming
a dependency increases to 25-50 percent. To place marijuana dependence in the
context of other drugs, according to the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health, of the 6.9 million Americans who abused illicit drugs or were
dependent on them, 4.2 million were marijuana users.

## Signs of Abuse and Addiction

A reality of American life is that many adolescents, young adults, and older
adults experiment with illicit drugs. While occasional use of marijuana may
not lead to compulsive misuse, it is still a hazardous activity because of
marijuana’s addiction potential or the association of marijuana use with
incidental harms, such as drugged driving or being arrested for other
substance-related criminal activities. In the earliest stages, neither the
drug user nor loved ones may recognize that there is a problem developing. But
over time, the person who abuses marijuana may begin to show signs of physical
dependence and addiction. Physical signs of marijuana use can occur
immediately after use and include:

  * Dizziness.
  * Unprompted laughing (i.e., the giggles).
  * Bloodshot eyes.
  * Forgetfulness of recent events.
  * Increased appetite or eating more than usual.

The physical signs of marijuana use alone may not indicate that addiction has
developed. The presence of a withdrawal syndrome, though it is often mild, is
an indication of physical dependence, however. Withdrawal symptoms may include
bad mood, nervousness, problems sleeping, and cravings for marijuana. Although
these symptoms may have a lack of medical urgency, they should not be ignored,
as for some people they could serve as the impetus for continued use turned
compulsive use and, eventually, a marijuana use disorder or addiction.

People with a marijuana use disorder may continue to use it in spite of
personal, family, work, and/or school problems. These people may socialize
around this drug and decline the company of others who forbid its use. In
other words, using marijuana becomes the most important part of the person’s
social life.

Denial of the extent of the marijuana use may occur as a way to protect the
ongoing use. Individuals who are addicted to marijuana will not want anyone to
interfere with their continued ability to obtain and use the drug, which have
become their main priorities.

At this point, loved ones will likely notice the changes and may want to think
about next steps, such as helping the person to get into treatment.

Share **** __

About the editor

Kristina Ackermann![american addiction centers

photo](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/Kristina-Ackermann-150x150.jpg)

Kristina Ackermann, B.A., is a professional writer and editor. Her
professional experience includes evidence-based research for peer-reviewed
medical journals, with an emphasis in prehospital care.

### Does your loved one need help?

You’ve come to the right place. We’ll check your insurance information to help
find the best option for your family member.

Get Started Now right-arrow copy

### I am ready to call.

(888) 966-8152

__

![american addiction centers photo](/static/aac_icon.svg)

American Addiction Centers(888) 987-1784 200 Powell Pl Brentwood, TN 37027

![american addiction centers photo](/static/icon-twitter.svg)

![american addiction centers photo](/static/icon-facebook.svg)

![american addiction centers photo](/static/icon-linkedin.svg)

### Company

  * Our Brand Promise
  * Explore Careers
  * Treatment Centers
  * Alumni
  * Investor Relations
  * Contact Us

### Resources

  * Guide to Helping a Loved One
  * Treatment Resources for Veterans
  * Substance Abuse & HIV/AIDS
  * Treatment of Firefighters & First Responders
  * Information on 12-Step Programs

### Legal

  * Notice of Privacy Practices
  * Online Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use

Copyright © American Addiction Centers 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

