

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

# History of Poland during the Piast dynasty

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Part of **a series** on the

* * *

History of Poland  
![Old map of

Poland](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/64/Poland_and_Lit.jpg/200px-

Poland_and_Lit.jpg)  
Topics

  * Chronology
  * List of Polish monarchs

Prehistory and protohistory

  * Stone Age
  * Bronze and Iron Age
  * Antiquity
  * Polish tribes

Middle Ages

  * Early Middle Ages
  * Christianization

| Piast period| 10th century - 1385  
\---|---  
Jagiellonian period| 1385-1572  
Early Modern  
| Early elective monarchy| 1572-1648  
\---|---  
Deluge and decline| 1648-1764  
Three partitions| 1764-1795  
Modern  
| Partitioned Poland| 1795-1918  
\---|---  
World War I| 1914-1918  
Second Republic| 1918-1939  
World War II| 1939-1945  
Communist Poland| 1945-1989  
Contemporary  
| Third Republic| 1989-present  
\---|---  
![Flag of

Poland.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/12/Flag_of_Poland.svg/16px-

Flag_of_Poland.svg.png) Poland portal

  * v
  * t
  * e

The period of rule by the Piast dynasty between the 10th and 14th centuries is
the first major stage of the history of the Polish nation. The dynasty was
founded by a series of dukes listed by the chronicler Gallus Anonymous in the
early 12th century: Siemowit, Lestek and Siemomysł. It was Mieszko I, the son
of Siemomysł, who is now considered the proper founder of the Polish state at
about 960 AD.[1] The ruling house then remained in power in the Polish lands
until 1370. Mieszko converted to Christianity of the Western Latin Rite in an
event known as the Baptism of Poland in 966, which established a major
cultural boundary in Europe based on religion. He also completed a unification
of the West Slavic tribal lands that was fundamental to the existence of the
new country of Poland.[2]

Following the emergence of the Polish state, a series of rulers converted the
population to Christianity, created a kingdom of Poland in 1025 and integrated
Poland into the prevailing culture of Europe. Mieszko's son Bolesław I the
Brave established a Roman Catholic Archdiocese in Gniezno, pursued territorial
conquests and was officially crowned in 1025 as the first king of Poland. The
first Piast monarchy collapsed with the death of Mieszko II Lambert in 1034,
followed by its restoration under Casimir I in 1042. In the process, the royal
dignity for Polish rulers was forfeited, and the state reverted to the status
of a duchy. Duke Casimir's son Bolesław II the Bold revived the military
assertiveness of Bolesław I, but became fatally involved in a conflict with
Bishop Stanislaus of Szczepanów and was expelled from the country.[2]

Bolesław III, the last duke of the early period, succeeded in defending his
country and recovering territories previously lost. Upon his death in 1138,
Poland was divided among his sons. The resulting internal fragmentation eroded
the initial Piast monarchical structure in the 12th and 13th centuries and
caused fundamental and lasting changes.

Konrad I of Masovia invited the Teutonic Knights to help him fight the Baltic
Prussian pagans, which led to centuries of Poland's warfare with the Knights
and the German Prussian state.[2]

In 1320, the kingdom was restored under Władysław I the Elbow-high, then
strengthened and expanded by his son Casimir III the Great. The western
provinces of Silesia and Pomerania were lost after the fragmentation, and
Poland began expanding to the east. The period ended with the reigns of two
members of the Capetian House of Anjou between 1370 and 1384. The
consolidation in the 14th century laid the base for the new powerful kingdom
of Poland that was to follow.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 10th–12th century
    * 1.1 Mieszko I and the adoption of Christianity in Poland (ca. 960–992)
    * 1.2 The reign of Bolesław I and establishment of a Kingdom of Poland (992–1025)
    * 1.3 Mieszko II and the collapse of the Piast kingdom (1025–1039)
    * 1.4 Reunification of Poland under Casimir I (1039–1058)
    * 1.5 Bolesław II and the conflict with Bishop Stanisław (1058–1079)
    * 1.6 Reign of Władysław I Herman (1079–1102)
    * 1.7 Reign of Bolesław III (1102–1138)
    * 1.8 Fragmentation of the realm (1138–1320)
    * 1.9 Culture
  * 2 13th century
    * 2.1 State and society; German settlement
    * 2.2 Relations with the Teutonic Knights
    * 2.3 Reunification attempts and the reigns of Przemysł II and Václav II (1232–1305)
    * 2.4 Culture
  * 3 14th century
    * 3.1 The reunited kingdom of the last Piast rulers; Jewish settlement
    * 3.2 The reign of Władysław I the Elbow-high (1305–1333)
    * 3.3 The reign of Casimir III the Great (1333–1370)
    * 3.4 The reign of Louis I and Jadwiga (1370–1399)
    * 3.5 Culture
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

## 10th–12th century[edit]

### Mieszko I and the adoption of Christianity in Poland (ca. 960–992)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3a/Ostr%C3%B3w_Tumski_Pozna%C5%84_RB1.JPG/250px-

Ostr%C3%B3w_Tumski_Pozna%C5%84_RB1.JPG)

Important early stages in the history of the Polish state and church took
place on the island of Ostrów Tumski. Remnants of the original _palatium_
–chapel complex of Poland's first Christian ruling couple have been found
beneath the church in the foreground. The Poznań Cathedral is located on the
right.[3]

The tribe of the Polans ( _Polanie_ , lit. "people of the fields") in what is
now Greater Poland gave rise to a tribal predecessor of the Polish state in
the early part of the 10th century, with the Polans settling in the flatlands
around the emerging strongholds of Giecz, Poznań, Gniezno and Ostrów Lednicki.
Accelerated rebuilding of old tribal fortified settlements, construction of
massive new ones and territorial expansion took place during the period ca.
920–950.[4] The Polish state developed from these tribal roots in the second
half of the century. According to the 12th-century chronicler Gallus Anonymus,
the Polans were ruled at this time by the Piast dynasty. In existing sources
from the 10th century, Piast ruler Mieszko I was first mentioned by Widukind
of Corvey in his _Res gestae saxonicae_ , a chronicle of events in Germany.
Widukind reported that Mieszko's forces were twice defeated in 963 by the
Veleti tribes acting in cooperation with the Saxon exile Wichmann the
Younger.[5] Under Mieszko's rule (ca. 960 to 992), his tribal state accepted
Christianity and became the Polish state.[6]

The viability of the Mieszko's emerging state was assured by the persistent
territorial expansion of the early Piast rulers. Beginning with a very small
area around Gniezno (before the town itself existed), the Piast expansion
lasted throughout most of the 10th century and resulted in a territory
approximating that of present-day Poland. The Polanie tribe conquered and
merged with other Slavic tribes and first formed a tribal federation, then
later a centralized state. After the addition of Lesser Poland, the country of
the Vistulans, and of Silesia (both taken by Mieszko from the Czech state
during the later part of the 10th century), Mieszko's state reached its mature
form, including the main regions regarded as ethnically Polish.[7] The Piast
lands totaled about 250,000 km2 (96,526 sq mi) in area,[8] with an approximate
population of under one million.[9]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/4_Gift_Bringers_of_Otto_III.jpg/250px-4_Gift_Bringers_of_Otto_III.jpg)

Roma, Gallia, Germania and Sclavinia (Slavic province of Europe) bring
offerings to Emperor Otto III, approaching him in that order. However, they
appear to be given equal rank (size), which is a reflection of imperial
policies at that time.

Initially a pagan, Mieszko I was the first ruler of the Polans tribal union
known from contemporary written sources. A detailed account of aspects of
Mieszko's early reign was given by Ibrâhîm ibn Ya`qûb, a Jewish traveler,
according to whom Mieszko was one of four Slavic "kings" established in
central and southern Europe in the 960s.[10][11] In 965, Mieszko, who was
allied with Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia at the time, married the duke's
daughter Doubravka, a Christian princess. Mieszko's conversion to Christianity
in its Western Latin Rite followed on 14 April 966,[12] an event known as the
Baptism of Poland that is considered to be the founding event of the Polish
state. In the aftermath of Mieszko's victory over a force of the Velunzani in
967, which was led by Wichmann, the first missionary bishop was appointed:
Jordan, bishop of Poland. The action counteracted the intended eastern
expansion of the Magdeburg Archdiocese, which was established at about the
same time.[7][13][14]

Mieszko's state had a complex political relationship with the German Holy
Roman Empire, as Mieszko was a "friend", ally and vassal of Holy Roman Emperor
Otto I and paid him tribute from the western part of his lands. Mieszko fought
wars with the Polabian Slavs, the Czechs, Margrave Gero of the Saxon Eastern
March in 963–964 and Margrave Odo I of the Saxon Eastern March in 972 in the
Battle of Cedynia. The victories over Wichmann and Odo allowed Mieszko to
extend his Pomeranian possessions west to the vicinity of the Oder River and
its mouth. After the death of Otto I, and then again after the death of Holy
Roman Emperor Otto II, Mieszko supported Henry the Quarrelsome, a pretender to
the imperial crown. After the death of Doubravka in 977, Mieszko married Oda
von Haldensleben, daughter of Dietrich, Margrave of the Northern March, ca.
980\. When fighting the Czechs in 990, Mieszko was helped by the Holy Roman
Empire. By about the year 990, when Mieszko I officially submitted his country
to the authority of the Holy See ( _Dagome iudex_ ), he had transformed Poland
into one of the strongest powers in central-eastern Europe.[7][14]

### The reign of Bolesław I and establishment of a Kingdom of Poland

(992–1025)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6c/Drzwi_gnieznienskie_wykupienie_zwlok_Wojciecha.jpg/250px-

Drzwi_gnieznienskie_wykupienie_zwlok_Wojciecha.jpg)

An image on the Gniezno Doors at the entrance to Gniezno Cathedral depicts
Bolesław buying Adalbert's body back from the Prussians

When Mieszko I died in 992, he was succeeded by his son Bolesław contrary to
his wishes. In order to ascend the throne, Bolesław had to contest it with his
widowed stepmother Oda, his father's second wife, and her minor sons. Bolesław
was Mieszko's oldest son, born to his first wife Doubravka of Bohemia, who
died in 977. His father intended to divide the duchy of Poland between his
sons, but Bolesław succeeded in displacing his stepmother and stepbrothers to
become the sole ruler of Poland. Consistent with the intrigues he pursued at
the start of his reign to secure his throne, Bolesław I Chrobry ("the Brave")
proved himself to be a man of high ambition and strong personality.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/68/Polska_992_-_1025.png/250px-

Polska_992_-_1025.png)

Poland (992–1025); area within dark pink color represents the borders at the
end of the rule of Mieszko I (992); dark red border comprises the area at the
end of the reign of Bolesław I (1025)

One of the most important concerns of Bolesław's early reign was building up
the Polish church. Bolesław cultivated Adalbert of Prague of the Slavník
family, a well-connected Czech bishop in exile and missionary who was killed
in 997 while on a mission in Prussia. Bolesław skillfully took advantage of
his death: his martyrdom led to his elevation as patron saint of Poland and
resulted in the creation of an independent Polish province of the Church with
Radim Gaudentius as Archbishop of Gniezno. In the year 1000, the young Emperor
Otto III came as a pilgrim to visit St. Adalbert's grave and lent his support
to Bolesław during the Congress of Gniezno; the Gniezno Archdiocese and
several subordinate dioceses were established on this occasion. The Polish
ecclesiastical province effectively served as an essential anchor and an
institution to fall back on for the Piast state, helping it to survive in the
troubled centuries ahead.[15][16]

Bolesław at first chose to continue his father's policy of cooperation with
the Holy Roman Empire but when Emperor Otto III died in 1002, Bolesław's
relationship with his successor Henry II turned out to be much more difficult,
and it resulted in a series of wars (1002–1005, 1007–1013, 1015–1018). From
1003–1004, Bolesław intervened militarily in Czech dynastic conflicts. After
his forces were removed from Bohemia in 1018,[17] Bolesław retained
Moravia.[18] In 1013, the marriage between Bolesław's son Mieszko and Richeza
of Lotharingia, the niece of Emperor Otto III and future mother of Casimir I
the Restorer, took place. The conflicts with Germany ended in 1018 with the
Peace of Bautzen on favorable terms for Bolesław. In the context of the 1018
Kiev expedition, Bolesław took over the western part of Red Ruthenia. In 1025,
shortly before his death, Bolesław I finally succeeded in obtaining the papal
permission to crown himself, and he became the first king of Poland.[15][16]

Bolesław's expansionist policies were costly to the Polish state and were not
always successful. He lost, for example, the economically crucial Farther
Pomerania in 1005 together with its new bishopric in Kołobrzeg; the region had
previously been conquered with great effort by Mieszko.[15][16]

### Mieszko II and the collapse of the Piast kingdom (1025–1039)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/Matylda_wrecza_mieszkowi_II_ksiege_liturgiczna.jpg/200px-

Matylda_wrecza_mieszkowi_II_ksiege_liturgiczna.jpg)

Mieszko II shown allegorically with Duchess Mathilda von Schwaben

King Mieszko II Lambert (r. 1025–1034) tried to continue the expansionist
politics of his father. His actions reinforced old resentment and hostility on
the part of Poland's neighbors, and his two dispossessed brothers took
advantage of it by arranging for invasions from Germany and Kievan Rus' in
1031\. Mieszko was defeated and forced to leave Poland. Mieszko's brother
Bezprym was murdered in 1032, whereas his brother Otto died in unclear
circumstances in 1033, events that permitted Mieszko to recover his authority
partially. The first Piast monarchy then collapsed with Mieszko's death in
1034\. Deprived of a government, Poland was ravaged by an anti-feudal and
pagan rebellion, and in 1039, there was an invasion by the forces of
Bretislaus I of Bohemia. The country suffered territorial losses, and the
functioning of the Gniezno archdiocese was disrupted.[19][20]

### Reunification of Poland under Casimir I (1039–1058)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/Krakow_kosciol_20071229_1246.jpg/180px-

Krakow_kosciol_20071229_1246.jpg)

St. Andrew's Church in Kraków (built in the 11th century)

Poland made a recovery under Mieszko's son, Duke Casimir I (r. 1039–1058),
known to history as the Restorer. After returning from exile in 1039, Casimir
rebuilt the Polish monarchy and the country's territorial integrity through
several military campaigns: in 1047, Masovia was taken back from Miecław, a
Polish noble who tried to detach the region from the rule of the Polish
monarch, and in 1054 Silesia was recovered from the Czechs. Casimir was aided
by recent adversaries of Poland, the Holy Roman Empire and Kievan Rus', both
of whom disliked the chaos in Poland left after the dismemberment of the
country beginning in the reign of Mieszko II. Casimir introduced a more mature
form of feudalism and relieved the burden of financing large army units from
the duke's treasury by settling his warriors on feudal estates. Faced with the
widespread destruction of Greater Poland after the Czech incursion, Casimir
moved his court to Kraków and replaced the old Piast capitals of Poznań and
Gniezno; Kraków would function as the nation's capital for several
centuries.[21][22]

### Bolesław II and the conflict with Bishop Stanisław (1058–1079)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/Wawel_St_Leonard.JPG/220px-

Wawel_St_Leonard.JPG)

St. Leonard's Crypt is all that remains of the second Romanesque Wawel
Cathedral of Władysław Herman

Casimir's son Bolesław II the Bold, also known as the Generous (r. 1058–1079),
developed Polish military strength and waged several foreign campaigns between
1058 and 1077. As an active supporter of the pope in its Investiture
Controversy with the German emperor, Bolesław crowned himself king in 1076
with the blessing of Pope Gregory VII. In 1079, there was an anti-Bolesław
conspiracy or conflict that involved the Bishop of Kraków. Bolesław had Bishop
Stanisław of Szczepanów executed; subsequently Bolesław was forced to abdicate
the Polish throne due to pressure from the Catholic Church and the pro-
imperial faction of the nobility. Stanisław would become the second martyr and
patron saint of Poland (known in English as St. Stanislav), canonized in
1253.[23]

### Reign of Władysław I Herman (1079–1102)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/81/6_Plock_073.jpg/130px-6_Plock_073.jpg)

Płock Cathedral is the burial place of Władysław I Herman and Bolesław III
Wrymouth

After Bolesław's exile, the country found itself under the unstable rule of
his younger brother Władysław I Herman (r. 1079–1102). Władysław was strongly
dependent on Count Palatine Sieciech, an advisor from the ranks of the Polish
nobility who acted much as the power behind the throne. When Władysław's two
sons, Zbigniew and Bolesław, finally forced Władysław to remove his hated
protégé, Poland was divided among the three of them from 1098, and after the
father's death, from 1102 to 1106, it was divided between the two
brothers.[24]

### Reign of Bolesław III (1102–1138)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Polska_1102_-_1138.png/225px-

Polska_1102_-_1138.png)

Poland during the rule of Bolesław III Wrymouth

After a power struggle, Bolesław III Wrymouth (r. 1102–1138) became the duke
of Poland by defeating his half-brother Zbigniew in 1106–1107. Zbigniew had to
leave the country, but received support from Holy Roman Emperor Henry V, who
attacked Bolesław's Poland in 1109. Bolesław was able to defend his country
due to his military abilities, determination and alliances, and also because
of a national mobilization across the social spectrum (see Battle of Głogów).
Zbigniew, who later returned, died in mysterious circumstances, perhaps in the
summer of 1113. Bolesław's other major achievement was the conquest of all of
Mieszko I's Pomerania (of which the remaining eastern part had been lost by
Poland from after the death of Mieszko II), a task begun by his father
Władysław I Herman and completed by Bolesław around 1123. Szczecin was subdued
in a bloody takeover and Western Pomerania up to Rügen, except for the
directly incorporated southern part, became Bolesław's fief,[25] to be ruled
locally by Wartislaw I, the first duke of the Griffin dynasty.[26]

At this time, Christianization of the region was initiated in earnest, an
effort crowned by the establishment of the Pomeranian Wolin Diocese after
Bolesław's death in 1140.[26]

### Fragmentation of the realm (1138–1320)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d4/Tum_-

_Kolegiata_01.jpg/250px-Tum_-_Kolegiata_01.jpg)

Collegiate church in Tum

Before he died, Bolesław III Wrymouth divided the country, in a limited sense,
among four of his sons. He made complex arrangements intended to prevent
fratricidal warfare and preserve the Polish state's formal unity, but after
Bolesław's death, the implementation of the plan failed and a long period of
fragmentation was ushered in. For nearly two centuries, the Piasts would spar
with each other, the clergy, and the nobility for the control over the divided
kingdom. The stability of the system was supposedly assured by the institution
of the senior or high duke of Poland, based in Kraków and assigned to the
special Seniorate Province that was not to be subdivided. Following his
concept of seniorate, Bolesław divided the country into five principalities:
Silesia, Greater Poland, Masovia, Sandomierz and Kraków. The first four
provinces were given to his four sons, who became independent rulers. The
fifth province, the Seniorate Province of Kraków, was to be added to the
senior among the princes who, as the Grand Duke of Kraków, was the
representative of the whole of Poland. This principle broke down already
within the generation of Bolesław III's sons, when Władysław II the Exile,
Bolesław IV the Curly, Mieszko III the Old and Casimir II the Just fought for
power and territory in Poland, and in particular over the throne of
Kraków.[27]

The external borders left by Bolesław III at his death closely resembled the
borders left by Mieszko I; this original early Piast monarchy configuration
had not survived the fragmentation period.[28]

### Culture[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e2/Legnica.JPG/275px-

Legnica.JPG)

Mongol invasion of Poland (late 1240–1241) culminated in the Battle of Legnica

From the time of the conversion of Poland's ruling elite to Christianity in
the 10th century, foreign churchmen had been arriving and the culture of early
Medieval Poland was developing as a part of European Christendom. However, it
would be a few generations from the time of Mieszko's conversion until
significant numbers of native clergymen appeared. After the establishment of
numerous monasteries in the 12th and 13th centuries, Christianization of the
populace was accomplished on a larger scale.[29]

Intellectual and artistic activity was concentrated around the institutions of
the Church, the courts of the kings and dukes, and emerged around the
households of the rising hereditary elite. Written annals began to be
generated in the late 10th century; leaders such as Mieszko II and Casimir the
Restorer were considered literate and educated. Along with the _Dagome iudex_
act, the most important written document and source of the period is the
_Gesta principum Polonorum_ , a chronicle by Gallus Anonymus, a foreign cleric
from the court of Bolesław Wrymouth. Bruno of Querfurt was one of the
pioneering Western clergymen spreading Church literacy; some of his prominent
writings had been produced in eremitic monasteries in Poland. Among the
preeminent early monastic religious orders were the Benedictines (the abbey in
Tyniec founded in 1044)[30] and the Cistercians.[31][32] A number of Pre-
Romanesque stone churches were built beginning in the 10th century, often
accompanied by _palatium_ ruler residencies; Romanesque buildings proper
followed. The earliest coins were minted by Bolesław I around 995. The Gniezno
Doors of Gniezno Cathedral in bronze low relief, dating from the 1170s, are
the finest examples of Romanesque sculpture in Poland.

## 13th century[edit]

### State and society; German settlement[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2e/Sachsenspiegel-

Ostsiedlung.jpg/275px-Sachsenspiegel-Ostsiedlung.jpg)

Ostsiedlung or German settlement in the east, miniature from Sachsenspiegel

The 13th century brought fundamental changes to the structure of Polish
society and its political system. Because of constant internal conflicts, the
Piast dukes were unable to stabilize Poland's external borders. Western
Farther Pomerania broke its political ties with Poland in the second half of
the 12th century and from 1231 became a fief of the Margraviate of
Brandenburg, which in 1307 extended its Pomeranian possessions even further
east, taking over the Sławno and Słupsk areas. Pomerelia or Gdańsk Pomerania
became independent of the Polish dukes from 1227. In mid-13th century,
Bolesław II the Bald granted Lubusz Land to the Margraviate, which made
possible the creation of the Neumark and had far reaching negative
consequences for the integrity of the western border. In the south-east,
Leszek the White was unable to preserve Poland's supremacy over the Halych
area of Rus', a territory that had changed hands on a number of occasions.[33]

The social status was becoming increasingly based on the size of feudal land
possessions. Those included the lands controlled by the Piast princes, their
rivals the great lay land owners and church entities, and the knightly class.
The work force ranged from hired "free" people to serfs attached to the land,
to slaves (either purchased, forced into slavery after capture in war or
forced into slavery as prisoners). The upper layer of the feudal lords, first
the Church and then others, was able to acquire economic and legal immunity,
which it exempt to a significant degree from court jurisdiction and economic
obligations such as taxation that had previously been imposed by the ruling
dukes.[33]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1a/Torun01CenterWithWall_level_corr.jpg/250px-

Torun01CenterWithWall_level_corr.jpg)

Thorn (Toruń), established by the Teutonic Knights became a member of the
Hanseatic League

Civil strife and foreign invasions, such as the Mongol invasions in 1240/1241,
1259/1260 and 1287/1288, weakened and depopulated many of the small Polish
principalities, as the country was becoming progressively more subdivided.
Depopulation and increasing demand for labor caused a massive immigration of
West European peasants into Poland, mostly German settlers; the early waves
from Germany and Flanders occurred in the 1220s.[34] The German, Polish and
other new rural settlements represented a form of feudal tenancy with legal
immunity and German town laws were often utilized as its legal bases. German
immigrants were also important in the rise of the cities and the establishment
of the Polish burgher (city dwelling merchants) class; they brought with them
West European laws (Magdeburg rights) and customs that the Poles adopted. From
that time, the Germans, who created early strong establishments (led by
patriciates) especially in the urban centers of Silesia and other regions of
western Poland, were an increasingly influential minority in
Poland.[33][35][36]

In 1228, the Acts of Cienia were passed and signed into law by Władysław III
Laskonogi. The titular Duke of Poland promised to provide a "just and noble
law according to the council of bishops and barons." Such legal guarantees and
privileges included the lower level land owners and knights, who were evolving
into the lower and middle nobility class known later as _szlachta_. The period
of fragmentation weakened the rulers and established a permanent trend in
Polish history, whereby the rights and role of the nobility were expanded at
the monarch's expense.[33]

### Relations with the Teutonic Knights[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Codex_Manesse_Heinrich_von_Breslau.jpg/175px-

Codex_Manesse_Heinrich_von_Breslau.jpg)

Henry IV of Wrocław in the Codex Manesse, about 1300

In 1226, Duke Konrad I of Masovia invited the Teutonic Knights to help him
fight the pagan Baltic Prussian people, who lived in a territory adjacent to
his lands; substantial border warfare was taking place and Konrad's province
was suffering from Prussian invasions. On the other hand, the Old Prussians
themselves were at that time being subjected to increasingly forced, but
largely ineffective Christianization efforts, including Northern Crusades
sponsored by the papacy. The Teutonic Order soon overstepped their authority
and moved beyond the area granted them by Konrad (Chełmno Land or Kulmerland).
In the following decades, they conquered large areas along the Baltic Sea
coast and established their own monastic state. As virtually all of the
Western Baltic pagans became converted or exterminated (the Prussian conquests
were completed by 1283), the Knights confronted Poland and Lithuania, then the
last pagan state in Europe. Teutonic wars with Poland and Lithuania continued
for most of the 14th and 15th centuries. The Teutonic state in Prussia,
populated by German settlers beginning in the 13th century, had been claimed
as a fief and protected by the popes and Holy Roman Emperors.[37][38]

### Reunification attempts and the reigns of Przemysł II and Václav II

(1232–1305)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c9/Jakub_%C5%9Awinka.PNG/185px-

Jakub_%C5%9Awinka.PNG)

Archbishop Jakub Świnka

As the disadvantages of national division were becoming increasingly apparent
in various segments of the society, some of the Piast dukes began to make
serious efforts aimed at the reunification of the Polish state. Important
among the earlier attempts were the activities of the Silesian dukes Henry I
the Bearded, his son Henry II the Pious, who was killed in 1241 while fighting
the Mongols at the Battle of Legnica, and Henry IV Probus. In 1295, Przemysł
II of Greater Poland became the first Piast duke crowned as King of Poland
since Bolesław II, but he ruled over only a part of the territory of Poland
(including Gdańsk Pomerania from 1294) and was assassinated soon after his
coronation. A more extensive unification of Polish lands was accomplished by a
foreign ruler, Václav II of Bohemia of the Přemyslid dynasty, who married
Przemysł's daughter Richeza and became King of Poland in 1300. Václav's heavy-
handed policies soon caused him to lose whatever support he had earlier in his
reign; he died in 1305.[39]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/55/Wroclaw_Archicathedral.jpg/170px-

Wroclaw_Archicathedral.jpg)

Gothic Cathedral of St. John the Baptist in Wrocław

An important factor in the unification process was the Polish Church, which
remained a single ecclesiastical province throughout the fragmentation period.
Archbishop Jakub Świnka of Gniezno was an ardent proponent of Poland's
reunification; he performed the crowning ceremonies for both Przemysł II and
Wenceslaus II. Świnka supported Władysław I Łokietek at various stages of the
duke's career.[39]

### Culture[edit]

Culturally, the social impact of the Church was considerably broader in the
13th century, as networks of parishes were established and cathedral-type
schools became more common. The Dominicans and the Franciscans were the
leading monastic orders at this time, and they interacted closely with the
general population. A proliferation of narrative annals characterized the
period, as well as other written records, laws and documents. More of the
clergy were of local origin; others were expected to know the Polish language.
Wincenty Kadłubek, the author of an influential chronicle, was the most
recognized representative in the intellectual sphere. _Perspectiva_ , a
treatise on optics by Witelo, a Silesian monk, was one of the finest
achievements of medieval science. The construction of churches and castles in
the Gothic architecture style predominated in the 13th century; native
elements in art forms were increasingly important, with significant advances
taking place in agriculture, manufacturing and crafts.[40]

## 14th century[edit]

### The reunited kingdom of the last Piast rulers; Jewish settlement[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/W%C5%82adys%C5%82aw_I_sarcophagus_figure.jpg/190px-W%C5%82adys%C5%82aw_I_sarcophagus_figure.jpg)

A fragment of a sandstone sarcophagus depicting Władysław I the Elbow-high in
Wawel Cathedral, Kraków

Władysław I the Elbow-high and his son Casimir III, "the Great", were the last
two rulers of the Piast dynasty of the unified kingdom of Poland of the 14th
century. Their rule was not a return to the Polish state as it existed before
the period of fragmentation, because of the loss of internal cohesion and
territorial integrity. The regional Piast princes remained strong, and for
economic and cultural reasons, some of them gravitated toward Poland's
neighbors. The kingdom lost Pomerania and Silesia, the most highly developed
and economically important regions of the original ethnically Polish lands,
which left half of the Polish population outside the kingdom's borders. The
western losses had to do with the failure of the unification efforts
undertaken by the Silesian Piast dukes and the German expansion processes.
These included the Piast principalities developing (or falling into)
dependencies in respect to the German political structures, settler
colonization and gradual Germanization of the Polish ruling circles. The lower
Vistula was controlled by the Teutonic Order. Masovia was not to be fully
incorporated into the Polish state in the near future. Casimir stabilized the
western and northern borders, tried to regain some of the lost territories,
and partially compensated the losses by new eastern expansion that placed
within his kingdom regions that were East Slavic, thus ethnically non-
Polish.[41][42]

Despite the territorial truncation, 14th-century Poland experienced a period
of accelerated economic development and increasing prosperity. This included
further expansion and modernization of agricultural settlements, the
development of towns and their greater role in briskly growing trade, mining
and metallurgy. A great monetary reform was implemented during the reign of
Casimir III.[41][42]

Jewish settlement was taking place in Poland since very early times. In 1264,
Duke Bolesław the Pious of Greater Poland granted the privileges of the
Statute of Kalisz, which specified a broad range of freedoms of religious
practices, movement, and trading for the Jews. It also created a legal
precedent for the official protection of Jews from local harassment and
exclusion. The act exempted the Jews from enslavement or serfdom and was the
foundation of future Jewish prosperity in the Polish kingdom; it was later
followed by many other comparable legal pronouncements.[43] Following a series
of expulsions of Jews from Western Europe, Jewish communities were established
in Kraków, Kalisz and elsewhere in western and southern Poland in the 13th
century. Another series of communities were established at Lviv, Brest-Litovsk
and Grodno further east in the 14th century.[44] King Casimir received Jewish
refugees from Germany in 1349,[45] which assisted the acceleration of a Jewish
expansion in Poland that was to continue until World War II. German urban and
rural settlements were another long-lasting ethnic feature.

### The reign of Władysław I the Elbow-high (1305–1333)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/af/Krakow_nagrobek_Kazimierza_W.jpg/220px-

Krakow_nagrobek_Kazimierza_W.jpg)

Sarcophagus of Casimir the Great at Wawel Cathedral

Władysław I the Elbow-high (r. 1305–1333), who began as an obscure Piast duke
from Kuyavia, fought a lifelong, uphill battle with powerful adversaries with
persistence and determination. When he died as the king of a partially
reunited Poland, he left the kingdom in a precarious situation. Although the
area under King Władysław's control was limited and many unresolved issues
remained, he may have saved Poland's existence as a state.[46]

Supported by his ally Charles I of Hungary, Władysław returned from exile and
challenged Václav II and his successor Václav III in the period 1304–1306.
Václav III's murder in 1306 terminated the Bohemian Přemyslid dynasty and its
involvement in Poland. Afterwards, Władysław completed the takeover of Lesser
Poland, entering Kraków, and took the lands north of there, through Kuyavia
all the way to Gdańsk Pomerania. In 1308, Pomerania was conquered by the
Brandenburg state. In a recovery effort, Władysław agreed to ask for help from
the Teutonic Knights; the Knights brutally took over Gdańsk Pomerania and kept
it for themselves.[46]

In 1311–1312, a rebellion in Kraków instigated by the city's patrician
leadership seeking rule by the House of Luxembourg was put down. This event
may have had a limiting impact on the emerging political power of towns.[47]

In 1313–1314, Władysław conquered Greater Poland. In 1320, he became the first
king of Poland crowned in Kraków's Wawel Cathedral instead of Gniezno. The
coronation was hesitantly agreed to by Pope John XXII in spite of the
opposition of King John of Bohemia, who had also claimed the Polish crown.
John undertook an expedition aimed at Kraków in 1327, which he was compelled
to abort; in 1328, he waged a crusade against Lithuania, during which he
formalized an alliance with the Teutonic Order. The Order was in a state of
war with Poland from 1327 to 1332 (see Battle of Płowce). As a result, the
Knights captured Dobrzyń Land and Kujawy. Władysław was helped by his
alliances with Hungary (his daughter Elizabeth was married to King Charles I
in 1320) and Lithuania (in a pact of 1325 against the Teutonic State and the
marriage of Władysław's son Casimir to Aldona, daughter of the Lithuanian
ruler Gediminas).[48] After 1329, a peace agreement with Brandenburg also
assisted his efforts. A lasting achievement of King John of Bohemia (and a
great loss to Poland) was his success in forcing most of the Piast Silesian
principalities, often ambivalent about their loyalties, into allegiance
between 1327 and 1329.[46][49]

### The reign of Casimir III the Great (1333–1370)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d0/Polska_1333_-_1370.png/250px-

Polska_1333_-_1370.png)

Poland at the end of the rule of Casimir III (1370) is shown within the dark
red border; Silesia (yellow) was lost, while the kingdom had expanded to the
east

After the death of Władysław I, the old monarch's 23-year-old son became King
Casimir III, later known as Casimir the Great (r. 1333–1370). Unlike his
father, the new king demonstrated no attraction for the hardships of military
life. Casimir's contemporaries did not give him much of a chance of overcoming
the country's mounting difficulties or succeeding as a ruler. But from the
beginning, Casimir acted prudently, and in 1335, he purchased the claims of
King John of Bohemia to the Polish throne. In 1343, Casimir settled several
high-level arbitration disputes with the Teutonic Order by a territorial
compromise that culminated in the Treaty of Kalisz of 1343. Dobrzyń Land and
Kuyavia were recovered by Casimir. At that time, Poland started to expand to
the east and through a series of military campaigns between 1340 and 1366,
Casimir annexed the Halych–Volodymyr area of Rus'. The town of Lviv there
attracted newcomers of several nationalities, was granted municipal rights in
1356, and had thus begun its career as Lwów, the main Polish center in the
midst of a Rus' Orthodox population. Supported by Hungary, the Polish king in
1338 promised the Hungarian ruling house the Polish throne in the event he
dies without male heirs.[50][51]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/76/Casimir_III_of_Poland.jpg/175px-

Casimir_III_of_Poland.jpg)

Foundation of the Collegiate church in Wiślica by Casimir III the Great

Casimir, who formally gave up his rights to several Silesian principalities in
1339, unsuccessfully tried to recover the region by conducting military
activities against the House of Luxembourg (the rulers of Bohemia) between
1343 and 1348, but then blocked the attempted separation of Silesia from the
Gniezno Archdiocese by Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV. Later, until his death,
he pursued the Polish claim to Silesia legally by petitioning the pope; his
successors did not continue his efforts.[51]

Allied with Denmark and Western Pomerania (Gdańsk Pomerania was granted to the
Order as an "eternal charity"), Casimir was able to impose some corrections on
the western border. In 1365, Drezdenko and Santok became Poland's fiefs, while
the Wałcz district was taken outright in 1368. The latter action severed the
land connection between Brandenburg and the Teutonic state and connected
Poland with Farther Pomerania.[51]

Casimir the Great considerably solidified the country's position in both
foreign and domestic affairs. Domestically, he integrated and centralized the
reunited Polish state and helped develop what was considered the "Crown of the
Polish Kingdom": the state within its actual boundaries, as well as past or
potential boundaries. Casimir established or strengthened kingdom-wide
institutions (such as the powerful state treasury) independent of the
regional, class, or royal court-related interests. Internationally, the Polish
king was very active diplomatically; he cultivated close contacts with other
European rulers and was a staunch defender of the Polish national interest. In
1364, he sponsored the Congress of Kraków, in which a number of monarchs
participated, which was concerned with the promotion of peaceful cooperation
and political balance in Central Europe.[51]

### The reign of Louis I and Jadwiga (1370–1399)[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/19/Jadwiga_Andegawe%C5%84ska.jpg/180px-

Jadwiga_Andegawe%C5%84ska.jpg)

Queen Jadwiga was the great-granddaughter of Władysław I the Elbow-high

Immediately after Casimir's death in 1370, the heirless king's nephew Louis of
Hungary of the Capetian House of Anjou assumed the Polish throne. As Casimir's
actual commitment to the Anjou succession seemed problematic from the
beginning (in 1368 the Polish king adopted his grandson, Casimir of Słupsk),
Louis engaged in succession negotiations with Polish knights and nobility
starting in 1351. They supported him, exacting in return further guarantees
and privileges for themselves; the formal act was negotiated in Buda in 1355.
After his coronation, Louis returned to Hungary; he left his mother and
Casimir's sister Elizabeth in Poland as regents.[52]

With the death of Casimir the Great, the period of hereditary (Piast) monarchy
in Poland came to an end. The land owners and nobles did not want a strong
monarchy; a constitutional monarchy was established between 1370 and 1493 that
included the beginning of the general sejm, the dominant bicameral parliament
of the future.[52]

During the reign of Louis I, Poland formed a Polish-Hungarian union. In the
pact of 1374 (the Privilege of Koszyce), the Polish nobility was granted
extensive concessions and agreed to extend the Anjou succession to Louis's
daughters, as Louis had no sons. Louis's neglect of Polish affairs resulted in
the loss of Casimir's territorial gains, including Halych Rus', which was
recovered by Queen Jadwiga in 1387. In 1396, Jadwiga and her husband Jagiełło
(Jogaila) forcefully annexed the central Polish lands separating Lesser Poland
from Greater Poland, previously granted by King Louis to his Silesian Piast
ally Duke Władysław of Opole.[52][53]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/db/Krakow_72.jpg/190px-

Krakow_72.jpg)

St. Mary's Church in Kraków

The Hungarian-Polish union lasted for twelve years and ended in war. After
Louis's death in 1382 and a power struggle that resulted in the Greater Poland
Civil War, the Polish nobility decided that Jadwiga, Louis's youngest
daughter, should become the next "King of Poland"; Jadwiga arrived in 1384 and
was crowned at the age of eleven. The failure of the union of Poland and
Hungary paved the way for the union of Lithuania and Poland.[52]

### Culture[edit]

In the 14th century, many large scale brick building projects were undertaken
during Casimir's reign, including the construction of Gothic churches,
castles, urban fortifications and homes of wealthy city residents. The most
notable examples of architecture from the medieval period in Poland are the
many churches representing the Polish Gothic style; medieval sculpture,
painting and ornamental smithery are best revealed in the furnishings of
churches and liturgical items. Polish law was first codified in the Statutes
of Casimir the Great (the Piotrków–Wiślica Statutes) from 1346–1362.
Accordingly, conflict resolution relied on legal proceedings domestically,
while bilateral or multilateral negotiations and treaties were increasingly
important in international relations. By this time, the network of cathedral
and parish schools had become well developed. In 1364, Casimir the Great
established the University of Kraków, the second oldest university in Central
Europe. While many still traveled to southern and western Europe for
university studies, the Polish language, along with the predominant Latin,
became increasingly more common in written documents. The Holy Cross Sermons
(ca. early 14th century) constitute possibly the oldest extant Polish prose
manuscript.[54]

## See also[edit]

  * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/12/Flag_of_Poland.svg/32px-Flag_of_Poland.svg.png)Poland portal

  * Poland in the Early Middle Ages

  * History of Poland during the Jagiellonian dynasty
  * Slavery in Poland

## References[edit]

  1. **^** Witold Chrzanowski, _Kronika Słowian, tom II Polanie_ (The Chronicle of the Slavs, Volume II: The Polans), p. 95, Wydawnictwo EGIS, Kraków 2008, ISBN 978-83-7396-749-6
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe (Polish Scientific Publishers PWN), Warszawa 1986, ISBN 83-01-03732-6
  3. **^** "The history of Ostrów Tumski stronghold". Poznań.pl. Retrieved 2009-09-19.
  4. **^** Various authors, ed. Marek Derwich and Adam Żurek, _U źródeł Polski (do roku 1038)_ (Foundations of Poland (until year 1038)), Wydawnictwo Dolnośląskie, Wrocław 2002, ISBN 83-7023-954-4, Zofia Kurnatowska, pp. 147–149, Adam Żurek and Wojciech Mrozowicz, p. 226
  5. **^** Ed. Andrzej Chwalba, _Kalendarium dziejów Polski_ (Chronology of Polish History), p. 29, Krzysztof Stopka. Copyright 1999 Wydawnictwo Literackie Kraków, ISBN 83-08-02855-1.
  6. **^** Various authors, ed. Marek Derwich and Adam Żurek, _U źródeł Polski (do roku 1038)_ (Foundations of Poland (until year 1038)), pp. 144–159
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Various authors, ed. Marek Derwich and Adam Żurek, _U źródeł Polski (do roku 1038)_ (Foundations of Poland (until year 1038)), pp. 146–167, Zofia Kurnatowska
  8. **^** Francis W. Carter, _Trade and urban development in Poland_ , Cambridge University Press, 1993, ISBN 0-521-41239-0, Google Print, p.47
  9. **^** Jerzy Lukowski, Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , Cambridge University Press, 2001, ISBN 0-521-55917-0, Google Print, p.6
  10. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Dzieje Polski piastowskiej_ (VIII w. – 1370) (History of Piast Poland (8th century – 1370)), p. 77, Fogra, Kraków 1999, ISBN 83-85719-38-5
  11. **^** Norman Davies, _Europe: A History_ , p. 325, 1998 New York, HarperPerennial, ISBN 0-06-097468-0
  12. **^** Kłoczowski, Jerzy (2000). _A history of Polish Christianity_. Cambridge University Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-521-36429-4. Retrieved 12 April 2011.
  13. **^** An interview with the historian Tomasz Jasiński, Piotr Bojarski, _Polski mogło nie być_ (There could have been no Poland), Gazeta Wyborcza July 7, 2007
  14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 80–88
  15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 88–93
  16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Various authors, ed. Marek Derwich and Adam Żurek, _U źródeł Polski (do roku 1038)_ (Foundations of Poland (until year 1038)), p. 168–183, Andrzej Pleszczyński
  17. **^** Makk, Ferenc (1993). Magyar külpolitika (896-1196) ("The Hungarian External Politics (896-1196)"). Szeged: Szegedi Középkorász Műhely. pp. 48–49. ISBN 963-04-2913-6.
  18. **^** Ed. Andrzej Chwalba, _Kalendarium dziejów Polski_ (Chronology of Polish History), p. 33, Krzysztof Stopka
  19. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 93–96
  20. **^** Various authors, ed. Marek Derwich and Adam Żurek, _U źródeł Polski (do roku 1038)_ (Foundations of Poland (until year 1038)), pp. 182–187, Andrzej Pleszczyński
  21. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), p. 96–98
  22. **^** Stanisław Szczur, _Historia Polski-średniowiecze_ (History of Poland: The Middle Ages), Wydawnictwo Literackie, Kraków 2002, ISBN 978-83-08-04135-2, pp. 106-107
  23. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 98–100
  24. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), p. 100–101
  25. **^** _Atlas historyczny Polski_ (Atlas of Polish History), 14th edition, ISBN 83-7000-016-9, PPWK Warszawa–Wrocław 1998, p. 5
  26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 101–104
  27. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 104–111
  28. **^** _Atlas historyczny Polski_ (Atlas of Polish History), 14th edition, p. 4 and 5
  29. **^** Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition 2006, ISBN 0-521-61857-6, p. 9
  30. **^** Ed. Andrzej Chwalba, _Kalendarium dziejów Polski_ (Chronology of Polish History), p. 37, Krzysztof Stopka
  31. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 111–115
  32. **^** Various authors, ed. Marek Derwich and Adam Żurek, _U źródeł Polski (do roku 1038)_ (Foundations of Poland (until year 1038)), pp. 196–209
  33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 116–128
  34. **^** John Radzilowski, _A Traveller's History of Poland_ ; Northampton, Massachusetts: Interlink Books, 2007, ISBN 1-56656-655-X, p. 260
  35. **^** Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , pp. 14–16
  36. **^** Norman Davies, _Europe: A History_ , p. 366
  37. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 128–129
  38. **^** John Radzilowski, _A Traveller's History of Poland_ , pp. 39–41
  39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 129–141, 154–155
  40. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 141–144
  41. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , pp. 15–34
  42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 145–154
  43. **^** Davies, Norman (2005). _God's Playground: A History of Poland_ , Volume I. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12817-9, p. 66
  44. **^** Richard Overy (2010), _The Times Complete History of the World_ , Eights Edition, pp. 116–117. London: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-00-788089-8.
  45. **^** Norman Davies, _Europe: A History_ , p. 429
  46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 155–160
  47. **^** Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , pp. 23–24
  48. **^** Ed. Andrzej Chwalba, _Kalendarium dziejów Polski_ (Chronology of Polish History), pp. 74–75, Krzysztof Stopka
  49. **^** Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , pp. 14–26
  50. **^** Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , pp. 26–34
  51. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 160–171
  52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 169–173
  53. **^** Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, _A Concise History of Poland_ , pp. 42–44
  54. **^** Jerzy Wyrozumski, _Historia Polski do roku 1505_ (History of Poland until 1505), pp. 173–177

## Further reading[edit]

  * Davies, Norman (2005) [1981]. _God's Playground: A History of Poland. Vol. 1: The Origins to 1795_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925339-0.
  * Knoll, Paul W. (1972). _The Rise of the Polish Monarchy: Piast Poland in East Central Europe, 1320–1370_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-44826-6.

## External links[edit]

  * Górczyk, Wojciech, "Półksiężyc, orzeł, lew i smok. Uwagi o godłach napieczętnych Piastów" (Piast heraldic emblems on seals) _Histmag_ (English)

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_Poland_during_the_Piast_dynasty&oldid=890000723"

Categories:

  * History of Poland during the Piast dynasty

Hidden categories:

  * Good articles

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Magyar
  * Português
  * Română
  * Slovenščina
  * Српски / srpski
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 29 March 2019, at 10:49 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

