

# Opium den

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For other uses, see Opium Den (disambiguation).

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/20/Opium_den_chinatown.jpg/280px-

Opium_den_chinatown.jpg)

Two women and a man smoking in an opium den, late 19th century

An **opium den** was an establishment where opium was sold and smoked. Opium
dens were prevalent in many parts of the world in the 19th century, most
notably China, Southeast Asia, North America, and France. Throughout the West,
opium dens were frequented by and associated with the Chinese, because the
establishments were usually run by Chinese who supplied the opium as well as
prepared it for visiting non-Chinese smokers. Most opium dens kept a supply of
opium paraphernalia such as the specialized pipes and lamps that were
necessary to smoke the drug. Patrons would recline in order to hold the long
opium pipes over oil lamps that would heat the drug until it vaporized,
allowing the smoker to inhale the vapors. Opium dens in China were frequented
by all levels of society, and their opulence or simplicity reflected the
financial means of the patrons. In urban areas of the United States,
particularly on the West Coast, there were opium dens that mirrored the best
to be found in China, with luxurious trappings and female attendants. For the
working class, there were many low-end dens with sparse furnishings. These
latter dens were more likely to admit non-Chinese smokers.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 United States
    * 1.1 San Francisco
    * 1.2 New York City
  * 2 Canada
  * 3 France
  * 4 London
  * 5 In popular culture
    * 5.1 Anime and manga
    * 5.2 Film
    * 5.3 Literature
    * 5.4 Television
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

## United States[edit]

### San Francisco[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Interior_chinese_lodging_house%2C_san_francisco.JPG/220px-

Interior_chinese_lodging_house%2C_san_francisco.JPG)

Opium den in San Francisco boarding house, late 19th century

Opium smoking arrived in North America with the large influx of Chinese, who
came to participate in the California Gold Rush. The jumping-off point for the
gold fields was San Francisco, and the city's Chinatown became the site of
numerous opium dens soon after the first Chinese arrived, around 1850.
However, from 1863 to the end of the century, anti-vice laws imposed by the
new municipal code book banned visiting opium rooms in addition to
prostitution and other laws that could injure public morals.[2] Despite this,
the 1870s attracted many non-Chinese residents to San Francisco's dens,
prompting the city fathers to enact the nation's first anti-drug law, an 1875
ordinance banning opium dens. In the early 20th century, huge bonfires, fueled
by confiscated opium and opium paraphernalia, were used to destroy opium and
create a public venue to discuss opium use.

Opium-eradication campaigns drove opium smoking underground, but it was still
fairly common in San Francisco and other North American cities until around
World War II. A typical opium den in San Francisco might have been a Chinese-
run laundry that had a basement, back room, or upstairs room that was tightly
sealed to keep drafts from making the opium lamps flicker or allowing the
tell-tale opium fumes to escape. A photograph of one luxurious opium den in
19th-century San Francisco has survived, taken by I. W. Taber in 1886, but the
majority of the city's wealthy opium smokers, both Chinese and non-Chinese,
shunned public opium dens in favor of smoking in the privacy of their own
homes.[3]

### New York City[edit]

The opium dens of New York City's Chinatown, due to its geographical distance
from China, were not as opulent as some of those to be found on the American
West Coast. According to H. H. Kane, a doctor who spent years studying opium
use in New York in the 1870s and 1880s, the most popular opium dens (or "opium
joints" as they were known in the parlance of the day) were located on Mott
and Pell Streets in Chinatown. At the time, all the city's opium dens were run
by Chinese, except for one on 23rd Street that was run by an American woman
and her two daughters. Kane remarked that New York's opium dens were one place
"where all nationalities seem indiscriminately mixed".

As in San Francisco, New Yorkers of all races would come to Chinatown to
patronize its opium dens. New York City's last known opium den was raided and
shut down on June 28, 1957.[1][4][5]

## Canada[edit]

Chinese immigrants first established Chinatowns in Victoria and Vancouver in
British Columbia, and here too, opium dens were common in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries. When the city of San Francisco began taxing imported
opium for smoking, the trade was diverted to Victoria, and, from there, much
of the opium was smuggled south into the United States. However, a fair amount
of opium was consumed in the opium dens to be found in the Chinatowns of
Victoria and Vancouver. The latter city's "Shanghai Alley" was known for its
rustic opium dens. As in the United States, non-Chinese often frequented the
Chinese-run opium dens in Canadian Chinatowns.[6]

## France[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/French_opium_den.jpg/170px-

French_opium_den.jpg)

"A New Vice: Opium Dens in France", an illustration from Le Petit Journal, 5
July 1903.

Opium smoking in France was introduced for the most part by French expatriates
returning home from stints in their Indochinese colonies.[7] By the early 20th
century, there were numerous opium dens in France's port cities, particularly
Toulon, Marseille and Hyères.[8]

## London[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Opium den" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar
**·** JSTOR _( June 2017)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

\---|---

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/64/Opium_smoking_1874.jpg/220px-

Opium_smoking_1874.jpg)

Drawing of opium smokers in an opium den in London based on fictional accounts
of the day

Victorian London's reputation as a centre of opium smoking is based on the
belief of literary fiction over historical fact. The London press, along with
popular British authors of the day, were fond of portraying London's Limehouse
district as an opium-drenched pit of danger and mystery. In fact, London's
Chinese population never exceeded the low hundreds, in large contrast to the
tens of thousands of Chinese who settled in North American Chinatowns. In the
mid-1880s, Chinatowns started to form in London and Liverpool with grocery
stores, eating houses, meeting places and, in the East End, Chinese street
names. In 1891, the Census recorded 582 Chinese-born residents in Britain,
though this dropped to 387 in 1896. 80% were single males between 20 and 35,
the majority being seamen.[9] Companies began to export opium from India to
China, selling the drug to raise the money to buy shipments of tea. This was
against the law and angered China's authorities. In 1839, war broke out
between Britain and China over the opium trade. Britain defeated China and
under the terms of the Treaty of Nanking in 1842, Hong Kong became a British
colony. In 1857, the Second Opium War resulted in the unequal Treaties of
Tianjin which included a clause allowing Britain and France to recruit Chinese
to the British Colonies, North America, South America, and Australia as cheap
labour. However, Britain did not recruit as many workers as North America,
where the Chinese were employed on the construction of the Transcontinental
Railroad, and where many Chinese immigrated in search of fortune during the
gold rush, thus the Chinese communities were much smaller in Britain.The
Chinese immigrants to London often arrived in the East London ports by boat,
such as the Blue Funnel Line. Most of them were seamen, and many would have
settled in only a few select streets. When jobs on the docks and on boats
dried up, many Chinese turned to other businesses, such as the restaurants or
laundries.

In the 1860s, "Dark England" with its opium dens in London's East End was
described in popular press and books, various individuals and religious
organisations began to campaign against unrestricted opium trafficking. At
Pennyfields there was a Christian Mission for the Chinese and a Confucian
temple. At Limehouse Causeway there was the famous Ah Tack's lodging house.
There was much prejudice against the East End Chinese community, with much of
it initiated by the writings of Thomas Burke and Sax Rohmer. Both of these men
wrote about the Chinese community. Burke and Ward exaggerated the Chinese
community's true size and made much mention of gambling, opium dens, and
"unholy things" in the shadows. A character from Charles Dickens' last novel,
_The Mystery of Edwin Drood_ (1870) sets the scene: "O my poor head! I makes
my pipes of old penny ink-bottles, ye see, deary – this is one – and I fits-in
a mouthpiece, this way, and I takes my mixter out of this thimble with this
little horn spoon; and so I fills, deary. Ah, my poor nerves!" [ _citation
needed_ ]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/72/TwoWomenAhSingOpiumDen.jpg/170px-

TwoWomenAhSingOpiumDen.jpg)

Rare Photograph of two women outside Ah Sing's Opium den from the London
Science Museum

Dickens is famous for his portrayal and caricature of nineteenth-century
London. So it is significant that he has immortalised this opium den in east
London, identifying it as part of the fabric-weave of Victorian London. The
establishment "run by the Chinaman" described in _The Mystery of Edwin Drood_
, was based on a real opium den. It was run by Ah Sing, or John Johnston as he
was known to his clients, an immigrant from Amoy in China. Rare photographs of
the Chinese opium scene in East London do exist. A photograph held at the
Science Museum in London shows two Chinese women outside Ah Sing's opium den.
Ah Sing was a smoker himself and it was claimed that only he had the "true
secret of mixing opium ... with an eye to business". His secret evidently
brought him much success, as his den was frequented by the local Chinese
sailors on a break from working on the ships, but also others. Some of the
literary elite of the time including Arthur Conan Doyle (see "The Man with the
Twisted Lip") and Dickens himself visited the area, although whether they
themselves took up the "pipe" has remained undisclosed. Ah Sing's opium den
was probably the most famous of the dens in Victorian London, attracting
gentlemen from the very elite of London's high society.[ _citation needed_ ]

In 1868, the Pharmacy Act recognised dangerous drugs and limited their sale to
registered chemists and pharmacists, but until the end of the nineteenth
century few doctors and scientists warned about the dangers of drug addiction.
When the small number of opium dens gradually declined in London, following
crackdowns from the authorities, individuals like Ah Sing were forced to move
from their properties, and had to find alternative ways of making a living. In
his latter days, it was said that he continued to smoke, despite finding
religion. He did eventually manage to give up opium smoking, though only days
before he died around 1890, aged 64. He is now buried in Bow Cemetery.

## In popular culture[edit]

### Anime and manga[edit]

  * In the anime and manga _Kuroshitsuji_ , one of the main side characters, Lau, owns an opium den.

### Film[edit]

  * In the film _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_ (1971), Constance Miller visits a very low-class opium den at the very end of the movie in the Asia quarter of the town.
  * In the film _Once Upon a Time in America_ (1984), the character Noodles (Robert De Niro) frequents an opium den.
  * In the film _Tombstone_ (1993), the character, William Brocius aka Curly Bill Brocius (played by Powers Boothe), is seen smoking opium in an Old West opium den before exiting to the street and shooting the town marshal, Fred White. In reality, Curly Bill was intoxicated by alcohol rather than opium.[10]
  * In the film _Wild Bill_ (1995), Wild Bill Hickok, played by Jeff Bridges, frequents an opium den in Deadwood. His sessions with the pipe are often the trigger for hallucinogenic flashbacks.
  * In the film adaptation of _From Hell_ (2001), the main character, Inspector Fred Abberline played by Johnny Depp, frequents opium dens.
  * The film _Gangs of New York_ (2002) portrayed rival political ward bosses in search of fraudulent voters rousting Chinese immigrants from an opium den in the Five Points neighborhood of Manhattan, in the 1860s.
  * Starz Channel Original Series The Borgias. Juan visits an opium den for pain in his leg from an arrow wound.

### Literature[edit]

  * In Agatha Christie's magazine short story "The Lost Mine"(1923), Hercule Poirot is forced, much against his will, to conduct part of his investigation in a Limehouse opium den. The story appeared in book form in the American version of _Poirot Investigates_ (1925) and in the UK in _Poirot's Early Cases_ (1974).
  * In Cassandra Clare's novel _Clockwork Prince_ , Will visits an opium den where a faerie version of the drug is smoked. The characters still refer to it as an opium den.
  * In Charles Dickens' final and uncompleted novel, _The Mystery of Edwin Drood_ , an opium den is a critical element of the story.
  * In Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes story "The Man with the Twisted Lip", Dr. Watson goes to an opium den in the East End of London to find Isa Whitney.
  * In Hergé's The Adventures of Tintin story _The Blue Lotus_ (1934–1935), the main character Tintin is involved in infiltrating opium dens.
  * Rudyard Kipling's short story "The Gate of a Hundred Sorrows" tells the history of a Chinese opium den in India.
  * In Alan Moore and Kevin O'Neill's graphic novel _The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen_ , Mina Murray finds aged adventurer Allan Quatermain in an opium den. "Singapore Charlie's" den is the setting of their first encounter with the "Devil Doctor".
  * Anaïs Nin's collection _Delta of Venus_ (published posthumuously in 1977) contains a short story where the main character finds herself within an opium den.
  * In Edgar Allan Poe's short story "Ligeia", the narrator reports his use of opium to cope with the loss of his first wife.
  * In Philip Pullman's novel _The Ruby in the Smoke_ (1985), Sally is depicted fainting in an opium den
  * In Sax Rohmer's novel _The Mystery of Dr. Fu-Manchu_ (1913), Nayland Smith and Dr Petrie enter Singapore Charlie's Thames-side opium den in search of Dr Fu Manchu and his henchmen.
  * In Jules Verne's novel _Around the World in Eighty Days_ (1873), Fix attempts to delay Fogg by giving Passepartout a pipe in a Hong Kong opium den.
  * In Oscar Wilde's novel, _The Picture of Dorian Gray_ , Dorian visits the opium dens of London when indulging in the pleasures of life whether moral or immoral, having been influenced by the hedonistic outlook on life of Lord Henry Wotton.
  * In Tennessee Williams' play, _The Glass Menagerie_ (1944), the main character Tom tells his religious mother that he goes to an opium den.
  * Jeet Thayil's debut novel, _Narcopolis_ (2012), is largely set in an opium den in Old Bombay during the 1970–1990s.

### Television[edit]

  * In _Copper_ season 2, Elizabeth Haverford Morehouse visits an opium den after her husband, Jonathan Morehouse (who'd introduced her to the drug), cuts off her supply in an effort to wean her off the drug.
  * In the television drama series _The Knick_ (2014), set in Manhattan in 1900, Clive Owen's character, Dr. John Thackery, is both a cocaine and opium addict, and frequently visits an opium den on Mott Street in Chinatown to get high and enjoy a Chinese prostitute/worker at the den.
  * In _The Simpsons_ episode "Treehouse of Horror XV" several characters, most notably Ralph and Mr. Burns, are shown smoking opium in an opium den in 19th century London.
  * In "Boardwalk Empire" episode "Nights in Ballygran", Jimmy Darmody is shown smoking opium at an opium den in Chinatown.
  * In The Blacklist (season 3) episode "Cape May", Raymond "Red" Reddington is seen as a patron inside of an opium den in New York City's Chinatown. In previous episodes, he speaks about his previous experiences with opium dens.
  * In Silicon Valley (TV series) season 4 episode 9 "Hooli-Con", Erlich officially leaves the show. Gavin leaves him at an opium den in Tibet with enough money to last five years.
  * In the Highlander series, immortal Brian Cullen develops a fear of fighting other immortals. He escapes from his fear by smoking opium at opium dens in San Francisco during the Gold Rush.
  * In Penny Dreadful, Season 1; Episode 1 

## References[edit]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Opium Museum".
  2. **^** “Arresting Dress | Duke University Press.” Accessed February 2, 2017. https://www.dukeupress.edu/arresting-dress.
  3. **^** Commissioner Jesse B. Cook (June 1931). "San Francisco's Old Chinatown". _San Francisco Police and Peace Officers' Journal_. Retrieved 2007-09-22.
  4. **^** Nick Tosches, M.D. (September 2000). "Opium Dens". _Vanity Fair_. Retrieved 2009-11-24.
  5. **^** H.H. Kane, M.D. (1881-09-24). "American Opium Smokers". Retrieved 2007-09-22.
  6. **^** Jane F. Murphy (1922). "The Black Candle". Archived from the original on 2012-07-30. Retrieved 2007-09-22.
  7. **^** https://www.wykop.pl/wpis/11196028/opium-party-francja-1918r-jest-grubo-foto-fotograf/
  8. **^** "Opium degrading the French Navy". 1913-04-27. Retrieved 2007-09-22.
  9. **^** Martin, Steven (2007). _The Art of Opium Antiques_. ISBN 974-9511-22-0.
  10. **^** Barra, Allen (2008). _Inventing Wyatt Earp: His Life and Many Legends_. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press. p. 440. ISBN 978-0-8032-2058-4.

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Opium
den**_.  
\---|---

  * Opium Museum
  * Opium in the French Navy
  * San Francisco Opium Den Photos circa 1889
  * Scenes From an Opium Den - slideshow by _Life_ magazine
  * https://culturacolectiva.com/fotografia/fotografias-de-mujeres-fumadoras-de-opio/

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opium_den&oldid=901224754"

Categories:

  * Opium culture

Hidden categories:

  * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
  * Articles needing additional references from June 2017
  * All articles needing additional references
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015
  * Pages using div col with small parameter
  * Commons category link from Wikidata

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Español
  * فارسی
  * 日本語
  * Suomi
  * 粵語

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 10 June 2019, at 13:34 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

