

  * __
  * Sections __
  * __
  * Home

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

  * Try 1 month for $1
  * Username
  * Sign In

* * *
    
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    

  * My Post __
  * My Reading List __
  * Account Settings __
  * Newsletters & alerts __
  * Gift subscriptions __
  * Contact us __
  * Help desk __

  * Accessibility for screenreader

Economic Policy Analysis

__

**Analysis** Interpretation of the news based on evidence, including data, as
well as anticipating how events might unfold based on past events

# How legalization caused the price of marijuana to collapse

Add to list

In my list

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/ziE6dXDQGJXe2ZWPxuLETjfu_QU=/960x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/XYL34NJ5YM3S7A3WU2RCGIVIXE.jpg)  
Rows of cannabis plants grow in the 20,000 square foot greenhouse at Vireo
Health's medical marijuana cultivation facility, Aug. 19, 2016, in Johnstown,
N.Y. (Drew Angerer/Getty Images)

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

By Keith Humphreys

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Keith Humphreys

Bio __

September 5, 2017

All the diverse effects of legalizing recreational marijuana may not be clear
for a number of years, but one consequence has become evident almost
immediately: Pot has never been so cheap.

Steven Davenport of the Pardee Rand Graduate School has analyzed marijuana
retail prices in Washington state since legal recreational markets opened in
July 2014. Remarkably, prices have fallen every single quarter since.

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/TXJKur-

cQ3m4AF9lqk_kkjfemkk=/3x2/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

When Davenport spoke to me 18 months ago (Wonkblog coverage here), retail
marijuana prices had already fallen a stunning 58.5 percent. Yet he predicted
correctly that the price collapse was not complete. The current retail price
of $7.38 per gram (including tax) represents a 67 percent decrease in just
three years of the legalization, with more decline likely in the future.

Davenport expects the marijuana industry to continue to find ways to lower
prices for the simple reason that it’s a profitable business model. “Some
consumers will prefer higher priced brands, but there will always be a market
for the brand that can produce adequate quality cannabis at the cheapest
cost,” he notes.

The ongoing decline in marijuana’s price after legalization has an important
implication for drug policy more generally. The experience of Washington and
other marijuana legalization states demonstrates how enormously effective
prohibition of production and sale is at raising drug prices. For example
heroin’s price took a decade to fall by 16 percent, which the legalization of
marijuana accomplished in just eight months. Notably, even high taxes on legal
marijuana don’t keep the legal price anywhere near what it was when the drug
was more broadly illegal.

Prohibition imposes huge costs on drug producing industries that are passed on
to consumers in the form of higher prices. These higher prices are one of the
principal reasons (the others being stigma and fear of punishment) that
illegal drugs are used so much less frequently than legal drugs such as
alcohol and tobacco. Marijuana is a rare example where we can see the impact
of legalizing a drug in real time, which shows that were the production and
sale of heroin, cocaine and methamphetamine also legalized, those drugs would
also become dramatically cheaper to consume.

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Keith Humphreys Keith Humphreys is a Professor of Psychiatry at Stanford
University and is an affiliated faculty member at Stanford Law School and the
Stanford Neurosciences Institute.

Market Watch

Dow 26,048.51

Today 0.05%

S&P 2,885.72

Today 0.03%

NASDAQ 7,822.57

Today 0.01%

Last Updated:5:23 PM 06/12/2019

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

