

![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-masthead-

logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWto get home delivery

  * ![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
  * News
  * Sports
  * Life
  * Money
  * Tech
  * Travel
  * Opinion
  * Weather

Icon

    
    
    * Humidity
    * Precip.
    * Winds
    

Open settings

Settings

Enter City Name

Cancel

Set

Close settings

Full Forecast

  * Crosswords
  * Investigations
  * Newsletters
  * Humankind
  * Apps
  * Best-Selling Books
  * Cartoons
  * Classifieds
  * Corrections
  * Interactives
  * Job Network
  * Moonlighting
  * Newsstand
  * News tips
  * Photo galleries
  * Podcasts
  * Policing the USA
  * Scores
  * Storytellers Project
  * Thanksgiving
  * Washington
  * Video
  * VRtually There
  * More

    * News
    * Sports
    * Life
    * Money
    * Tech
    * Travel
    * Opinion
    * Weather
    * Crosswords
    * Investigations
    * Newsletters
    * Humankind
    * Apps
    * Best-Selling Books
    * Cartoons
    * Classifieds
    * Corrections
    * Interactives
    * Job Network
    * Moonlighting
    * Newsstand
    * News tips
    * Photo galleries
    * Podcasts
    * Policing the USA
    * Scores
    * Storytellers Project
    * Thanksgiving
    * Washington
    * Video
    * VRtually There
  * search

  *     * Subscribe
  * salutation

    * Manage Account
    * Access e-Edition
    * Newsletters
    * Pay Bill
    * Report Delivery Issues
    * Pause Delivery
    * Help Center
    * Sign Out

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### New marijuana laws in 2019 could help black and Latino drug dealers go

legal

Marijuana legalization advocates across the country are demanding remedies to
address decades of demonstrably racist policing against minorities.

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

New marijuana laws in 2019 could help black and Latino drug dealers go legal
Marijuana legalization advocates across the country are demanding remedies to
address decades of demonstrably racist policing against minorities. Check out
this story on USATODAY.com:
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2019/02/21/marijuana-
legalization-2019-black-latino-dealers-now-getting-help/2838959002/

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Nation's Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

# New marijuana laws in 2019 could help black and Latino drug dealers go legal

Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY Published 6:01 a.m. ET Feb. 21, 2019 | Updated 2:38
p.m. ET Feb. 24, 2019

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

Tucky Blunt was arrested for illegally selling weed in 2003. Fifteen years
later, he owns his own marijuana business. USA TODAY

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Fourth-generation Oakland native Tucky Blunt grew up around weed. His
grandmother used it. So did his parents and his friends.

Blunt (yes, that's his real last name) started selling to friends in the
neighborhood when he was 16. He was usually careful, buying in bulk from a
trusted supplier and selling to customers who'd call him to meet up.

After nearly a decade of illegal sales, it was $80 worth of pot that got him
in trouble. He was found with a handful of baggies stashed in his pants when
police officers came for him, tipped off by someone Blunt thought was a
friend.

"We were out there trying to make money to help support our families at a time
when people didn't have a lot money. We didn't think we were hurting anyone,"
said Blunt, now 39. "I liked weed. I knew people who liked weed. Why not
facilitate them getting good weed? That's how I looked at it."

His arrest in 2004 and his conviction left Blunt with a 10-year felony
probation, allowing police to stop and search him anytime, for any reason.
Meanwhile, all around Oakland, young black men like him were getting arrested
while most of the white guys who were selling weed were left alone.

![Alphonso "Tucky" Blunt, 39, is photographed at his marijuana dispensary,

Blunts and Moore in Oakland, California.](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/presto/2019/02/16/USAT/893329d6-4614-4348-88c4-bed554fadaa0-137813_002.jpg?crop=5200,3467,x0,y0&width=540&height=&fit=bounds&auto=webp)

Alphonso "Tucky" Blunt, 39, is photographed at his marijuana dispensary,
Blunts and Moore in Oakland, California. (Photo: Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY)

"It affected everybody in my circle because it was only targeted to us. I knew
white people that was selling weed that never went to jail," Blunt said. "The
war on drugs was just about putting as many of us in jail as possible. It tore
up a lot of families."

The war on drugs has for decades disproportionately devastated minority
communities by punishing people like Blunt and creating a cycle of poverty,
incarceration and limited employment options, legal and social justice experts
say.

Now, lawmakers and legalization advocates across the country are demanding not
just cannabis legalization but remedies to address decades of demonstrably
racist policing, from laws that automatically expunge criminal records for
marijuana dealing and possession to policies that would give minority
communities assistance in building cannabis businesses.

The same year as Blunt's arrest, Oakland's voters ordered police officers to
make marijuana enforcement their lowest priority, below even jaywalking. But a
decade later, the problem was laid bare: Officers were still arresting black
men for marijuana crimes at rates staggeringly higher than for whites.

According to the city's own statistics, 77 percent of the marijuana arrests in
Oakland in 2015 were of African-Americans. Whites represented just 4 percent
of those arrests, even though the city’s population is about 30 percent white
and 30 percent black.

![Detail of marijuana flower at the marijuana dispensary, Blunts and

Moore.](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/presto/2019/02/16/USAT/e2fb550b-20e7-490a-a78c-0ce18f2306f4-137813_020.jpg?crop=5200,3467,x0,y0&width=540&height=&fit=bounds&auto=webp)

Detail of marijuana flower at the marijuana dispensary, Blunts and Moore.
(Photo: Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY)

Similar data have been reported throughout the U.S. While marijuana
legalization has reduced the overall number of marijuana arrests, people of
color are still being targeted by police.

Even in states with largely white populations, black people using or selling
marijuana still face high arrest rates.

In Colorado, which in 2012 became the first state to legalize marijuana, the
total number of marijuana arrests decreased by 52 percent between 2012 and
2017, from 12,709 to 6,153, according to state statistics. But at the same
time, the marijuana arrest rate for African-Americans – 233 per 100,000 – was
nearly double that of whites in 2017, and that's in a state that's 84 percent
white.

In Alaska, of the 17 marijuana arrests in 2016, 29 percent were of African-
Americans, even though they represent just 4 percent of the state’s
population, making Alaska’s marijuana arrest rate for African-Americans nearly
10 times higher than that of whites. The state made recreational marijuana
legal in 2014.

And in Washington, D.C., where marijuana is legal, a black person is 11 times
more likely than a white person to be arrested for public consumption of
marijuana, according to Metropolitan Police Department statistics.

NEWSLETTERS

Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox

We're sorry, but something went wrong

Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001.

Delivery:

Invalid email address

Thank you! You're almost signed up for

Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration.

More newsletters![](https://staticassets.gannettdigital.com/gci-static-

assets/assets/global/static-web/right-arrow@2x.png)

Health statistics show that whites and African-Americans use marijuana at
roughly equivalent rates, which means the disparity in arrests is driven not
by use but by police.

### Years of 'discriminatory enforcement'

California has taken the lead in trying to amend years of racist drug
policies.

In 2016, the state approved legal recreational marijuana in a ballot measure
that also allowed people with pot arrests to get their records expunged. So
few people took advantage of the opportunity, however, that state lawmakers
passed a new law last fall ordering prosecutors to automatically review and
potentially reduce or dismiss sentences and records for low-level marijuana
offenses. It's the first statewide law of its kind.

Though such efforts have the potential to make a difference, advocates say, it
would have been better to include, from the very start, automatic expungement
and other provisions to aid minority communities.

"Once the train has left the station, it's hard to attach new boxcars," said
Christine De La Rosa, who owns marijuana businesses in California and Oregon
and is lobbying to pass legal recreational pot in New York state. "People are
starting to understand and to put the pieces together: This child's father has
been in jail for 16 years on a minor possession charge, and then right across
the street at the marijuana convention you have a bunch of white guys in ties
getting rich."

Similar debates over social justice reform and marijuana laws are unfolding in
cities and states with legal marijuana and those without it. In Seattle,
prosecutors have sought to abolish hundreds of convictions against people
arrested with small amounts of pot. In New Jersey and New York, lawmakers are
looking to legalize pot and expunge marijuana records once they do.

![Interior of Blunts and Moore, a marijuana dispensary in

Oakland.](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/presto/2019/02/16/USAT/5c3aa72b-66fc-4f6d-b314-397eaccee056-137813_021.jpg?crop=5200,3467,x0,y0&width=540&height=&fit=bounds&auto=webp)

Interior of Blunts and Moore, a marijuana dispensary in Oakland. (Photo:
Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY)

In Baltimore, State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby argues that police and prosecutor
resources are better spent focusing on the city's extraordinarily high murder
rate than on marijuana cases. Last month, Mosby announced that her office
would no longer prosecute any marijuana possession cases, regardless of amount
or prior criminal record, unless there was demonstrated intent to distribute.
And she announced her office would vacate about 5,000 marijuana-related
convictions dating back to 2011.

Maryland decriminalized possession in 2014, but police still can and do issue
citations. In a white paper released by her office, Mosby said that of the 431
marijuana citations issued by Baltimore police in 2017, 95 percent of them
went to African-Americans, even though the city is roughly 60 percent black
and 30 percent white. And of those citations, more than 40 percent were issued
in one majority-black neighborhood.

Drug laws have been "disproportionately enforced in communities of color, and
that's creating an erosion of public trust," Mosby told USA TODAY. "We're
moving toward legalization, and it makes absolutely no sense as the top
prosecutor to be complicit in that discriminatory enforcement."

As a prosecutor, Mosby said, she's all too aware of how a criminal record can
hurt someone for decades, even generations. In Baltimore, even though simple
marijuana possession is a civil infraction, someone caught with a little bit
of cannabis but without an ID can be arrested and booked, which turns the
civil case into a criminal one.

"When you think about those collateral consequences, it's got impacts on
housing, employment, adoption, mobility, property rights," Mosby said. "It's a
greater realization that these failed policies did not work and we need to
take a different approach."

### Who gets to sell legal marijuana

Kevin Sabet, CEO of the anti-legalization group Smart Approaches to Marijuana,
said states should decriminalize marijuana and provide drug treatment rather
than punishing users.

That could help lots of Americans targeted by the war on drugs. But he doubts
it will help people who have been shut out of the legal weed industry because
of their records. His group argues that the licensing systems created to sell
marijuana are primarily benefiting companies racing to become the next Big
Tobacco.

"The pot industry is largely rich, white, male, and despite lip service by
some legalization advocates, this won’t change anytime soon," he said. "The
pot industry requires major institutional capital, and unless a state is
handing out seven-figure checks to certain populations, license preference
programs won’t make a dent."

To understand how this situation occurred, you first have to understand not
just the laws governing marijuana legalization, but the regulations
implementing the stores and licenses.

In general, the first states that legalized recreational marijuana made it
hard for anyone with a criminal record to enter the marijuana business and
gave preference to people already operating medical marijuana businesses,
which were in many cases subject to even tougher licensing laws because those
stores came first, when regulators were at their wariest.

And because small-business loans are usually reserved for people without drug
convictions, an arrest for simple possession also shut many would-be
entrepreneurs out of now-legal cannabis business opportunities.

The end result? Tech workers, real estate investors and guys who owned
construction companies have been the market leaders for years now, joined
increasingly by white politicians like former House Speaker John Boehner, who
backed the war on drugs and then, after leaving office, joined the board of a
cannabis company in April 2018.

A first-of-its kind survey by Marijuana Business Daily in 2017 found that
whites made up 81 percent of people who had either started a marijuana company
or had an ownership stake. New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a
Democrat, cited those statistics at a hearing this month, suggesting that most
marijuana legalization systems were actually compounding the racial wealth
gap.

“It all comes down to money in the bank, time and community support,” said
Adam Powers, who with his twin brother, Andrew, has worked in dispensaries and
as cannabis consultants in Washington state. The Powers brothers, who are
African-American, say they frequently deal with marijuana store owners looking
to launch stores the pair compare to a Starbucks experience: non-threatening,
consistent and accessible. And bland.

"From a logical standpoint, I can agree with it," Powers said. "You make the
industry super-hard to get into, that only people who are squeaky clean can
get into it, because you know all eyes are on you. However, that is the
approach always, always, that you take to whitewash things and make it clean.
That's literally what you say before you fire the black people and the
minorities."

Powers, 31, said social justice was a clear motivating factor for many voters
who supported legalization in Washington; they just didn't realize that
legalizing pot sales wouldn't immediately right decades of wrongs.

"My life as a minority is a little bit easier knowing, hoping, that's one less
reason for someone to bug me over something I use medically or recreationally,
like alcohol," he said.

FacebookTwitterGoogle+LinkedIn

Latest efforts to legalize marijuana aim to help blacks, Latinos hurt mo...

Fullscreen

![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

Alphonso "Tucky" Blunt, 39, is photographed at his marijuana dispensary,
Blunts and Moore in Oakland, Calif. Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY

Fullscreen

Alphonso "Tucky" Blunt, 39, displays some marijuana flower at his marijuana
dispensary, Blunts and Moore, in Oakland. Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY

Fullscreen

Today, Blunt has gone legit: he's an officially licensed drug dealer selling
to some of the same customers he once served on the street. Martin E. Klimek,
USA TODAY

Fullscreen

Detail of marijuana flower at the marijuana dispensary, Blunts and Moore.
Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY

Fullscreen

Interior of Blunts and Moore, a marijuana dispensary in Oakland. Martin E.
Klimek, USA TODAY

Fullscreen

Employee Jasmin Chavez, 24, serves a customer. Martin E. Klimek, USA TODAY

Fullscreen

Blunts and Moore, a marijuana dispensary in Oakland. Martin E. Klimek, USA
TODAY

Fullscreen

### Interested in this topic? You may also want to view these photo galleries:

Replay

  * 1 of 7

  * 2 of 7

  * 3 of 7

  * 4 of 7

  * 5 of 7

  * 6 of 7

  * 7 of 7

Autoplay

Show Thumbnails

Show Captions

Last SlideNext Slide

Fears of being targeted by police – especially federal law enforcement – kept
many African-Americans without arrest records from immediately joining the
semi-legal cannabis industry in its early days. For them, waiting to see how
things shook out just made sense.

Actor and pot entrepreneur Whoopi Goldberg took a different approach. A
longtime advocate for both racial equality and marijuana legalization,
Goldberg, 63, co-founded a medical marijuana company in 2016, counting on her
celebrity and age to insulate her from the unfair policing faced by young
black men, she said.

“When you look at who is in jail for marijuana, it kind of explains it all,”
she said. “Black folks with marijuana went to jail a lot more than white folks
with marijuana. I think it’s always been guy-oriented, and in particular white
guys, because they could get away with it.”

### Helping drug dealers go legal

For many marijuana legalization activists, it's now up to local governments to
diversify the legal pot industry by clearing conviction records and handing
out subsidies. If white men have unfairly benefited from marijuana
legalization, then it's only fair that minority communities be given extra
help now because they suffered more, the thinking goes.

"We actually do have to overcorrect," said Kassandra Frederique, 32, the New
York state director of the Drug Policy Alliance, which is lobbying to legalize
marijuana in the Empire State. "People from our communities, black and brown
communities, were the one first ones to be criminalized. Why shouldn’t we be
the first ones to benefit?"

In California, several cities have created cannabis equity programs to help
former drug dealers go legal. The programs include business development, loan
assistance and mentor relationships. In September 2018, former Gov. Jerry
Brown signed legislation to partially fund such programs. The bill stated it
would help ensure "that persons most harmed by cannabis criminalization and
poverty be offered assistance to enter the multibillion-dollar industry as
entrepreneurs or as employees with high-quality, well-paying jobs.”

In Massachusetts, regulators have also launched an equity program after
acknowledging that while the state's population is 22 percent Latino or
African-American, that same demographic makes up 75 percent of people
imprisoned under mandatory minimums for drug crimes. The Bay State's equity
program is specifically reserved for residents with a drug conviction or those
who are married to someone with a drug conviction.

Years after he was arrested, Blunt is now the first Oakland resident to
benefit from the city's special license preference program. Under the equity
program, longtime Oakland residents who were hurt by the war on drugs are
getting priority, preference and special assistance to open up marijuana
stores so they can sell cannabis legally. Blunt, who got his criminal record
cleared once he finished his sentence, actually had to get it temporarily
reopened so equity program managers could verify his arrest.

Blunt tried to break into the industry on his own a few years back but
couldn't crack into California's majority-white cannabis club scene. The
equity program helped him launch his marijuana store, Blunts+Moore, in
November. He sees the national push for more equity programs as a key
component to easing the damage caused by the war on drugs.

"We're not just budtenders, not just security guards anymore. We're owners
now," he said. "To be able to sell this legally in my city, literally 10
blocks from where I caught my case, I'm fine – I wasn't going to let anything
stop me. I'm the new kid on the block, and I'm here to change the game."

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story:
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2019/02/21/marijuana-
legalization-2019-black-latino-dealers-now-getting-help/2838959002/

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

