

Skip to main content

![Home](/themes/custom/drugpolicy/logo.png)

## Quick Links

  * Blog.
  * For Media.
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube

## Main navigation

  * Issues.
    * About the Drug War.
    * History of the Drug War
    * Drug War Statistics
    * Making Economic Sense
    * New Solutions for Drug Policy
    * The International Drug War
    * Reforming Marijuana Laws.
    * Legalization & Regulation
    * Medical Marijuana
    * Criminal Justice Reform.
    * Drug Decriminalization
    * Mass Criminalization
    * Race & the Drug War
    * Women & the Drug War
    * LGBTQIA+ People & the Drug War
    * Asset Forfeiture Reform
    * Harm Reduction.
    * Discrimination
    * Overdose
    * Naloxone
    * Good Samaritan Laws
    * Supervised Consumption Services
    * Syringe Access
    * Drug Checking
    * Protecting Youth.
    * Families
    * Drug Education
    * Student Aid
    * Safer Partying
  * Drug Facts.
    * Marijuana
    * Heroin
    * MDMA (Ecstasy, Molly)
    * Cocaine
    * Methamphetamine
    * LSD
    * Psilocybin Mushrooms
    * Synthetic Opioids (Fentanyl)
    * Synthetic Cannabinoids (Spice, K2)
    * Synthetic Cathinones (Bath Salts, Flakka)
  * Take Action.
    * Action Alerts
    * Become a Member
    * Attend an Event
    * Contact Your Elected Officials
    * Key States
    * Shop to Support DPA
    * Ways to Give
  * Resources.
    * Browse Resources
    * Drug Education Resources
    * Resources for Academics
    * Online Resource Library
    * Recommended Books
    * Treatment, Counseling & Legal Help
  * About Us.
    * Vision & Mission
    * History of DPA
    * Our Victories
    * Staff & Board
    * Departments & State Offices
    * Jobs & Internships
    * Advocacy Grants from DPA
    * International Drug Policy Reform Conference
    * Membership
    * Annual Report
    * Member Newsletter
    * Financial Documents

Search

_Search this site_ _Close search panel_

Donate _⁠⁠ _

__

July 9, 2017

Blog Post

# 4 Reasons Why The U.S. Needs to Decriminalize Drugs - And Why We're Closer

Than You Think

Jag Davies

Half of all adults in the U.S. have used an illegal drug at some point. If
this was your loved one, family member or friend, would they deserve to be
arrested, jailed, and face a lifetime of punishment and discrimination?

Ending criminal penalties for drug possession, often referred to as
_decriminalization_ , means nobody gets arrested, goes to jail or prison, or
faces criminal punishment for possessing a small amount of a drug for personal
use. As detailed in a new Drug Policy Alliance report, there's an emerging
public, political, and scientific consensus that otherwise-law-abiding people
should not be arrested, let alone locked in cages, simply for using or
possessing a drug.

This is a pivotal moment. Our retrograde federal administration is ramping up
the war on drugs - despite widespread public support for ending it and instead
focusing our limited resources on health-based approaches to drug addiction
and overdose deaths.

Since most drug enforcement is carried out at the local and state levels, not
the federal level, jurisdictions across the U.S. are responding to Trump and
Sessions by moving drug policy reforms forward with increasing urgency.

Here's why the U.S. needs to decriminalize drugs - and why we're actually
closer than you might think.

## 1) Decriminalization benefits public safety and health.

Decades of empirical evidence from around the world shows that reducing and
eliminating criminal penalties for drug possession does not increase rates of
drug use or crime - while drastically reducing addiction, overdose and
HIV/AIDS.

Today, as overdose deaths skyrocket all over the U.S., people who need drug
treatment or medical assistance may avoid it in order to hide their drug use.
If we decriminalize drugs, people can come out of the shadows and get help.

More than a million people are arrested each year in the U.S. for drug
possession, but this has done nothing to reduce the availability of drugs or
the harms they can cause. What we're doing doesn't work - and actually makes
things worse.

Our current policies are diverting law enforcement resources from serious
public safety issues. Hundreds of thousands of rape kits go unprocessed at the
same time we're spending billions of dollars arresting and punishing people
for drug possession. Our limited public resources would be better spent on
expanding access to effective drug treatment and other health services.

## 2) Drug possession arrests fuel mass incarceration and mass

criminalization - not to mention institutionalized racism and economic
inequality.

Criminalizing drug use hurts families and communities, compounds social and
economic inequalities, and unfairly denies millions of people the opportunity
to support themselves and their families.

U.S. law enforcement arrests about 1.5 million people each year for drug law
violations - and more than 80% of those arrests are for simple drug
possession. On any given night, there are at least 133,000 people behind bars
in U.S. prisons and jails for drug possession - and 63,000 of these people are
held pre-trial, which means they're locked up simply because they're too poor
to post bail.

Discriminatory enforcement of drug possession laws has produced profound
racial and ethnic disparities at all levels of the criminal justice system.
Black people comprise just 13% of the U.S. population and use drugs at similar
rates as other groups - but they comprise 29% of those arrested for drug law
violations and 35% of those incarcerated in state prison for drug possession.

Drug criminalization also fuels mass detentions and deportations. For
noncitizens, including legal permanent residents - many of whom have been in
the U.S. for decades and have jobs and families - possession of any amount of
any drug (except first-time possession of less than 30 grams of marijuana) can
trigger automatic detention and deportation, often without the possibility of
return. From 2007 to 2012, 266,000 people were deported for drug law
violations, of whom 38 percent - more than 100,000 people - were deported
simply for drug possession.

## 3) Other countries have successfully decriminalized drugs - and the U.S.

is moving in the right direction, despite Trump.

Most drug laws exist on a spectrum between criminalization and
decriminalization. Some countries have eliminated penalties for possession of
all drugs, while some countries and U.S. jurisdictions have eliminated
penalties only for marijuana possession. Still other countries and U.S.
jurisdictions have taken steps in the right direction by reducing criminal
penalties without eliminating them entirely.

Some of these efforts in the U.S. include "defelonizing" drug possession by
reducing it to a misdemeanor (which the Oregon legislature just approved last
week), decriminalizing or legalizing marijuana possession, establishing pre-
arrest diversion programs such as Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion (LEAD),
and enacting 911 Good Samaritan laws, which allow for limited
decriminalization at the scene of an overdose for people who are witnesses and
call for emergency medical assistance. But more ambitious efforts are needed.

Several countries have successful experience with decriminalization, most
notably Portugal. In 2001, Portugal enacted one of the most extensive drug law
reforms in the world when it decriminalized low-level possession and use of
all illegal drugs. Today in Portugal, no one is arrested or incarcerated for
drug possession, many more people are receiving treatment, and addiction,
HIV/AIDS and drug overdose have drastically decreased.

The Portuguese experience demonstrates that ending drug criminalization -
alongside a serious investment in treatment and harm reduction services - can
significantly improve public safety and health.

## 4) The American public - as well as leading governmental, medical, public

health, and human rights groups - already support drug decriminalization.

Polls of presidential primary voters last year found that substantial
majorities support ending arrests for drug use and possession in Maine (64%),
New Hampshire (66%) and even South Carolina (59%). In 2016, the first state-
level decriminalization bill was introduced in Maryland and a similar version
was reintroduced in 2017. The Hawaii legislature, meanwhile, overwhelmingly
approved a bill last year creating a commission to study decriminalization.

Just last month, the United Nations and World Health Organization released a
joint statement calling for repeal of laws that criminalize drug use and
possession. They join an impressive group of national and international
organizations who have endorsed drug decriminalization that includes the
International Red Cross, Organization of American States, Movement for Black
Lives, NAACP, and American Public Health Association, among many others.

To learn more, check out DPA's new report, _It 's Time for the U.S. to
Decriminalize Drug Use and Possession_ , which lays out a roadmap for how U.S.
jurisdictions can move toward ending the criminalization of people who use
drugs.

_Jag Davies is director of communications strategy at the Drug Policy
Alliance_.

**View more blog posts.**

No More Drug War

## Featured Resources

Drug Policy Alliance Annual Report

Safety First: A Reality-Based Approach to Teens and Drugs

DPA Podcast Episode 24: Sheila Vakharia Connects the Dots between Harm
Reduction and Social Work

More Resources

## Related News

Press Release

####

06.03.19

Tuesday in White Plains: Police Chief, School Board Parent, Addiction
Treatment Expert Discuss Marijuana Regulation in New York State

Press Release

####

05.30.19

DPA Statement on Illinois State Senate Passing Legislation to Legalize
Marijuana

Start SMART NY  
www.smart-ny.com

Drug Policy Alliance  
www.drugpolicy.org

Press Release

####

05.08.19

Mexico Announces Plans to End the Prohibition of Drugs and Allow for Legal
Supply Through Prescriptions

More News

## Take Action

Tell Congress It's Time for Marijuana Justice

### The Marijuana Justice Act would end federal marijuana prohibition, support

racial justice, and help repair communities most devastated by the war on
drugs.

Send Your Message

## Get Updates

Sign up to receive action alerts and news about drug policy reform.

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/press-resources.png)

Press Resources.

Get tips for covering the war on drugs and download DPA staff photos, logos,
marijuana stock photos and b-roll video.

See Resources

![Man at No More Drug War rally](/sites/default/files/2019-06/2018-annual-

report-footer2.jpg)

Annual Report.

The Drug Policy Alliance is entering a critical chapter in its history. ****
We have the momentum to end the drug war. Will you stand with us?

View Report

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/store.png)

Wear Your Support.

Show off your support for drug policy reform with our new Party Safer t-shirts
and tank tops.

Shop Now

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/give-now-2.png)

Give Now.

### Together, we are fighting for responsible drug policy. Join us.

Give Now.

## Footer menu

  * News.
  * Jobs.
  * Store.
  * Contact Us.

![Drug Policy Alliance

Logo](../sites/default/files/We_are_DPAlliance_96_0.png)

**Drug Policy Alliance Headquarters**

131 West 33rd Street, 15th Floor

New York, New York 10001

**P.** 212.613.8020

  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠ ⁠_
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _

  * Privacy Policy.

  * Terms of Use.
  * © Copyright 2019 Drug Policy Alliance. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

