

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

  *     *       *         * 

Log In or Sign Up

  * Log In
  * Sign Up

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * More 

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts ✕

# Is marijuana a gateway drug? Here's what the research says.

By German Lopez@germanrlopez Apr 29, 2016, 11:40am EDT

Share Tweet Share

**Share** Is marijuana a gateway drug? Here's what the research says.

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

Is marijuana a gateway drug? Much of the conventional wisdom and middle school
drug education say yes. But the research tells a different story.

The gateway hypothesis says marijuana inspires users to try other drugs: Once
they get a taste of how fun pot is, they're more likely to want to see how fun
other drugs are. So if marijuana is more easily available through
legalization, believers of the hypothesis say, it could push people to harder
drugs.

But this is an empirical claim — one that can be verified or refuted by
research. So far, there's no solid evidence to support the gateway hypothesis.
And there's some evidence that legalizing marijuana may actually reduce the
use of other drugs.

### There's no good evidence for the gateway hypothesis

![Ban Introduced On Smoking Marijuana In Public Areas](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/tYxsDvGjGHGJSO6L7Mm1vxea824=/0x0:3000x2000/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:3000x2000\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/6407061/73245308.jpg) Photo by Christopher
Furlong/Getty Images

Supporters of the gateway theory point to the correlation between marijuana
use and the use of other drugs. Robert DuPont, president of the Institute for
Behavior and Health, argued in the New York Times:

> Marijuana use is positively correlated with alcohol use and cigarette use,
as well as illegal drugs like cocaine and methamphetamine. This does not mean
that everyone who uses marijuana will transition to using heroin or other
drugs, but it does mean that people who use marijuana also consume more, not
less, legal and illegal drugs than do people who do not use marijuana.

>

> People who are addicted to marijuana are three times more likely to be
addicted to heroin.

It's true that marijuana use correlates with harder drug use. But so does
alcohol and tobacco use. There doesn't have to be a causal link between
marijuana or alcohol and harder drugs to explain this; it could just be that
the things that drive someone to marijuana or alcohol — boredom, depression,
social circles — can just as easily drive them to other drugs. Perhaps the
correlation is actually exposing those underlying factors, not some gateway
effect.

If that's the case, why do harder drug users tend to start with alcohol and
marijuana before they end up at harder drugs? There's an easy explanation:
Alcohol and marijuana are _much_ more accessible, because they're generally
cheaper than harder drugs and part of much bigger markets.

A 2002 report by RAND's Drug Policy Research Center said that this explanation
is at least as plausible as the gateway hypothesis:

> The new DPRC research thus demonstrates that the phenomena supporting claims
that marijuana is a gateway drug also support the alternative explanation:
that it is not marijuana use but individuals' opportunities and unique
propensities to use drugs that determine their risk of initiating hard drugs.
The research does not disprove the gateway theory; it merely shows that
another explanation is plausible.

Back in 1999, the highly prestigious Institute of Medicine looked at the
evidence and reached a similar conclusion:

> Patterns in progression of drug use from adolescence to adulthood are
strikingly regular. Because it is the most widely used illicit drug, marijuana
is predictably the first illicit drug most people encounter. Not surprisingly,
most users of other illicit drugs have used marijuana first. In fact, most
drug users begin with alcohol and nicotine before marijuana — usually before
they are of legal age.

>

> In the sense that marijuana use typically precedes rather than follows
initiation of other illicit drug use, it is indeed a "gateway" drug. But
because underage smoking and alcohol use typically precede marijuana use,
marijuana is not the most common, and is rarely the first, "gateway" to
illicit drug use. There is no conclusive evidence that the drug effects of
marijuana are causally linked to the subsequent abuse of other illicit drugs.

Since then, other studies have prodded at the question, similarly failing to
find hard evidence of marijuana leading people to harder drugs.

So there is no good causal **** evidence for the gateway hypothesis. There is
some weak correlational evidence, but it can be easily support with an
entirely different idea — drug users tend to start with more accessible drugs
— over the gateway hypothesis.

That doesn't rule out the gateway effect entirely. But it should give
proponents of it pause.

### Marijuana legalization could lead to an anti-gateway effect

To the extent there is any gateway effect, it might be due to marijuana's
illegality.

As drug policy experts Jon Caulkins, Beau Kilmer, and Mark Kleiman explained
in their newly released book, _Marijuana Legalization: What Everyone Needs to
Know_ , it's possible that people may be exposed to harder drugs when they,
for example, interact with their pot dealer. Once that dealer knows a
marijuana user is a reliable customer, he may push his customer to trying
harder drugs, such as heroin or cocaine.

There's some weak evidence behind this idea. After the Dutch liberalized their
marijuana policies, a 2010 report by RAND researcher Robert MacCoun found
"some evidence" for a "weakened gateway." This is by no means conclusive, but
it suggests that marijuana legalization could actually prevent people from
going to harder drugs by separating the cocaine and heroin dealers from the
marijuana sellers.

"Other research suggests marijuana can act as a sort of anti-gateway"

Other research suggests that marijuana can act as a sort of anti-gateway. As
the nation deals with an opioid epidemic, some opioid painkiller users are
moving on to other opioids — heroin and fentanyl — to satisfy their addiction.
But several studies have found that medical marijuana legalization can
actually reduce opioid deaths, perhaps because patients can use pot to treat
their chronic pain — without the risk of overdose and less of a risk for
addiction — instead of highly addictive, deadly opioids.

Similarly, marijuana legalization also may lead people to substitute their
alcohol use with marijuana use. This could be hugely beneficial to public
health and safety, since alcohol is a fairly dangerous drug linked to violent
crimes, poisonings, and fatal accidents, while legal pot isn't linked to
violent crimes or poisonings and less likely to cause accidents.

The evidence on alcohol substitution is mixed: A 2015 study by UCLA researcher
Rosanna Smart linked liberalized marijuana policies to fewer alcohol and
opioid deaths among older adults, but more alcohol deaths among adolescents
and young adults. But the research in this area is still fairly early, so it's
hard to draw definitive conclusions from it.

Either way, the evidence suggests that marijuana's illegality — not the drug
itself — may cause a gateway effect, and loosening marijuana policy may push
some people away from much more dangerous drugs.

### The verdict: Marijuana, by itself, probably won't lead people to use

harder drugs

![A marijuana business manager prepares for the first day of recreational

sales in Denver, Colorado.](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/A2m_iXf1hqBRpUfNV92VEhO0t9A=/0x0:2040x1312/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:2040x1312\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/4314219/459780027.0.jpg) R.J.
Sangosti/Denver Post via Getty Images

Putting all of this together, there's no good evidence that marijuana is a
"gateway drug" or that any gateway effect would be worsened by legalization.
The evidence suggests, in fact, that pot could stop some people from using
harder, more dangerous drugs if it was legalized.

None of this means marijuana is harmless. Its potential risks include
dependence and overuse, accidents, non-deadly overdoses that lead to mental
anguish and anxiety, and marijuana use potentially causing psychotic episodes.

But the gateway hypothesis isn't supported by the evidence. Until that
changes, the debates about marijuana should focus on real issues that are
evidence-based.

## Next Up In Politics & Policy

  * Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for representation
  * How the US women’s team World Cup 13-0 win became about pay equity
  * Alabama’s law forcing sex offenders to get chemically castrated, explained
  * Watch Jon Stewart blast Congress on behalf of 9/11 first responders
  * The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress
  * Pete Buttigieg just gave his first foreign policy speech. He offered 5 clear proposals.

### Most Read

  1. The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress Democrats escalate their fight with the Trump administration.
  2. Trump is reportedly in denial about his campaign’s bleak internal polling This is fine.
  3. Mary Meeker’s most important trends on the internet Here are all the slides, plus analysis.
  4. Processed foods are a much bigger health problem than we thought They’ve been linked to disease and overeating. Could our microbiome explain why?
  5. Elaine Chao and Mitch McConnell’s potential conflict of interest, explained Chao oversaw grant money that could benefit her husband politically. Is it an ethics violation?

vox-mark

### Future Perfect

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 43. The sidebar size is long.

## The Latest

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989647/GettyImages_1147791146.165114.0.jpg)

## Vox Sentences: Maine moves to expand abortion access

By Catherine Kim

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989585/Anthony_Noto_2.0.0.jpg)

## Why SoFi would be interested in buying naming rights to the LA football

stadium

By Theodore Schleifer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989470/Rajiv_Shah_1.0.0.jpg)

## Rockefeller Foundation’s Rajiv Shah explains how tech can actually help

save the world

By Rani Molla

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989472/1144683170.jpg.0.jpg)

## Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for

representation

By Li Zhou

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989385/BlackLivesMatterFresnoLawsuit.0.jpg)

## Support for Black Lives Matter cost church its polling place designation,

lawsuit claims

By P.R. Lockhart

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989302/1155298105.jpg.0.jpg)

## How the US women’s team World Cup 13-0 win became about pay equity

By Tara Golshan

Chorus

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * GDPR Commitment
  * Communications Preferences

  * Contact

  * Send Us a Tip
  * Masthead
  * About Us
  * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

