

![ScienceDaily](/images/sd-logo.png)

* * *

Your source for the latest research news

Follow **___** _Subscribe ____

**Just In:**

  * Mass Anomaly Under Moon's Largest Crater
  * Biggest Meteorite Collision in the UK
  * Climate Change: Making Siberia More Habitable?
  * How Undifferentiated Cells Commit to Their Fate
  * Danger Avoidance: Genetically Encoded
  * Molecular Aging 'Midlife Crisis' Identified
  * Translation of Genes More Complex Than Expected
  * How Old Are Your Organs? Mix of Young, Old
  * New Insight Into Origin of Canadian Rockies
  * Alzheimer's Protein: Plaques, Cell Death in Mice

advertisement

Follow all of ScienceDaily's **latest research news** and **top science
headlines**!

Science News

from research organizations

* * *

# More adults use marijuana in states where it is legal

Date:

    
    
    November 13, 2017
    

Source:

    
    
    Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health
    

Summary:

    
    
    Daily use of marijuana as well as past month rates rose for both men and women aged 26 and older in states with medical marijuana laws in effect. Marijuana use among those younger than 26 years old was generally unaffected by changes in the law.
    

Share:

FULL STORY

* * *

Daily use of marijuana as well as past month rates rose for both men and women
aged 26 and older in states with medical marijuana laws in effect, according
to researchers at Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health.
Marijuana use among those younger than 26 years old was generally unaffected
by changes in the law. The results of the study are published online in
_Prevention Science_.

advertisement

* * *

In states with medical marijuana laws, daily marijuana use for male users age
26 and older increased from 16.3 percent to 19.1 percent, and for women, from
9.2 percent to 12.7 percent. Past month use among men in the same age bracket
increased from 7.0 percent before the laws passed to 8.7 percent following
their passage, and for women rose from 3.0 percent before to 4.3 percent
after. There were no significant increases in past-year marijuana use disorder
(continuing to use despite significant behavioral or psychological changes)
for any age or gender group following passage of the laws.

The study also documents a rise in males ages 18-25 using marijuana daily
compared to females. "Among past month users, more than one in five young men
ages 18-25 living in states with medical marijuana laws said they used
marijuana every day," said Christine Mauro, PhD, assistant professor of
Biostatistics at Columbia's Mailman School of Public Health, and first author.

Daily use was generally higher among individuals aged 18-25 compared with
those ages 12-17 and those 26 or older, regardless of their state's laws
around marijuana. "Daily marijuana use raises health concerns as the brain
doesn't fully mature until age 25," noted Mauro.

The researchers analyzed state-level survey data from the National Survey on
Drug Use and Health for the years 2004-2013, including more than 17,500 youth
(12-17 years-old), 17,500 young adults (18-25 years-old), and 18,800 adults 26
and older per year studied.

Since 1996, more than half of the United States has passed medical marijuana
laws, with 28 states legalizing medical marijuana use as of November 2016;
eight states have legalized recreational marijuana. "As more states enact laws
and more years of data are available, future research should examine how
legalization of recreational marijuana and other local rules contribute to
changes in marijuana use," said Mauro.

Rising rates of marijuana use raises concerns regarding associated increases
in heavy use of marijuana and marijuana use disorder. Earlier research by
Columbia researchers estimated that 16.2 percent and 57.2 percent of daily
marijuana users meet criteria for DSM-IV abuse and dependence diagnosis,
respectively.

"The advent of medical marijuana laws has been proposed as one potential cause
of the increased prevalence of marijuana use, but there is now a general
consensus that passage of the laws has not affected rates of use in
adolescents," said Silvia Martins, MD, PHD, associate professor of
Epidemiology at the Mailman School, and senior author. Until this most recent
data, studies by Martins and colleagues found past-year individual use rose
among all adults 26+ in states with medical marijuana laws but had not
investigated changes in daily marijuana use and marijuana use disorder.

In fact, despite public health concerns regarding increased use of pot and
enactment of marijuana laws, some positive outcomes have been associated with
the laws, including decreased opioid use and decreased alcohol consumption --
the latter tied to declining rates of traffic injury fatalities at the state
level. "Research shows the impacts of medical marijuana law, both positive and
negative," noted Martins.

"Because most states in our sample more recently passed medical marijuana
laws, it is possible that not enough time has elapsed to observe more
significant changes in marijuana use disorder across age-gender subgroups,"
said Mauro. "Given the impact the disorder may have on individuals, families
and society, marijuana use should continue to be monitored regularly. Building
the evidence base by age and gender is critical in helping public health
professionals better understand which groups, may be most affected by medical
marijuana laws and target public health programming accordingly."

advertisement

* * *

* * *

**Story Source:**

Materials provided by **Columbia University's Mailman School of Public
Health**. _Note: Content may be edited for style and length._

* * *

**Journal Reference** :

  1. Christine M. Mauro, Paul Newswanger, Julian Santaella-Tenorio, Pia M. Mauro, Hannah Carliner, Silvia S. Martins. **Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws on State-Level Marijuana Use by Age and Gender, 2004 -2013**. _Prevention Science_ , 2017; DOI: 10.1007/s11121-017-0848-3

* * *

**Cite This Page** :

  * MLA
  * APA
  * Chicago

Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health. "More adults use
marijuana in states where it is legal." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 13
November 2017. .

Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health. (2017, November 13).
More adults use marijuana in states where it is legal. _ScienceDaily_.
Retrieved June 10, 2019 from
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/11/171113123639.htm

Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health. "More adults use
marijuana in states where it is legal." ScienceDaily.
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/11/171113123639.htm (accessed June 10,
2019).

advertisement

* * *

  * RELATED TOPICS
    * Health & Medicine
    * __Controlled Substances
    * __Teen Health
    * __Today's Healthcare
    * Mind & Brain
    * __Marijuana
    * __Illegal Drugs
    * __Addiction
    * Plants & Animals
    * __Soil Types
    * __Animal Learning and Intelligence
    * __Biology
    * Science & Society
    * __Public Health
    * __Social Issues
    * __STEM Education

advertisement

* * *

  * RELATED TERMS
    * __Hair
    * __Cannabis
    * __Fertility
    * __Memory bias
    * __Misogyny
    * __Civil libertarianism
    * __Law
    * __Ophthalmology

RELATED STORIES

* * *

##### Cigarette Smokers Are 10 Times More Likely to Be Daily Marijuana Users

Nov. 30, 2017 혰 Daily marijuana use has been on the rise over the past decade.
Now, a new study found that cigarette smokers are 10 times more likely to use
marijuana on a daily basis. Marijuana use occurred nearly ... read more __

##### Rates of Marijuana Use, Heavy Use, and Cannabis Use Disorder Depend on

Where You Live

June 15, 2017 혰 Adult marijuana use rose significantly in states that passed
loosely regulated medical marijuana laws (MMLs) according to a new study. The
highest increases were reported among adults ages 26 and ... read more __

##### New Research Shows Uptick in Past-Month Marijuana Use Among Women of

Reproductive Age

Dec. 19, 2016 혰 The prevalence of past-month marijuana use among reproductive-
aged women rose from 2.4 percent in 2002 to 3.9 percent in 2014, an increase
of 62 percent. Past-month marijuana use was highest among ... read more __

##### Marijuana Survey Finds Medical Users More Likely to Consume Edibles and

Vaporize

Jan. 28, 2016 혰 A new study provides some of the first evidence about patterns
of marijuana use in states that have legalized medical marijuana. It finds
that medical marijuana users are more likely to vaporize or ... read more __

FROM AROUND THE WEB

* * *

Below are relevant articles that may interest you. ScienceDaily shares links
with scholarly publications in the TrendMD network and earns revenue from
third-party advertisers, where indicated.

**Print Email** Share

* * *

advertisement

* * *

Most Popular

this week

* * *

HEALTH & MEDICINE

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190603102549_1_75x50.jpg)Brush Your Teeth --

Postpone Alzheimer's

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101143_1_75x50.jpg)Research Confirms Gut-Brain

Connection in Autism

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190520190110_1_75x50.jpg)Anxiety Might Be Alleviated

by Regulating Gut Bacteria

MIND & BRAIN

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530141443_1_75x50.jpg)Circadian Clocks: Body

Parts Respond to Day and Night Independently from Brain, Studies Show

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606150315_1_75x50.jpg)How Old Are Your Organs? To

Scientists' Surprise, Organs Are a Mix of Young and Old Cells

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606133824_1_75x50.jpg)Alzheimer's Disease Protein

Links Plaques to Cell Death in Mice

LIVING & WELL

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605142613_1_75x50.jpg)Is There a Limit to Human

Endurance? Science Says Yes

##### Boy or Girl? It's in the Father's Genes

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529221040_1_75x50.jpg)New Evidence Links Ultra-

Processed Foods With a Range of Health Risks

advertisement

* * *

Strange & Offbeat

* * *

HEALTH & MEDICINE

##### Improved Human Brain Organoids to Boost Neurological Disease Research

##### Americans Consumer 70,000 Particles of Microplastics Per Year

##### Could Boosting the Gut Microbiome Be the Secret to Healthier Older Age?

MIND & BRAIN

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605121652_1_75x50.jpg)Was Mona Lisa's Smile a

Lie?

##### Hearing Through Your Fingers: Device That Converts Speech

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101120_1_75x50.jpg)Godzilla Is Back and He's

Bigger Than Ever: The Evolutionary Biology of the Monster

LIVING & WELL

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529094003_1_75x50.jpg)Healthy, Stress-Busting Fat

Found Hidden in Dirt

##### Soft, Social Robot Brings Coziness to Homes, and Classrooms

##### Examining Ethical Issues Surrounding Wearable Brain Devices Marketed to

Consumers

advertisement

* * *

Toggle navigation Menu __ SD

  * SD

    * Home Page
    *       * Top Science News
    *       * Latest News
  * Home 

    * Home Page
    *       * Top Science News
    *       * Latest News
  * Health 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the health sciences,   
or browse the topics below:

Health & Medicine

    
    
      * Allergy
      * Alternative Medicine
      * Birth Control
      * Cancer
      * Diabetes
      * Diseases
      * Heart Disease
      * HIV and AIDS
      * Obesity
      * Stem Cells
      * ... _more topics_
    

Mind & Brain

    
    
      * ADD and ADHD
      * Addiction
      * Alzheimer's
      * Autism
      * Depression
      * Headaches
      * Intelligence
      * Psychology
      * Relationships
      * Schizophrenia
      * ... _more topics_
    

Living Well

    
    
      * Parenting
      * Pregnancy
      * Sexual Health
      * Skin Care
      * Men's Health
      * Women's Health
      * Nutrition
      * Diet and Weight Loss
      * Fitness
      * Healthy Aging
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Tech 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the physical sciences  & technology,   
or browse the topics below:

Matter & Energy

    
    
      * Aviation
      * Chemistry
      * Electronics
      * Fossil Fuels
      * Nanotechnology
      * Physics
      * Quantum Physics
      * Solar Energy
      * Technology
      * Wind Energy
      * ... _more topics_
    

Space & Time

    
    
      * Astronomy
      * Black Holes
      * Dark Matter
      * Extrasolar Planets
      * Mars
      * Moon
      * Solar System
      * Space Telescopes
      * Stars
      * Sun
      * ... _more topics_
    

Computers & Math

    
    
      * Artificial Intelligence
      * Communications
      * Computer Science
      * Hacking
      * Mathematics
      * Quantum Computers
      * Robotics
      * Software
      * Video Games
      * Virtual Reality
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Enviro 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the environmental sciences,   
or browse the topics below:

Plants & Animals

    
    
      * Agriculture and Food
      * Animals
      * Biology
      * Biotechnology
      * Endangered Animals
      * Extinction
      * Genetically Modified
      * Microbes and More
      * New Species
      * Zoology
      * ... _more topics_
    

Earth & Climate

    
    
      * Climate
      * Earthquakes
      * Environment
      * Geography
      * Geology
      * Global Warming
      * Hurricanes
      * Ozone Holes
      * Pollution
      * Weather
      * ... _more topics_
    

Fossils & Ruins

    
    
      * Ancient Civilizations
      * Anthropology
      * Archaeology
      * Dinosaurs
      * Early Humans
      * Early Mammals
      * Evolution
      * Lost Treasures
      * Origin of Life
      * Paleontology
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Society 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the social sciences  & education,   
or browse the topics below:

Science & Society

    
    
      * Arts & Culture
      * Consumerism
      * Economics
      * Political Science
      * Privacy Issues
      * Public Health
      * Racial Disparity
      * Religion
      * Sports
      * World Development
      * ... _more topics_
    

Business & Industry

    
    
      * Biotechnology & Bioengineering
      * Computers & Internet
      * Energy & Resources
      * Engineering
      * Medical Technology
      * Pharmaceuticals
      * Transportation
      * ... _more topics_
    

Education & Learning

    
    
      * Animal Learning & Intelligence
      * Creativity
      * Educational Psychology
      * Educational Technology
      * Infant & Preschool Learning
      * Learning Disorders
      * STEM Education
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Quirky 
    * Top News
    *       * Human Quirks
    * Odd Creatures
    * Bizarre Things
    * Weird World

__

Free Subscriptions

* * *

Get the latest science news with ScienceDaily's free email newsletters,
updated daily and weekly. Or view hourly updated newsfeeds in your RSS reader:

  * __Email Newsletters
  * __RSS Feeds

Follow Us

* * *

Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter
  * __Google+
  * __LinkedIn

Have Feedback?

* * *

Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and
negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions?

  * __Leave Feedback
  * __Contact Us

About This Site | Staff | Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy |
Editorial Policy | Terms of Use

Copyright 2019 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights
controlled by their respective owners.

Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide
medical or other professional advice.

Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its
staff, its contributors, or its partners.

Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral
programs, where indicated.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: 款-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: 款-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: 款-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGF棺]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: 款-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: 款-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: 款-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGF棺]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

