

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Male Reproductive System

Health Effects of Cannabis

Smoking Cannabis

Cannabis

Adult Question

Biology

# Is it true that smoking weed kills human sperm? Why?

UpdateCancel

### Answer Wiki

2 Answers

![Adarsh Narayanan](https://qph.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

thumb-37949948-100-mzfdiqxkghbyxwwxbulqaqqyoqsphxhy.jpeg)

Adarsh Narayanan, I've been growing for years, indoors and outdoors, hydro and
soil

Answered 203w ago

Answered 203w ago * Author has 306 answers and 777.7k answer views

This misconception is spread by a very, very poorly conducted study.

TL;DR version:

The study found that of the samples taken, about 20% of the samples had
abnormal sperm mobility. Of these that had abnormal sperm mobility, the common
factors found amongst them were that: most of them were under 30, most of them
had consumed marijuana at least once in the last 3 months, and that the
samples taken in the summer had a lower count and mobility. Does this mean
that if you're under 30, or if you've smoked pot in the last 3 months, or if
it's summer time, you will have a lower sperm count? **Absolutely NOT.** Why
not? First of all, this breaks one standard statistical rule: correlation does
NOT have to imply causation. Just because most of those taken with a low sperm
count were under 30, does NOT mean that if you're under 30 you will have a low
sperm count. Just because most of the samples taken smoked pot 3 months before
their test does NOT mean that if you smoke pot you will have low sperm levels
for the next 3 months. Secondly, 3 months is a long time. Any number of things
could have happened in that time that affect the sperm count.  
\----

If you are a scientific analysis freak and you want the full info as to why
this study is such bollocks, here we go...

This is a case-referrent study - a type of study that literally has control
over almost no external variables.

There are two things that make this study ludicrous, and that is the
limitation of semen analyses, as well as the poor scientific procedure
followed by this study.

Here's a fact that strains the credibility of almost any test done based on a
semen analyses. Semen analyses are limited in terms of accuracy. This is due
to many reasons. Just a handful:

  * Semen is stored in cryofreezers. After thawing, the count and mobility is measured. The number of cells that die in the thawing process is in hundreds of thousands to millions per ml, and the amount below which your sperm count is said to be low is 15 million; even if just 750,000 cells die during the thawing process, 5% is rather large for a margin for error.
  * 10% of samples do not endure supercool temperatures like those experienced in the cryopreservation process. This has nothing to do with sperm count or mobility; the samples just don't get through the procedure, and the cause is unknown.
  * The sperm count is a minimum of 70% higher if obtained as a result of intercourse rather than masturbation, and again, there's no idea as to why. Visual stimulation could hold a possible correlation, but, (unlike the buffoons who undertook this study) we will bear in mind that _correlation does not have to imply causation_.
  * Regular exposure to higher than ideal temperatures reduces the ability of the testes to produce spermatozoa, such as using a hot laptop on the lap near the groin area, regular sauna use, and regular long, hot showers, but it is not known if these changes are permanent, nor the time it takes after stopping these activities for the sperm count to come back to optimum levels if the changes are reversible.

The list goes on and on, and if there's one test of the human body that is
bloody unreliable and has not just margins for error, but rather significant
fractions for error, it's the semen analyses. However, accepting and ignoring
those limitations as the best we've got and moving on, the team involved in
this experiment followed extremely poor scientific method. Here's why.

  1. Nowhere in the study does it mention the number of semen samples collected from each men to obtain more accurate values. If it was just 1 semen sample, then this study is as good as useless. If it was 2, it's slightly better, but frankly, given the above limitations of semen analyses, anything under 3 is not even worth studying.
  2. The controls may be a matched (similar to those known to have a condition (on what grounds, nobody knows)) or may be an un-matched random sample from the unaffected population. Here, the problems of controlling for unknown influences is present, but not only that; if the controls are too closely matched they may not be representative of the general population. 
  3. The study found that of the samples taken, about 20% of the samples had abnormal sperm mobility. Of these that had abnormal sperm mobility, the common factors found amongst them were that: most of them were under 30, most of them had consumed marijuana at least once in the last 3 months, and that the samples taken in the summer had a lower count and mobility. Does this mean that if you're under 30, or if you've smoked pot in the last 3 months, or if it's summer time, you will have a lower sperm count? **Absolutely NOT.** Why not? First of all, this breaks one standard statistical rule: correlation does NOT have to imply causation. Just because most of those taken with a low sperm count were under 30, does NOT mean that if you're under 30 you will have a low sperm count. Just because most of the samples taken smoked pot 3 months before their test does NOT mean that if you smoke pot you will have low sperm levels for the next 3 months. Secondly, 3 months is a long time. Any number of things could have happened in that time that affect the sperm count. 

Just as an added point, this result was found by 0 other researches -
absolutely none. However, this study apparently came to the conclusion that
smoking tobacco and alcohol consumption had no noticeable effect on sperm
count. However, several other studies, better conducted, suggest that smoking
cigarettes and alcohol consumption affected sperm count. Go figure.

Anyone who wants the sources, I'll be happy to provide them.

9k views * View 5 Upvoters

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

  * Can weed kill you?

  * Is smoking weed killing my attention span?

  * Does smoking weed help studying?

  * Should I start smoking weed?

  * Can Christians smoke weed?

View more

### Related Questions

  * What makes smoking weed better?

  * Can smoking weed affect pregnancy?

  * How can smoking weed kill you?

  * Should I stop smoking weed?

  * Is smoking weed harmful to health in any way?

  * Is it true that men should smoke female weed, while women should smoke male weed?

  * Can weed kill you if you smoke too much?

  * Does smoking weed cause cancer?

  * Has anyone ever died from smoking marijuana?

  * Does weed kill neurons?

### Related Questions

  * Can weed kill you?

  * Is smoking weed killing my attention span?

  * Does smoking weed help studying?

  * Should I start smoking weed?

  * Can Christians smoke weed?

  * What makes smoking weed better?

  * Can smoking weed affect pregnancy?

  * How can smoking weed kill you?

  * Should I stop smoking weed?

  * Is smoking weed harmful to health in any way?

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

