

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4176521/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
  * How To
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# Bookshelf

##

Search databaseBooksAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO ProfilesGTRHomoloGeneIdentical
Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Browse Titles
  * Advanced
  * Help

NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National
Institutes of Health.

Mack A, Joy J. Marijuana as Medicine? The Science Beyond the Controversy.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000.

![Cover of Marijuana as Medicine?](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/bookshelf/thumbs/th-

nap9586-lrg.png)

## Marijuana as Medicine? The Science Beyond the Controversy.

Show details

Mack A, Joy J.

Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000.

  * Contents
  * Hardcopy Version at National Academies Press

Search term

< PrevNext >

# 9MARIJUANA AND GLAUCOMA

Glaucoma ranks among the most frequently cited reasons for using medical
marijuana and is one of the indications for which the federal government once
granted permission for compassionate marijuana use (see Chapter 2 and Chapter
11). Research findings from as early as the 1970s show that both marijuana and
THC reduce intraocular pressure, a key contributor to glaucoma. The first such
reports generated considerable interest because at the time conventional
medications for glaucoma caused a variety of adverse side effects. But, as
will be described, other treatments for the disorder have since eclipsed
marijuana-based medicines. Conventional therapies for intraocular pressure
outperform cannabinoids, and the next generation of glaucoma drugs is expected
to treat the disease more directly or even reverse its progress.

After cataracts, glaucoma is a leading cause of blindness worldwide, affecting
more than 60 million people. Its most common form, primary open-angle glaucoma
(POAG), is a slowly progressive disorder that destroys cells in the eye's
retina and degrades the optic nerve. These losses constrict the visual field,
which eventually disappears, along with the patient's sight.

Researchers have not yet learned what triggers POAG, but they have identified
three factors that place individuals at risk for developing the disease: age,
race, and elevated intraocular pres sure. One percent of people age 60 have
POAG, while more than 9 percent of people over 80 develop the disease. For
African Americans the figure rises to 10 percent and is up to 25 percent among
Caribbean people of African origin (who are less racially mixed than their
American counterparts).

The third risk factor, elevated intraocular pressure, results from blockage in
the flow of fluid that helps the eye maintain its rigid shape (see Figure
9.1). Normally this clear fluid, called the aqueous humor, circulates between
the front of the lens and the back of the cornea. In people with elevated
intraocular pressure the outflow of fluid from the anterior chamber of the eye
becomes restricted, causing pressure to build up like water behind a dam.
Increased pressure in the eye contributes to glaucoma by decreasing the flow
of nutrients to the optic nerve, scientists suspect. Because elevated
intraocular pressure is the only significant risk fac tor for glaucoma that
can be controlled, most treatments to date have been designed to reduce it.
Unfortunately, reducing intraocular pressure does not always stop or even slow
the progress of glaucoma toward blindness.

![FIGURE 9.1. The anatomy of the human

eye.](/books/NBK224386/bin/p200047c2g125001.gif)

#### FIGURE 9.1

The anatomy of the human eye. (Drawing by Roberto Osti.)

Drugs can alter intraocular pressure by acting on different circulation routes
of the aqueous humor (see Table 9.1). One important outflow route is the
trabecular meshwork, a latticework of connective tissue and cells. The fluid
flows through this tissue, into a little canal, and out of the eye, where it
joins the blood-stream. Such drugs as epinephrine or dipevefrin work by
changing the shape of certain cells, resulting in improved flow through the
trabecular meshwork. Pilocarpine, another type of drug, contracts the muscle
that controls the shape of the trabecular meshwork making it easier for fluid
to pass through, whereas timolol, yet another type of drug, interferes with
fluid manufacture by the ciliary epithelium. Other drugs, such as
apraclonidine and brimonidine, also reduce the amount of fluid produced.
Finally, an additional type of drug simulates the production of agents that
ease the passage of aqueous humor from the eye.

![TABLE 9.1. Treatments for

Glaucoma.](/books/NBK224386/table/ttt00002/?report=thumb)

#### TABLE 9.1

Treatments for Glaucoma.

There are also surgical options for controlling elevated intraocular pressure.
The trabecular meshwork can be cut with a laser, allowing the fluid to move
out of it more easily. Alternatively, a surgeon can remove a piece of the eye
wall and allow fluid to drain out under the conjunctiva. Doctors can also
insert tiny drainage tubes, similar to those used for middle-ear problems,
inside the eye to allow fluid drainage to the outer layers of the eye. Lastly,
laser, heat, or cold can be used to destroy the ciliary epithelium, which
secretes the aqueous humor.

Several clinical studies have found that cannabinoids or marijuana reduce
intraocular pressure (IOP) as well as do most conventional glaucoma
medications.1 This is true whether the cannabinoids are administered orally,
intravenously, or by inhalation but not when they are applied directly to the
eye. Smoked or eaten marijuana, THC and synthetic cannabinoids in pill form,
and intravenous injections of several natural cannabinoids have all been shown
to reduce IOP significantly in both glaucoma patients and healthy adults with
normal IOP. In most trials a single dose of marijuana or cannabinoid
maintained this effect for three to four hours.

Researchers have yet to explain how marijuana and cannabinoids reduce IOP. But
while clearly effective in reducing IOP, marijuana-based treatments for
glaucoma have numerous drawbacks. Marijuana reduces blood pressure and
produces psychological effects that some people--particularly the elderly--
find intolerable. Several patients in these studies also reported that their
hearts pounded or raced and that they felt uncomfortably anxious after taking
cannabinoids. All of these effects could prove especially problematic for
people at risk for cardiovascular disease and stroke; moreover, reduced blood
pressure could decrease blood flow to the optic nerve, counteracting the
benefits of reducing IOP. Finally, their short duration of effect means that
marijuana-based medicines must be taken up to eight times a day, which most
patients are unlikely to do; other medicines reduce IOP equally well and need
only be taken once or twice a day. This is an important difference because
patients need to control IOP continuously due to the progressive nature of
glaucoma.

It is possible that future research could reveal a therapeutic effect for
isolated cannabinoids other than THC or produce synthetic cannabinoid analogs
that last longer and have fewer side effects. But the most promising line of
research for treating glaucoma lies in the development of therapies that can
protect or rescue the optic nerve from damage or that can restore its blood
supply. There is some evidence that a synthetic cannabinoidlike compound known
as HU-211 has nerve-protecting properties, although it does not reduce IOP.
HU-211 is chemically similar to THC, but it is not found in the marijuana
plant and does not bind to the cellular receptor in brain cells that THC
activates.

There is no question that marijuana-based medicines can be used to lower IOP.
But like several other glaucoma medications that have fallen into disuse,
their drawbacks outweigh their benefits. This was not the case when the first
reports of marijuana's effects on IOP were published in the 1970s, a time when
relatively few drugs--all of which caused troubling side effects--were
available to treat the condition. Those drugs have since been superseded by
more effective and less problematic medications. That seems the likely fate of
marijuana-based treatments for glaucoma as well.

## Footnotes

1\. Institute of Medicine. 1999. _Marijuana and Medicine: Assessing the
Science Base._ Washington, DC: National Academy Press, pp. 203-204.

Copyright 2001 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Bookshelf ID: NBK224386

Contents

< PrevNext >

Share

### Views

  * PubReader
  * Print View
  * Cite this Page

Mack A, Joy J. Marijuana as Medicine? The Science Beyond the Controversy.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2000. 9, MARIJUANA AND
GLAUCOMA.

  * PDF version of this title (3.6M)

### Recent Activity

ClearTurn OffTurn On

  * MARIJUANA AND GLAUCOMA - Marijuana as Medicine?

MARIJUANA AND GLAUCOMA - Marijuana as Medicine?

Your browsing activity is empty.

Activity recording is turned off.

Turn recording back on

See more...

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=books&ncbi_pdid=book-

part&ncbi_acc=NBK224386&ncbi_domain=nap9586&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/NBK224386/&ncbi_pagename=MARIJUANA

AND GLAUCOMA - Marijuana as Medicine? - NCBI

Bookshelf&ncbi_bookparttype=chapter&ncbi_app=bookshelf)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

