

![Drugabuse.com Logo](https://drugabuse.com/wp-

content/themes/drugabuse-v2/img/da-white-logo-tagline.svg)

  * GENERAL INFORMATION 
    * Facts and Information 
    * Browse by Drug 
    * Media 
    * Infographics, Videos, and More 
    * Featured Media 
    * Expert Guides 
    * Frequently Asked Questions 
    * Substance Abuse FAQs 
    * Intervention FAQs 
    * Painkiller FAQs 
    * Detox FAQs 
    * Finding Help FAQs 
    * Why Are Drugs So Addictive? 
    * Alcohol 
    * Amphetamine 
    * Cocaine 
    * Crack 
    * Heroin 
    * Methamphetamine 
    * Opiates 
    * Painkillers 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * Tramadol 
    * Xanax 
    * Addiction Stigma 
    * Are You an Enabler? 
    * Famous Drug Abusers 
    * Workplace Drug Abuse 
    * Teen Drug Abuse 
  * DRUG EFFECTS 
    * Effects of Drugs 
    * Drug Withdrawal 
    * Overdose 
    * Drugs and Pregnancy 
    * Cocaine and Pregnancy 
    * Drinking while Pregnant 
    * Heroin and Pregnancy 
    * Marijuana and Pregnancy 
    * MDMA and Pregnancy 
    * Meth and Pregnancy 
    * Painkillers and Pregnancy 
    * Smoking while Pregnant 
  * GET HELP 
    * Find Help Now 
    * Screening: Are You Addicted? 
    * Hotlines 
    * Treatment Types 
    * Inpatient Treatment 
    * Outpatient Treatment 
    * Aftercare 
    * Addiction Therapies 
    * 5 Signs You Need Rehab Now 
    * Help a Loved One 
  * SIGNS OF DRUG ABUSE 
    * Signs and Symptoms 
    * Mixing Drugs and Alcohol 
  * ABOUT AAC 
  *     * Sections 
  * General Information 

    * Facts and Information 
    * Browse by Drug 
    * Media 
    * Infographics, Videos, and More 
    * Featured Media 
    * Expert Guides 
    * Frequently Asked Questions 
    * Substance Abuse FAQs 
    * Intervention FAQs 
    * Painkiller FAQs 
    * Detox FAQs 
    * Finding Help FAQs 
    * Why Are Drugs So Addictive? 
    * Alcohol 
    * Amphetamine 
    * Cocaine 
    * Crack 
    * Heroin 
    * Methamphetamine 
    * Opiates 
    * Painkillers 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * Tramadol 
    * Xanax 
    * Addiction Stigma 
    * Are You an Enabler? 
    * Famous Drug Abusers 
    * Workplace Drug Abuse 
    * Teen Drug Abuse 
  * Drug Effects 
    * Effects of Drugs 
    * Drug Withdrawal 
    * Overdose 
    * Drugs and Pregnancy 
    * Cocaine and Pregnancy 
    * Drinking while Pregnant 
    * Heroin and Pregnancy 
    * Marijuana and Pregnancy 
    * MDMA and Pregnancy 
    * Meth and Pregnancy 
    * Painkillers and Pregnancy 
    * Smoking while Pregnant 
  * Get Help 
    * Find Help Now 
    * Screening: Are You Addicted? 
    * Hotlines 
    * Treatment Types 
    * Inpatient Treatment 
    * Outpatient Treatment 
    * Aftercare 
    * Addiction Therapies 
    * 5 Signs You Need Rehab Now 
    * Help a Loved One 
  * Signs of Drug Abuse 
    * Signs and Symptoms 
    * Mixing Drugs and Alcohol 
  * About AAC 
  * Blog 
  * Forums 
  * Directory 

Overcome Your Addition Get Help Now.

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

Browse Featured Rehabs

![](https://clientreachapi.rehabs.com/images/115804/300/https://s3-us-

west-1.amazonaws.com/crimagebucket-

rebuild/listings/image-0.057496001556058736.png)

Garden Heights Recovery

Jersey City, NJ

![](https://clientreachapi.rehabs.com/images/114263/300/https://s3-us-

west-1.amazonaws.com/crimagebucket-

rebuild/listings/image-0.710795001482516346.jpg)

Recovery Centers of America at Westmi...

Westminster, MA

4.8

Excellent (9 reviews)

![](https://clientreachapi.rehabs.com/images/115513/300/https://s3-us-

west-1.amazonaws.com/crimagebucket-

rebuild/listings/image-0.767911001507136284.jpg)

Mount Sinai Wellness Center

Dahlonega, GA

4.7

Excellent (67 reviews)

Finding the perfect treatment is only one phone call away!

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

# Marijuana Abuse

Authored By Erik MacLaren, PhD

Edited By Amanda Lautieri, B.S.

  1. Table of ContentsPrint
  2. About Marijuana Abuse
  3. Signs and Symptoms
  4. Effects of Marijuana Abuse
  5. Marijuana Abuse Treatment
  6. Teen Marijuana Abuse
  7. Resources, Articles, and More Information

![drugabuse_shutterstock-259315754-smoking-joint-FI](//drugabuse.com/wp-

content/uploads/drugabuse_shutterstock-259315754-smoking-joint-FI.jpg)

## About Marijuana Abuse

**What Is Marijuana?**

Marijuana refers to the leaves, flowers, and extracts of the plant **_Cannabis
sativa_** and several closely related species commonly known as hemp.

Marijuana is the **most commonly used illicit drug in the United States** and
is known by a large variety of names including cannabis, pot, weed, grass,
hash, and many others. It is grown widely across the globe and is the only
major recreational drug grown within the US

* * *

1-888-744-0069

Treatment Advisors Are On Call 24/7

Who Answers?

Thinking About Getting Rehab?

## Signs and Symptoms

### What does marijuana look and smell like?

You might wonder if your teen is abusing marijuana, but aren't sure what it
looks or smells like. Coming in a couple colors, marijuana mostly looks like a
shredded plant, similar to tobacco.

It carries a distinct odor that has been likened to cooked sage or alfalfa.

Marijuana intoxication produces effects including:

  * Euphoria.
  * Relaxation.
  * Drowsiness.
  * Altered sense of time.
  * Impaired memory.
  * Slowed reflexes and impaired motor skills.
  * Bloodshot eyes.
  * Increased appetite.
  * Dry mouth.
  * Increased heart rate.
  * Cognitive impairments.
  * Paranoia.

### Factors that Determine Marijuana’s Potency and Effects

Marijuana contains more than 60 related psychoactive chemicals, called
cannabinoids; however, the most abundant of these is
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC **). The amount of THC ingested when using
marijuana determines the intensity of the high** , and the potency of
different strains of marijuana is a result of the level of THC they
contain—varying from 3% to 20%, on average. Industrial varieties of hemp, used
to make textiles and rope, contain little to no THC and do not produce a
demonstrable high at all.

Dried marijuana is most often smoked, but can also be used to infuse various
foods and eaten. THC-rich marijuana extracts are also increasing in
popularity, including hash oil and a hard, brittle preparation called
“shatter.” Such extracts are particularly dangerous because extremely large
amounts of THC can be ingested by users very quickly.

![](//www.drugabuse.com/wp-

content/uploads/drugabuse_shutterstock-120006580-sad-teen-lonely-gutter-

CTA-300x157.jpg)If you are unable to stop using marijuana, there is help.
Learn about treatment today.

The precise effects an individual will experience depend on:

  * How much marijuana is consumed.
  * How potent it is.
  * How it is ingested.

Smoking produces intoxication quickly, within minutes, and its effects are
fairly predictable from one time to another.

Eating marijuana-infused food causes the THC to be absorbed more slowly, with
intoxication beginning between 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion, and the
effects can be difficult for the user to predict.

Marijuana Abuse question 4

* * *

## Effects of Marijuana Abuse

In addition to positive and negative intoxicating effects, marijuana abuse can
also have negative effects on an individual’s physical and mental health,
especially in someone who uses marijuana for a long period of time.

Long-term detrimental effects of marijuana may include:

  * **Respiratory problems** : Marijuana smoke has many of the same irritating and lung-damaging properties as tobacco smoke. Long-term users may develop a chronic cough and are at higher risk of lung infections.
  * **Cardiovascular risk** : Marijuana ingestion increases the heart rate for several hours, increasing the chance of heart attack or stroke. This may aggravate pre-existing heart conditions in long-term users and those who are older—placing them at greater risk of a cardiovascular event.
  * **Mental health effects** : Long-term marijuana use can decrease an individual’s performance on memory-related tasks and cause a decrease in motivation and interest in everyday activities. Marijuana is also known to intensify symptoms in users with schizophrenia.
  * **Child development** : Marijuana use during pregnancy can affect the development of the fetus’s brain and has been linked to behavioral problems in babies.
  * **Psychological dependence** : Like most other drugs of abuse, individuals who use marijuana for long periods of time can develop a dependence on it. Signs of dependence in a user include the need to use marijuana to cope with everyday tasks and the experience of cravings and anxiety when marijuana is not available.

Marijuana Abuse question 5

Statistics on Marijuana Use

Marijuana is the single most commonly used illicit drug in the US. Despite its
popularity, however, national trends show that this drug is not harmless. Some
important statistics about marijuana use include the following:

![drugabuse_shutterstock-110429024-sad-girl-weed-350](//drugabuse.com/wp-

content/uploads/drugabuse_shutterstock-110429024-sad-girl-

weed-350-300x257.jpg)

  * Results from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) indicate that in 2013, nearly 115 million Americans aged 12 or older had used marijuana at some point in their life, or about 44% of all people in this age group.
  * Data collected by the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) show that between 2006 and 2010 there was a 59% increase in hospital emergency department visits that involved marijuana.
  * The DAWN data also demonstrate that in 2010 marijuana was the second most common reason for drug-related emergency department visits after cocaine.
  * Marijuana-related drug rehabilitation admissions increased by 14% between 2006 and 2010, reaching more than 350,000 in 2010, according to statistics released by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).

Learn more at our article, Marijuana History and Statistics.

* * *

## Marijuana Abuse Treatment

![drugabuse_shutterstock-168158144-support-group-weed-350](//drugabuse.com/wp-

content/uploads/drugabuse_shutterstock-168158144-support-group-weed-350.jpg)

The treatment for marijuana abuse and dependence has many similarities to
treatments for addictions to other drugs. Although there are no medications
available specifically for treating marijuana dependence, professional
detoxification facilities can provide a safe, supportive place for abusers to
get the drug out of their systems.

Medical staff can help ensure that individuals do not hurt themselves, and
sedative medications are available in case of severe anxiety or panic attacks.

Following detox, inpatient and outpatient drug rehabilitation facilities are
available depending on the specific needs of the recovering person. Both types
of treatment offer counseling and education to help people with addictions to
adapt to a drug-free lifestyle. Aftercare programs and peer recovery
organizations provide support to avoid future relapses.

Marijuana Abuse question 6

* * *

## Teen Marijuana Abuse

The Monitoring the Future survey has tracked drug use in secondary school
students since 1975 and is a good source of information on teen marijuana
abuse. Some key statistics from the survey include:

![drugabuse_shutterstock-200108399-smoking-hhodie-FI](//drugabuse.com/wp-

content/uploads/drugabuse_shutterstock-200108399-smoking-hhodie-

FI-300x201.jpg)

  * The prevalence of marijuana use in the previous year among high school seniors has held fairly steady for the last few years and decreased slightly from 36.4% in 2013 to 35.1% in 2014.
  * About 81% of 12th graders claim that marijuana is easily available if they wanted to get it.
  * The perceived risk of marijuana use has fallen since 2000 in all age groups monitored, and less than 40% of 12th graders considered regular marijuana use to be a “great risk."

Also alarming is the **rise of synthetic marijuana** , often referred to as
"Spice" or "K2." These substances can often be purchased legally and with
ease; however, their effects can severe and even fatal. Read more at our blog,
The Dangerous (and Deadly) Effects of Spice.

* * *

## Resources, Articles, and More Information

For more information, check out the following articles:

  * Effects of Marijuana Use
  * Drug Abuse Treatment Programs

You may visit our Forum to discuss the effects of drug use and abuse with
others.

### Sources:

  * Cannabis, Coca, & Poppy: Nature's Addictive Plants. (n.d.). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from http://www.deamuseum.org/ccp/cannabis/
  * Inhalant Use in Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month among Persons Aged 26 or Older, by Demographic Characteristics. (n.d.). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabsPDFWHTML2013/Web/HTML/NSDUH-DetTabsSect1peTabs47to92-2013.htm
  * Key Findings on Adolescent Drug Use. (2014). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/monographs/mtf-overview2014.pdf
  * Marijuana | CESAR. (n.d.). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from http://www.cesar.umd.edu/cesar/drugs/marijuana.asp
  * Marijuana intoxication: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia. (n.d.). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000952.htm
  * Marijuana. (n.d.). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from http://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana
  * National Drug Threat Assessment. (2013). Retrieved October 30, 2015, from http://www.dea.gov/resource-center/DIR-017-13 NDTA Summary final.pdf

### Related Posts:

  * ![Let’s Clear the Air About Secondhand Marijuana Smoke](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Copy-of-iStock_000009278592_Medium-150x150.jpg)Let's Clear the Air About Secondhand Marijuana Smoke
  * ![Guess What’s in Your Marijuana?](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock15958339-Spice-Aint-So-Nice1-150x150.jpg)Guess What's in Your Marijuana?
  * ![Hitting the Grass Ceiling: 6 Surprising Ways Weed is Sexist](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Is-Weed-Sexist-150x150.jpg)Hitting the Grass Ceiling: 6 Surprising Ways Weed is Sexist
  * ![New Bone Loss Study Points the Finger at Marijuana](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock5909599-Cannabis-Brittle-Bones-150x150.jpg)New Bone Loss Study Points the Finger at Marijuana
  * ![Would You Give Medical Marijuana to a Chronically Ill Pet?](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock532262202-Pets-on-Pot-150x150.jpg)Would You Give Medical Marijuana to a Chronically Ill Pet?
  * ![Voices From Both Sides of the Medical Marijuana Debate](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/iStock-image1-150x150.jpg)Voices From Both Sides of the Medical Marijuana Debate

Last updated on November 25, 2018

2018-11-25T03:51:47+00:00

A Forever Recovery

216 St. Mary's Lake Rd.

Battle Creek, MI 49017

Positive Sobriety Institute

680 N Lake Shore Dr Suite...

Chicago, IL 60611

Spirit Mountain Recovery for Men

3181 East 3350 North

Eden, UT 84310

Finding the perfect treatment is only one phone call away!

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

It's not too late to

turn your life around...

Learn More

I Want To Learn About:

  * Alcohol Intervention Programs 
  * Drug Intervention Programs 
  * Get the Facts on Alcohol Abuse 
  * Get the Facts on Substance Abuse 

Use Our New Directory To Find Treatment Today

Search

### Overcome Your Addiction

Get Help Now.

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

Connect to a treatment center.

Recent Posts

  * Before & After: Physical Effects of Drugs 

  * Golden State Gives No-Go for Booze-Cannabis Combo 

![](https://drugabuse-

com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/iStock-853572972-320x275.jpg)

  * FDA Raids Juul Headquarters as First Step in E-Cig Crackdown 

![](https://drugabuse-

com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/iStock-837565552-320x275.jpg)

Need Help Overcoming Addiction?

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

Search By State

Select a State

  * Alabama 
  * Alaska 
  * Arizona 
  * Arkansas 
  * California 
  * Colorado 
  * Connecticut 
  * Delaware 
  * District Of Columbia 
  * Florida 
  * Georgia 
  * Hawaii 
  * Idaho 
  * Illinois 
  * Indiana 
  * Iowa 
  * Kansas 
  * Kentucky 
  * Louisiana 
  * Maine 
  * Maryland 
  * Massachusetts 
  * Michigan 
  * Minnesota 
  * Mississippi 
  * Missouri 
  * Montana 
  * Nebraska 
  * Nevada 
  * New Hampshire 
  * New Jersey 
  * New Mexico 
  * New York 
  * North Carolina 
  * North Dakota 
  * Ohio 
  * Oklahoma 
  * Oregon 
  * Pennsylvania 
  * Rhode Island 
  * South Carolina 
  * South Dakota 
  * Tennessee 
  * Texas 
  * Utah 
  * Vermont 
  * Virginia 
  * Washington 
  * West Virginia 
  * Wisconsin 
  * Wyoming 

(C) DrugAbuse.com 2019. All Rights Reserved

Privacy Policy Terms of Use

Drugabuse.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc.

You're Ready to Escape Addiction

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

GENERAL DISCLAIMER: Drugabuse.com is designed for educational purposes only
and is not engaged in rendering medical advice. The information provided
through Drugabuse.com should not be used for diagnosing or treating a health
problem or disease. It is not a substitute for professional care. If you have
or suspect you may have a health problem, you should consult your health care
provider. The authors, editors, producers, and contributors shall have no
liability, obligation, or responsibility to any person or entity for any loss,
damage, or adverse consequences alleged to have happened directly or
indirectly as a consequence of material on this website. If you believe you
have a medical emergency, you should immediately call 911.

Drugabuse.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc. Learn more about what this means here.

Ready for Drug or Alcohol Rehab?

Discuss Treatment Options Call Toll Free 24 Hours A Day

Call Us Today! 1-888-744-0069

Who Answers?

Name:

Email:

Phone Number:

I Am:

\--- The Addicted Person A Family Member A Friend A Co-Worker A
Doctor/Therapist Other

Ability to Finance:

\--- There is Ample Money or Private Insurance There is Some Money or Private
Insurance There is No Money or Private Insurance I Am Interested in Financing
I Am Not Sure

Addiction(s):

\--- Alcohol Illicit (Street) Drugs Prescription Drugs A Combination of
Substances Other Addiction

Any Other Important Details:

I have read and agree to the conditions outlined in the Terms of Use and
Privacy Policy.

SEND

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Ratione ipsa
excepturi quae cum magnam quibusdam quos quam pariatur, libero veritatis aut
harum, laborum similique optio natus, nulla possimus necessitatibus soluta!

## How Our Helpline Works

For those seeking addiction treatment for themselves or a loved one, the
DrugAbuse.com helpline is a private and convenient solution.

**Calls to any general helpline (non-facility specific 1-8XX numbers) for your
visit will be answered by American Addiction Centers (AAC).**

We are standing by 24/7 to discuss your treatment options. Our representatives
work solely for AAC and will discuss whether an AAC facility may be an option
for you.

Our helpline is offered at no cost to you and with no obligation to enter into
treatment. Neither DrugAbuse.com nor AAC receives any commission or other fee
that is dependent upon which treatment provider a visitor may ultimately
choose.

For more information on AAC’s commitment to ethical marketing and treatment
practices, or to learn more about how to select a treatment provider, visit
our About AAC page.

If you wish to explore additional treatment options or connect with a specific
rehab center, you can visit our directory or SAMHSA’s treatment services
locator.

Ready for Drug or Alcohol Rehab?

Discuss Treatment Options Call Toll Free 24 Hours A Day

Call Us Today! 1-888-744-0069

Who Answers?

Select your state and then choose Alcohol Treatment or Drug Treatment

Please choose a state Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado
Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas
Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi
Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York
North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island
South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Drug Treatment Alcohol Treatment

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

