

Sections

Log in

* * *

Top News

U.S. News World News Featured Voices

Odd News

Entertainment

Movies Music TV

Sports

Soccer NFL NBA MLB

Photos

News Entertainment Sports Features Archives

More...

Defense Featured Science Health Archive Almanac

About Feedback

* * *

About Feedback

Search

Trending

House subpoenas

Chemical castration

'Avengers' game

Steve Lawrence

Tut sculpture

Iran missile

Helicopter crash

Famous birthdays

Extinct plants

Jon Stewart

Odd News

Jan. 20, 2009 / 7:09 PM

# Ice cream causes positive alcohol test

**___** _____( 0)

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/svc/sv/i/40821232496582/2009/1/12325528647036/Ice-

cream-causes-positive-alcohol-test.jpg)

![](/img/expand_gallery.svg)

FRANKSTON, Australia, Jan. 20 (UPI) -- An Australian man challenged to prove
his claim that ice cream gave him a blood alcohol reading demonstrated his
defense in court.

The man, whose name was not given, had asked Frankston Magistrates' Court to
remove the breath testing alcohol interlock device from his car, the
(Melbourne, Australia) Daily Sun reported Tuesday.

Prosecutors inquired why the machine had registered a "fail," which prevents
the car from starting, despite the man's claims that he had not been drinking.

The man claimed the alcohol reading was the result of eating a Bubble O' Bill
ice cream treat and Magistrate Rod Crisp ordered a test to be performed to
back up the claim. Police recorded the man's blood alcohol content as 0.00 and
performed the test a second time after he took a few bites of Bubble O' Bill,
yielding a 0.018 reading.

Crisp granted the man's request to remove the breath testing device from his
car.

Experts said consuming some foods or drinks before breath tests can cause a
false positive reading. It is recommended that that test subjects wait at
least 15 minutes in between eating and blowing into the machine.

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram for more UPI news and photos.

(0) Leave a comment

* * *

upi.com/3297181

### Trending Stories

Pittsburgh police get third loose alligator call in under a month

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/ph/st/th/6231560177323/2019/i/15601776281910/v1.5/Pittsburgh-

police-get-third-loose-alligator-call-in-under-a-month.jpg)

Lawnmower sets acceleration speed record in Germany

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/ph/st/th/4721560176586/2019/i/15601768394942/v1.5/Lawnmower-

sets-acceleration-speed-record-in-Germany.jpg)

Bear casually enjoys some candy atop California wall

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/ph/st/th/6191560175216/2019/i/15601758752323/v1.5/Bear-

casually-enjoys-some-candy-atop-California-wall.jpg)

Gas stop turns lucky when man wins $1 million lottery prize

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/ph/st/th/7451560181212/2019/upi/6c1790ea3fd8de7d2e59ee98604c164e/v1.5/Gas-

stop-turns-lucky-when-man-wins-1-million-lottery-prize.jpg)

Hippos wander into town to graze on rugby field

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/ph/st/th/3651560193364/2019/i/15601938688627/v1.5/Hippos-

wander-into-town-to-graze-on-rugby-field.jpg)

### Photo Gallery

![](https://cdnph.upi.com/related/8911560254808/3/v1.2/f53256ae437c81e872b9903b41a35224/upi/Rafael-

Nadal-Ashleigh-Barty-win-at-the-French-Open.jpg)
![](/img/photo_gallery_icon.svg)

Rafael Nadal, Ashleigh Barty win at the French Open

### Latest News

U.S. to house unaccompanied migrant children at Oklahoma's Fort Sill

U.S. Open: Tiger Woods aiming for Jack Nicklaus' major record in next 10 years

Jessica Chastain, Jake Gyllenhaal to star in 'The Division' movie

Egypt calls on Christie's not to auction Tut sculpture

Josh Hartnett, Bridget Regan, Nick Nolte to star in 'Paradise Lost' series

Back to Article

__

__

/

__

__ Back to top

![](/img/clear.gif)![](/img/clear.gif)

About UPI Contact Feedback Advertisements Submit News Tips

Copyright (C) 2019 United Press International, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Terms of UsePrivacy Policy

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-hqtKxhsRLFLuJ.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

