

Brought to you by our treatment providers

Get 24/7 help now: All calls free and confidential. (855) 826-4464

  * Find Rehab Go
  * Alcohol
    * Addiction and Abuse 
    * Addiction and Abuse
    * Is Your Drinking Out of Control?
    * Binge Drinking
    * How Long Does Alcohol Stay in Your System?
    * Is Alcohol a Depressant?
    * Symptoms and Warning Signs 
    * Symptoms and Warning Signs
    * Alcoholism Causes and Risk Factors
    * Genetics of Alcoholism
    * Withdrawal and Detox 
    * Alcohol Withdrawal and Detox
    * Alcohol Detox
    * Treatment and Rehab 
    * Treatment and Rehab
    * Intervention for Alcoholism
    * Alcoholism Cures
    * Government Alcohol Abuse Treatment
    * Aftercare Programs
    * Alcoholism Medications 
      * Acamprosate
      * Disulfiram
      * Naltrexone for Alcoholism Treatment
      * Benzodiazepines for Alcohol Withdrawal
    * Effects of Alcohol Abuse 
    * Alcohol-related Medical Conditions 
      * Alcohol and the Liver
      * Alcohol Poisoning
      * Alcohol and Depression
      * Alcohol and Dual Diagnosis
    * Mixing Alcohol With Other Drugs
    * Drunk Driving
    * Alcohol-Related Crime
    * Who Alcoholism Impacts 
    * High-Functioning Alcoholics
    * End Stage Alcoholism
    * How to Help an Alcoholic Parent
    * Stage an Intervention
    * The Impact of Alcoholism on Families
    * The 5 Types of Alcoholics
    * Alcohol Community
  * Drugs
    * Substances
    * Drug Classifications
    * Benzodiazepines 
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Ativan
    * Librium
    * Halcion
    * Klonopin
    * Rohypnol
    * Valium
    * Xanax
    * Illicit Drugs 
    * What are Illicit Drugs?
    * Ayahuasca
    * Cocaine
    * Crack Cocaine
    * DMT
    * Ecstasy
    * Inhalants
    * GHB
    * Hallucinogens
    * Heroin
    * Ketamine
    * LSD
    * Marijuana
    * Mescaline
    * Meth
    * PCP
    * Psilocybin Mushrooms
    * Salvia
    * Synthetic Marijuana
    * Opiates 
    * What are Opiates?
    * The Opioid Epidemic
    * How Long Do Opioids Stay in Your System?
    * Codeine
    * Darvocet and Darvon
    * Demerol
    * Dilaudid
    * Fentanyl
    * Hydrocodone
    * Methadone
    * Morphine
    * Over the Counter (OTC) Drugs
    * Oxycodone
    * Prescription Opioids
    * Synthetic Opioids
    * Tramadol
    * Sleeping Pills 
    * What are Sleeping Pills?
    * Ambien
    * Amytal
    * Lunesta
    * Sonata
    * Stimulants 
    * What are Stimulants?
    * Adderall
    * Antidepressants
    * Caffeine
    * Concerta
    * Dexedrine
    * Diet Pills
    * Nicotine
    * Ritalin
    * Steroids
    * Overdose
    * Drug Street Names
    * Behavioral Addictions 
    * Gambling Addiction
    * Plastic Surgery Addiction
    * Porn Addiction
    * Sex Addiction
    * Sugar Addiction
  * Treatment
    * Treatment
    * Treatment Journey 
    * Treatment Choices 
      * Inpatient Drug Rehab
      * Outpatient Drug Rehab
      * Inpatient vs. Outpatient Rehab
    * Intervention 
      * Intervention
      * An Interventionist's Perspective
      * When Do I Need to Hold an Intervention?
      * How Do I Hold an Intervention?
      * What Is an Enabler?
      * How Is Rehab Helpful After an Intervention?
      * 10 Steps to Take if an Alcoholic or Addict Refuses Treatment
      * City-Based Interventions 
      * New York City Drug and Alcohol Interventions
      * Miami Drug and Alcohol Interventions
    * Treatment Process 
      * Overview
      * Drug and Alcohol Detox
      * Treatment Medications 
      * Addiction Treatment Medications
      * Clonidine
      * Naloxone (Narcan)
      * Naltrexone for Opioid Addiction
      * Suboxone
      * 12-Step Programs
    * Treatment Therapies 
      * Biofeedback Therapy
      * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
      * Dialectical Behavior Therapy
      * EMDR Therapy
      * Equine Therapy
      * Experiential Therapy
      * Faith-Based Drug and Alcohol Rehab
      * Healthy Relationships
      * Holistic Therapy
      * Motivational Enhancement Therapy
      * NAD Therapy
      * TMS Therapy
    * Support Groups 
      * 12-Step Programs
      * Alcoholics Anonymous
      * Narcotics Anonymous
      * Al-Anon
      * Alcoholics Anonymous: The Big Book
      * SMART Recovery
    * Questions About Rehab 
    * Paying for Rehab 
      * Cost of Drug and Alcohol Rehab
      * How Do I Pay for Addiction Treatment?
    * Rehab & Insurance 
      * Aetna
      * BlueCross BlueShield
      * Cigna
      * Affordable Care Act
      * Medicaid and Medicare
      * United Healthcare
      * Humana
      * Beacon Health Options
      * Magellan Health
    * Before Rehab 
      * Questions About Rehab
      * How Do I Prepare for Rehab?
      * How to Know if You Need Help
      * Should I Travel For Rehab?
      * Why Does Rehab Have a Stigma?
      * What Makes a Top-Rated Treatment Center?
      * How Do I Choose the Right Rehab?
      * How Long Does Detox Take?
    * During Rehab 
      * Can I Do It On My Own?
      * Caring for Loved Ones
      * What Medications Are Used?
      * What if I have a co­-occurring disorder?
      * How Long Does Treatment Take?
      * What Is a Typical Day in Drug Rehab Like?
      * What to Bring to Rehab
    * After Rehab 
      * Life After Rehab
      * Can I Get My Job Back After Rehab?
      * How Do I Regain My Loved Ones' Trust?
      * How Do I Stay Sober After Rehab?
      * Should I Go Back to Rehab?
      * What Happens if I Relapse?
      * Will My Social Life Change After Rehab?
      * How Do I Help a Recovering Addict or Alcoholic?
  * Community
    * Blog
    * Browse Categories 
    * Alcohol
    * Celebrity
    * Drug News
    * Education
    * Expert Insight
    * Heroin
    * Legislation
    * Lifestyle
    * Marijuana
    * Mental Health
    * News
    * Prescription Drugs
    * Prevention
    * Recovery
    * Treatment Centers
    * Addiction Info 
    * Addiction
    * 10 Most Common Addictions
    * Addiction vs. Dependence
    * Addiction and the Brain
    * Addiction Statistics
    * Treatment Center Myths
    * Your Loved Ones and Addiction
    * The Role of Family in Addiction Recovery
    * Who Addiction Affects 
    * Co-Disorders 
      * Dual Diagnosis
      * ADHD
      * Bipolar Disorder
      * Borderline Personality Disorder
      * Depression
      * Eating Disorders
      * Generalized Anxiety Disorder
      * Insomnia
      * Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
      * Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
      * Postpartum Depression
      * Schizophrenia
    * Who Addiction Affects 
      * Community Resources
      * Cancer Patients
      * Differences Between Men and Women
      * Domestic Violence
      * The Disabled Community
      * Elderly
      * Emergency Responders
      * Homelessness
      * LGBTQ
      * Medical Professionals
      * Pregnant Women
      * Rural Areas
      * Teens
      * Veterans
      * Workplace
    * College Students 
      * College Drug Abuse
      * Addiction Treatment for College Students
      * College Drug Abuse vs Addiction
      * Drinking and Drug Abuse in Greek Life
      * Eating Disorders in College
      * Facts and Statistics of College Drug Abuse
      * Prescription Study Aid Abuse
      * Preventing Substance Abuse in College
    * Teenagers 
      * Teen Drug Abuse
      * Health Effects of Teen Substance Abuse
      * Teen Addiction Treatment
      * Teen Co-Occurring Disorders
      * Teenage Substance Abuse Prevention
      * Underage Drinking
    * International 
      * UK 
      * Addiction in the UK
      * Finding Treatment Outside the UK
      * Canada 
      * Addiction in Canada
      * Finding Treatment Outside Of Canada
      * Australia 
      * Addiction in Australia
      * Finding Treatment Outside of Australia
    * Health & Safety 
      * Addiction and HIV/AIDS
      * Addiction and Hepatitis
      * Addiction and the Brain
      * Addiction and Suicide
      * Driving Under the Influence (DUI)
  * Search 

# These Are The 5 Most Addictive Substances On Earth

by Addiction Center | March 9, 2016

  * **Categories:**
  * Alcohol
  * Blog
  * Drug News
  * Heroin
  * Prescription Drugs
  * Prevention
  * Recovery

## Which Drugs Have The Highest Rate Of Dependence?

Over the years, there has been much debate among researchers regarding which
substances should be classified as the “most addictive”. An addiction is
marked by compulsive substance-seeking behavior, a growing tolerance to the
drug or alcohol and the presence of withdrawal symptoms when use is stopped.

According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, approximately 22.7 million
Americans (8.6 percent) have an addiction to drugs or alcohol.

With such a significant percent of the population having an addiction, it’s
important to take a deeper look into which substances are particularly
difficult to overcome a dependence on.

### Measuring Addictiveness Of Various Substances

Due to the lack of a definitive ranking system for drug dependency, British
drug and addiction psychiatrist David Nutt and his team of researchers set out
to produce a conclusive list of the most addictive substances on the planet.
Utilizing a panel of addiction experts, Nutt’s team created a list of the 5
substances with the highest potential to become habit-forming.

So, what kind of criteria is used to determine exactly how addictive a certain
substance can be?

There were a few aspects researchers considered when rating each drug:

![heroin](/app/uploads/2016/03/bigstock-drug-addiction-on-the-old-

wood-75808930-300x200.jpg)

  * The extent to which the drug activates the brain’s dopamine system
  * How pleasurable people report the drug to be
  * The degree to which the drug causes withdrawal symptoms
  * How easily a person trying the drug will become hooked
  * How much physical and cognitive harm the drug causes
  * The street value of the drug

The researcher’s findings will be helpful during addiction treatment and
relapse prevention, as it informs medical staff and counselors of added
obstacles that lie ahead for individuals with addictions that are particularly
hard to overcome. They could then spend additional time identifying triggers
and planning for relapse prevention.

### **The 5 Most Addictive Substances On Earth**

Addiction of any kind is likely to wreak havoc on an individual’s life, but
there are various substances that have qualities that make them especially
hard to beat.

#### 5\. Nicotine

Nicotine, the highly addictive substance found in tobacco products, is the
most common addiction in America. More than two-thirds of Americans who tried
cigarettes or chewing tobacco report being dependent at some point during
their lifetime.

#### 4\. Barbiturates (“downers”)

These substances are typically used to treat anxiety and induce sleep. Popular
street names for barbiturates include blue bullets, gorillas, nembies, bars
and pink ladies. At low doses, these drugs can produce euphoria, but at higher
doses it can result in overdose due to suppressed breathing.

#### 3\. Cocaine

An estimated 14-20 million people worldwide use cocaine, resulting in a
billion-dollar industry. Cocaine reacts with the brain’s level of dopamine,
preventing neurons from turning the “feel good” signal off. This results in
abnormal activation of the brain’s reward pathways. An estimated 21 percent of
people who try cocaine will become addicted at some point in their lifetime.

#### 2\. Alcohol

Addiction to beer, wine or liquor can have a very negative effect on the body
and mind that is often irreversible. Studies have shown that alcohol increases
the level of dopamine in the brain’s reward system by as much as 360 percent.
This legalized substance has a death rate of over 3 million per year.

#### 1\. Heroin

Heroin takes the number one spot as the most addictive substance on the
planet. On Nutt’s addiction scale, it ranked a 2.5 out of a maximum score of
3\. This potent opiate has an alarming rate of addiction, with one in four
individuals who try heroin becoming addicted. What makes this drug
particularly dangerous is that the dose that can cause death is only five
times greater than the dose required for a high. Additionally, heroin has an
extremely high risk of death from a relapse.

### Getting Help For An Addiction

The symptoms of addiction vary depending on the substance being abused, but
there are various general warning signs that an addiction has taken root:

  * An overwhelming desire to use
  * Problems at school, work or at home
  * Changes in physical appearance
  * Secretive behavior or unexplained absences

Addiction treatment remains the most effective and safest way to overcome an
addiction and achieve sustained sobriety — especially to any of the top 5 most
addictive substances on the planet.

Check out The Five Most Commonly Abused Drugs On College Campuses for more
information.

Last Edited: June 7, 2019

![Photo of Addiction

Center](/app/uploads/2017/06/0ec5eea65f678c9d354096a42b7db6af-150x150.jpg)

##### Author

Addiction Center

  * About

Since 2014, Addiction Center has been an informational web guide for those who
are struggling with substance use disorders and co-occurring behavioral and
mental health disorders. All content included on Addiction Center is created
by our team of researchers and journalists. of our articles are fact-based and
sourced from relevant publications, government agencies and medical journals.

##### Get started on the road to recovery.

![sidebar_cta_img](/app/uploads/2017/08/sidebar_cta_img-e1503431142962.jpg)

Find Out How

##### Questions about treatment?

Get confidential help 24/7. Call now for:

  * Access to top treatment centers
  * Caring, supportive guidance
  * Financial assistance options

(855) 826-4464

##### Popular Authors

  * Jeffrey Juergens
  * Jerry Lawson
  * Mia Williams, MS

##### See how Jerry

overcame his  
addiction.

![Jerry Lawson sitting in a

chair](/app/uploads/2017/08/jerry_small_bg-e1504123506687.jpg)

Watch Jerry's Story

##### Get Answers to Your Questions

  * Can I Use Medicaid And Medicare?
  * How Much Does Treatment Cost?
  * Can I Use Insurance For Rehab?
  * What Is Inpatient Drug Rehab?
  * What Is Outpatient Drug Rehab?
  * USA Top 10 Drug Rehab Centers
  * How Can I Stage An Intervention?

##### Is your loved one

in need of help?

![Meeting Of Support Group](/app/uploads/2018/03/familylp_ad_bg.jpg)

Learn What You Can Do

### Related Articles

![Thumnail photo of The Synthetic Marijuana Outbreak: Legal and

Lethal](/app/uploads/2018/07/The-Synthetic-Marijuana-Outbreak-Legal-and-

Lethal.jpeg)

#### The Synthetic Marijuana Outbreak: Legal and Lethal

by: Cooper Smith | July 3, 2018

A new synthetic marijuana outbreak has taken to the streets. It isn't il...

Read more

  * Categories:
  * Drug News
  * Marijuana
  * News

![Thumnail photo of Pain Clinics in America: The Danger of Pill

Mills](/app/uploads/2014/04/Pain-Clinics-in-America-The-Danger-of-Pill-

Mills.jpg)

#### Pain Clinics in America: The Danger of Pill Mills

by: Addiction Center | April 18, 2014

A pain clinic is a medical facility that diagnoses provides painkillers ...

Read more

  * Categories:
  * Drug News
  * Legislation
  * News
  * Prescription Drugs

![Thumnail photo of Getting on Your Nerves \(Literally\): How Opioids

Work](/app/uploads/2019/05/how_do_opioids_work.jpeg)

#### Getting on Your Nerves (Literally): How Opioids Work

by: Michael Muldoon | May 22, 2019

Opioids interact with many parts of the body, from single nerve cell rec...

Read more

  * Categories:
  * opioids
  * Heroin
  * Prescription Drugs

### Sign-up for our newsletter

Vital perspectives on fighting addiction delivered straight to your inbox.

Sign up

  * Find a Center
    * All listings
    * Add your center
  * Alcohol
    * Symptoms and Warning Signs
    * Withdrawal and Detox
    * Treatment and Rehab
    * Alcohol Community
  * Drugs
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Illicit Drugs
    * Opiates
    * Sleeping Pills
    * Stimulants
  * Treatment
    * Drug and Alcohol Detox
    * Inpatient Rehab
    * Outpatient Rehab
    * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
    * Questions About Rehab
    * Support Groups
  * Addiction
    * How to Stage an Intervention
    * 10 Most Common Addictions
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * Community Resources
  * Community
    * Education
    * Lifestyle
    * Recovery

![HONConduct267448_s1](/app/uploads/2017/03/HONConduct267448_s1.png)

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information:  
verify here.

Addiction Center supports:

![SAMHSA Logo](/app/uploads/2017/05/samhsa_logo.png)

Copyright © 2019 AddictionCenter.com |  
For immediate treatment help call:  
(855) 826-4464

  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Privacy Policy
  * Disclaimer

  * Where do calls go? 

  * Brought to You by Providers 

    * Ambrosia Treatment Center
    * Delphi Behavioral Health Group
    * Sunlight Recovery Center

AddictionCenter.com is a referral service that provides information about
addiction treatment practitioners and facilities. AddictionCenter.com is not a
medical provider or treatment facility and does not provide medical advice.
AddictionCenter.com does not endorse any treatment facility or guarantee the
quality of care provided, or the results to be achieved, by any treatment
facility. The information provided by AddictionCenter.com is not a substitute
for professional treatment advice.

Get 24/7 help now. All calls free and confidential.

(855) 826-4464

### Take the first step into recovery today.

![flyout_test_bg](/app/uploads/2018/04/flyout_test_bg.jpg)

Find a Treatment Center

### Take control of your life

Our treatment specialists offer 24/7 assistance.

  * Access to top treatment centers
  * Caring, supportive guidance
  * Financial assistance options

Call now:

(855) 826-4464

OR

Have us call you:

(877) 746-0480

Get a Call

### Where do calls go?

Calls to numbers on a specific treatment center will be routed to that
treatment center. Other calls will be primarily routed to our partners at
Addiction Campuses, Delphi Behavioral Health Group, and Sunlight Recovery
Center.

![Delphi Behavioral Health Group](/app/uploads/2019/05/delphi.png)  
![Sunlight Recovery Center](/app/uploads/2019/05/sunlightrecovery.png)

Additional calls will also be forwarded and returned by one of our treatment
partners below

  * Ambrosia Treatment Center
  * Ardu Recovery Center
  * Capo by the Sea
  * Deer Hollow Recovery and Wellness
  * Medical Concierge Recovery
  * Oceanside Malibu Addiction Treatment Center
  * Palm Partners
  * Shoreline Recovery Center
  * Southern California Sunrise Recovery Center

All calls are private and confidential. Find out more about Addiction Center.

A treatment facility paid to have their center promoted here. Learn more about
how to be featured in a paid listing.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

