

Skip To Content

  * BuzzFeed News
  * BuzzFeed Reviews
  * BuzzFeed Tasty
  * BuzzFeed Goodful
  * BuzzFeed Bring Me
  * BuzzFeed As Is

__Homepage

  * News
  * Quizzes
  * TV & Movies
  * Shopping
  * Trending
  * Videos
  * Newsletters

Search BuzzFeedSearch BuzzFeed

  * lol Badge Feed
  * win Badge Feed
  * trending Badge Feed

Log in or sign up to post and comment!

## Browse Sections

  * Animals
  * Buzz
  * Celebrity
  * Community
  * Entertainment
  * Food
  * Gift Guides
  * Health
  * Life
  * Music
  * News
  * Nifty
  * Parents
  * Politics
  * Rewind
  * Shopping
  * Style
  * Travel: Bring Me
  * TV & Movies
  * Unsolved
  * Weddings

## About

  * About Us
  * Advertise
  * Jobs
  * Merch
  * Newsletters

  * Press

  * RSS
  * Privacy
  * Consent Preferences
  * User Terms
  * Ad Choices
  * Help
  * Contact
  * Sitemap

EditionUSUKAustraliaBrasilCanadaDeutschlandIndiaJapanMexico

© 2019 BuzzFeed, Inc

  * _BuzzFeed News_ Reporting on what you care about. We hold major institutions accountable and expose wrongdoing.
  * _BuzzFeed Reviews_ We test and find the best products. No matter your budget, we got you covered.
  * _BuzzFeed Tasty_ Search, watch, and cook every single Tasty recipe and video ever - all in one place!
  * _BuzzFeed Goodful_ Self care and ideas to help you live a healthier, happier life.
  * _BuzzFeed Bring Me_ Places that’ll instantly make you say, “bring me.”
  * _BuzzFeed As Is_ Something for everyone interested in hair, makeup, style, and body positivity.

# 24 Tips For Getting Stoned Like A Pro In Amsterdam

**Here's what to expect if you're heading to the Netherlands to get blazed.**

Posted on April 20, 2015, 13:26 GMT

![Mathew Guiver](https://img.buzzfeed.com/buzzfeed-

static/static/2015-01/6/13/user_images/webdr09/mathewguiver-6240-1420569072-0_large.jpg?downsize=60:*&output-

format=auto&output-quality=auto)

Mathew Guiver

BuzzFeed Staff

Share On facebook Share On facebook Share

Share On vk Share On vk Share

Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Share On pinterest
Pin

Share On lineapp Share On lineapp

Share On twitter Share On twitter Share

Share On email Share On email Email

Share On sms Share On sms

Share On whatsapp Share On whatsapp

Share On more Share On more More

Share On tumblr Share On tumblr

Share On link Share On link

Share On copy Share On copy Copy Link

![](https://img.buzzfeed.com/buzzfeed-

static/static/2015-04/19/7/enhanced/webdr15/enhanced-26897-1429444234-2.jpg?downsize=700%3A%2A&output-

quality=auto&output-format=auto&output-quality=auto&output-

format=auto&downsize=360:*)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

## 1\. Head right to a coffeeshop!

![It’s legal to buy marijuana at coffeeshops in Amsterdam, and there are

literally hundreds of them throughout the city. Trust me, you’ll have no

problem finding weed in Amsterdam! Just make sure that you go to a

“coffeeshop.” Not a “coffee shop,” “café,” or “coffee house.” Cafés are

usually the equivalent of a bar, and coffee shops not selling marijuana are

called koffiehuis \(which translates to coffee house in English\).Technically,

the coffeeshops themselves operate in a bit of a legal gray area, as the

suppliers they get the cannabis from aren’t supposed to be growing or selling

marijuana. It’s a technicality that goes unnoticed, though, as there's

weed aplenty!](https://img.buzzfeed.com/buzzfeed-

static/static/2015-04/19/7/enhanced/webdr04/enhanced-14697-1429444306-3.jpg?downsize=700%3A%2A&output-

quality=auto&output-format=auto&output-quality=auto&output-

format=auto&downsize=360:*)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

It’s legal to buy marijuana at coffeeshops in Amsterdam, and there are
literally hundreds of them throughout the city. Trust me, you’ll have no
problem finding weed in Amsterdam! Just make sure that you go to a
“coffeeshop.” Not a “coffee shop,” “café,” or “coffee house.” Cafés are
usually the equivalent of a bar, and coffee shops not selling marijuana are
called _koffiehuis_ (which translates to coffee house in English).

Technically, the coffeeshops themselves operate in a bit of a legal gray area,
as the suppliers they get the cannabis from aren’t supposed to be growing or
selling marijuana. It’s a technicality that goes unnoticed, though, as there's
weed aplenty!

## 2\. Don’t expect much in the way of window signage, since advertising

marijuana is illegal.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

You won’t find any “marijuana sold here” decals in the windows, but rest
assured, if the sign outside says “coffeeshop,” then the establishment sells
ganja. Also, if you’re googling venues before visiting, then don’t worry if a
website doesn’t list marijuana or soft drugs. Again, if it’s a coffeeshop,
then it’ll have weed.

## 3\. Every coffeeshop is different, so explore town to find a place you

like.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

When I said there are literally hundreds of coffeeshops in Amsterdam, I wasn’t
exaggerating. There are more coffeeshops then you could possibly visit during
a stay in the city, but be sure to spend some time exploring to find a
coffeeshop that you enjoy. They come in all shapes and sizes, have different
strains of marijuana, and have totally different environments.

Some are set up as multiroom lounges with board and arcade games, while others
are more like quick shops (without any seats) for marijuana buyers looking to
get their weed in a timely manner. Don’t just set up camp at the first
coffeeshop you visit; take some time to explore and find one that you’ll enjoy
patrolling.

## 4\. You pretty much just walk in and buy weed.

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![Buying marijuana is

Amsterdam is a stress-free process. Honestly, there’s nothing to it. You walk

in, ask for your herb, then pay the budtender. Legally, coffeeshops can sell

marijuana to customers over the age of 18, but most won’t check your ID unless

you plan to spend time smoking or vaping on site.The legal limit is five grams

per person, so if you’re with multiple people then you can buy more. But given

that there are so many coffeeshops throughout the city, you’ll have no problem

finding another should you smoke through all five grams \(!!!\) and need

more.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![Buying marijuana is

Amsterdam is a stress-free process. Honestly, there’s nothing to it. You walk

in, ask for your herb, then pay the budtender. Legally, coffeeshops can sell

marijuana to customers over the age of 18, but most won’t check your ID unless

you plan to spend time smoking or vaping on site.The legal limit is five grams

per person, so if you’re with multiple people then you can buy more. But given

that there are so many coffeeshops throughout the city, you’ll have no problem

finding another should you smoke through all five grams \(!!!\) and need

more.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

FOX / Via giphy.com

Buying marijuana is Amsterdam is a stress-free process. Honestly, there’s
nothing to it. You walk in, ask for your herb, then pay the budtender.
Legally, coffeeshops can sell marijuana to customers over the age of 18, but
most won’t check your ID unless you plan to spend time smoking or vaping on
site.

The legal limit is five grams per person, so if you’re with multiple people
then you can buy more. But given that there are so many coffeeshops throughout
the city, you’ll have no problem finding another should you smoke through all
five grams (!!!) and need more.

## 5\. Bring cash with you, because some coffeeshops don’t take cards.

![It seems like the majority of the coffeeshops I visited during my stay in

Amsterdam were cash only. We did come across a few that took cards, but they

were definitely in the minority. Just make sure you have a chip and PIN card

though, which is pretty much the standard now in

Europe.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

It seems like the majority of the coffeeshops I visited during my stay in
Amsterdam were cash only. We did come across a few that took cards, but they
were definitely in the minority. Just make sure you have a chip and PIN card
though, which is pretty much the standard now in Europe.

## 6\. “Joints” have tobacco; “pure joints” are just marijuana.

![At most coffeeshops you can usually buy either weed by the gram, hash oils,

or joints. But be warned: “Joints” are usually rolled with marijuana and

tobacco. If you want something without tobacco, then look for what’s labeled

as a “pure joint.” No labels? Well, if the joint is priced under €5, then it’s

most likely a tobacco-and-weed joint. The pure weed joints are usually between

€8 and

€10.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

At most coffeeshops you can usually buy either weed by the gram, hash oils, or
joints. But be warned: “Joints” are usually rolled with marijuana and tobacco.
If you want something without tobacco, then look for what’s labeled as a “pure
joint.” No labels? Well, if the joint is priced under €5, then it’s most
likely a tobacco-and-weed joint. The pure weed joints are usually between €8
and €10.

## 7\. Most coffeeshops have menus, but they aren’t always descriptive.

![The menu will tell you what types of weed, joints, and hash the coffeeshop

has for sale. However, don’t expect the menus to tell you much about the herb,

because they usually don’t say much other than the names of the strains and

the price in euros.Another thing to be aware of is that because of the

advertising restrictions, the menus aren’t supposed to be removed from the

main counter. Some shops go to the extreme of having the menu under glass,

while most don’t even bother. The advertising policy seems to be a lighter

rule, but that doesn’t mean you won’t get scolded for moving a menu at a

touchy establishment. It’s probably a good rule of thumb just not to touch or

move the

menus.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

The menu will tell you what types of weed, joints, and hash the coffeeshop has
for sale. However, don’t expect the menus to tell you much about the herb,
because they usually don’t say much other than the names of the strains and
the price in euros.

Another thing to be aware of is that because of the advertising restrictions,
the menus aren’t supposed to be removed from the main counter. Some shops go
to the extreme of having the menu under glass, while most don’t even bother.
The advertising policy seems to be a lighter rule, but that doesn’t mean you
won’t get scolded for moving a menu at a touchy establishment. It’s probably a
good rule of thumb just not to touch or move the menus.

## 8\. Ask for recommendations.

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![If you know that you like

a strong sativa strain, then ask the person behind the counter. The Dutch can

be rather straightforward and probably won’t want to engage in a lengthy

conversation with you, but the budtenders will definitely offer you a

recommendation.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![If you know that you like

a strong sativa strain, then ask the person behind the counter. The Dutch can

be rather straightforward and probably won’t want to engage in a lengthy

conversation with you, but the budtenders will definitely offer you a

recommendation.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

The Weinstein Company / Via giphy.com

If you know that you like a strong sativa strain, then ask the person behind
the counter. The Dutch can be rather straightforward and probably won’t want
to engage in a lengthy conversation with you, but the budtenders will
definitely offer you a recommendation.

## 9\. Always look at the weed before buying it.

![Although coffeeshops are touchy about advertising and menus, they usually

have the marijuana sitting in clear containers and will happily let you look

at \(and even smell\) a few strains of herb before making your purchase. And

thankfully so, because as most of us stoners know, there are a few obvious

signs of jank weed \(light yellow color, no visible crystals, etc.\) If the

bud looks iffy, then don’t buy much of it until you’ve had a chance to smoke

some.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Although coffeeshops are touchy about advertising and menus, they usually have
the marijuana sitting in clear containers and will happily let you look at
(and even smell) a few strains of herb before making your purchase. And
thankfully so, because as most of us stoners know, there are a few obvious
signs of jank weed (light yellow color, no visible crystals, etc.) If the bud
looks iffy, then don’t buy much of it until you’ve had a chance to smoke some.

## 10\. A lot of coffeeshops don’t sell bongs or pipes.

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![Don’t expect to be able

to get all of your smoking gear at your first stop, because most coffeeshops

don’t sell bongs or pipes. They’ll sell joints, and if the establishment

allows smoking inside then they won’t mind if you bring your own pipe to use,

but yeah, most don’t sell paraphernalia. A lot also have vapes on site that

you can use, but rarely sell ones you can take back with

you.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![Don’t expect to be able

to get all of your smoking gear at your first stop, because most coffeeshops

don’t sell bongs or pipes. They’ll sell joints, and if the establishment

allows smoking inside then they won’t mind if you bring your own pipe to use,

but yeah, most don’t sell paraphernalia. A lot also have vapes on site that

you can use, but rarely sell ones you can take back with

you.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

giphy.com

Don’t expect to be able to get all of your smoking gear at your first stop,
because most coffeeshops don’t sell bongs or pipes. They’ll sell joints, and
if the establishment allows smoking inside then they won’t mind if you bring
your own pipe to use, but yeah, most don’t sell paraphernalia. A lot also have
vapes on site that you can use, but rarely sell ones you can take back with
you.

## 11\. Luckily, there are plenty of other places to find them!

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

The Netherlands has no real drug paraphernalia laws, so you’ll see bongs in
the windows of shops all over Amsterdam, especially near the Red Light
District. Heads up though: Most of the pipes, bongs, and other paraphernalia
seem like they’re mass-produced. The bongs you find in one store are probably
going to be the same that you find throughout town, so there’s no real need to
go hunting for the “perfect” bong.

## 12\. Ask for joint papers and a lighter.

![The coffeeshops will give you a few papers if you want to roll your own

joints, as well as strips of paper to make a bridge at the tip. They’ll also

let you borrow a lighter for your smoke session and will typically sell

branded lighters and packs of

papers.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

The coffeeshops will give you a few papers if you want to roll your own
joints, as well as strips of paper to make a bridge at the tip. They’ll also
let you borrow a lighter for your smoke session and will typically sell
branded lighters and packs of papers.

## 13\. Make sure it's OK to smoke before you light up.

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![Probably 90% of the

coffeeshops I visited in Amsterdam had smoking sections. Sometimes the whole

shop is a smoke lounge where you can get your blaze on, but most coffeeshops

have a designated smoking area. Some, however, are set up more as marijuana

to-go shops that don’t allow smoking or vaping of any sort. When you buy your

weed, always make sure to ask where, and if you’re allowed to

smoke.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![Probably 90% of the

coffeeshops I visited in Amsterdam had smoking sections. Sometimes the whole

shop is a smoke lounge where you can get your blaze on, but most coffeeshops

have a designated smoking area. Some, however, are set up more as marijuana

to-go shops that don’t allow smoking or vaping of any sort. When you buy your

weed, always make sure to ask where, and if you’re allowed to

smoke.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Probably 90% of the coffeeshops I visited in Amsterdam had smoking sections.
Sometimes the whole shop is a smoke lounge where you can get your blaze on,
but most coffeeshops have a designated smoking area. Some, however, are set up
more as marijuana to-go shops that don’t allow smoking or vaping of any sort.
When you buy your weed, always make sure to ask where, and if you’re allowed
to smoke.

## 14\. The coffeeshops usually serve snack snacks!

![Candy, water, and almost always some type of coffee. My favorite was the

Pringles dispenser situated in the corner of one coffeeshop, where you could

start poppin' for only

€2.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Candy, water, and almost always some type of coffee. My favorite was the
Pringles dispenser situated in the corner of one coffeeshop, where you could
start poppin' for only €2.

## 15\. But the actual coffee they serve isn’t always that good.

![Every coffeeshop that I visited sold some sort of coffee. However, not all

of the coffee was all that good. Some shops definitely took pride in their

coffee and made delicious espresso beverages. Others had instant coffee

machines that spit out almost undrinkable cups of joe. Of course, you're

not really there for the actual coffee, so if you only see what looks like an

instant coffee machine, buy your weed and get your caffeine fix

elsewhere.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Every coffeeshop that I visited sold some sort of coffee. However, not all of
the coffee was all that good. Some shops definitely took pride in their coffee
and made delicious espresso beverages. Others had instant coffee machines that
spit out almost undrinkable cups of joe. Of course, you're not really there
for the actual coffee, so if you only see what looks like an instant coffee
machine, buy your weed and get your caffeine fix elsewhere.

## 16\. Check for the Wi-Fi sign.

![Some coffeeshops have Wi-Fi \(the good ones, IMO\), but a lot surprisingly

don’t. And it’s surprising because free Wi-Fi is somewhat ubiquitous in larger

European cities. So if you’re looking for a place to smoke, hang out, and post

pics to Instagram, then look for the Wi-Fi sign in the window before you

enter.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Some coffeeshops have Wi-Fi (the good ones, IMO), but a lot surprisingly
don’t. And it’s surprising because free Wi-Fi is somewhat ubiquitous in larger
European cities. So if you’re looking for a place to smoke, hang out, and post
pics to Instagram, then look for the Wi-Fi sign in the window before you
enter.

## 17\. Weed quality and prices vary, so look for herb outside the city core.

![Every shop has a different menu, with different prices. In my experience,

shops closer to popular tourist destinations and train stations sold somewhat

shoddier herb, while shops further away from high-trafficked streets tended to

offer better bud. I actually found my favorite weed at a coffeeshop in an

empty side street a few blocks from

Rembrandtplein.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Every shop has a different menu, with different prices. In my experience,
shops closer to popular tourist destinations and train stations sold somewhat
shoddier herb, while shops further away from high-trafficked streets tended to
offer better bud. I actually found my favorite weed at a coffeeshop in an
empty side street a few blocks from Rembrandtplein.

## 18\. Coffeeshops can’t sell alcohol, but you can smoke inside a lot of

bars.

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![If you want to get your

crossfade on, hit up a coffeeshop for herb, then find a bar that will let you

smoke inside. Don’t worry though, there are PLENTY of bars that let you smoke

marijuana inside. It’s illegal for coffeeshops to sell alcohol, and it’s a

rule that’s pretty strictly

followed.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![If you want to get your

crossfade on, hit up a coffeeshop for herb, then find a bar that will let you

smoke inside. Don’t worry though, there are PLENTY of bars that let you smoke

marijuana inside. It’s illegal for coffeeshops to sell alcohol, and it’s a

rule that’s pretty strictly

followed.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Paramount Pictures

If you want to get your crossfade on, hit up a coffeeshop for herb, then find
a bar that will let you smoke inside. Don’t worry though, there are PLENTY of
bars that let you smoke marijuana inside. It’s illegal for coffeeshops to sell
alcohol, and it’s a rule that’s pretty strictly followed.

## 19\. Liquor stores and small markets sell edibles.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Some but not all coffeeshops will sell edibles in addition to grams of herb
and joints. But smaller markets and liquors stores throughout the city sell
lollipops, “space cakes,” and other weed-infused goodies.

## 20\. Smoking marijuana in public is illegal, but not really enforced.

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![A lot of coffeeshops have

outdoor smoking areas, and you’ll frequently see locals and tourists smoking

joints out in the open. Smoking marijuana in public is technically against

Dutch law, though it’s not really enforced. As long as you aren’t acting

foolish and drawing attention to yourself, people generally won’t bat an eye

if you’re puffing off a joint as you walk along a

canal.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Tap to play or pause GIF Tap to play or pause GIF ![A lot of coffeeshops have

outdoor smoking areas, and you’ll frequently see locals and tourists smoking

joints out in the open. Smoking marijuana in public is technically against

Dutch law, though it’s not really enforced. As long as you aren’t acting

foolish and drawing attention to yourself, people generally won’t bat an eye

if you’re puffing off a joint as you walk along a

canal.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

FOX / Via giphy.com

A lot of coffeeshops have outdoor smoking areas, and you’ll frequently see
locals and tourists smoking joints out in the open. Smoking marijuana in
public is technically against Dutch law, though it’s not really enforced. As
long as you aren’t acting foolish and drawing attention to yourself, people
generally won’t bat an eye if you’re puffing off a joint as you walk along a
canal.

## 21\. Smart shops don’t sell weed. They sell “mushrooms” and other “mind”

drugs.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

They’re called “magic mushrooms,” but they aren’t actually mushrooms. The sale
of actual hallucinogenic mushrooms was banned in 2007, so instead smart shops
sell truffles that have basically the same affect on you as mushrooms. They
also sell other mind-altering drugs like salvia, peyote, and other
psychedelics.

## 22\. Hotels usually frown on smoking, but many Airbnb places allow smoking

and soft drugs.

![Before booking your trip, make sure you consider your smoking habits. If

you’re a frequent smoker and are looking for a place where you can rip your

new bong at night before bed then you may want to consider staying at a rental

property instead of a hotel, as most don’t allow smoking indoors. Just be sure

to email potential hosts to find out what their policy is regarding marijuana.

As you can see from the picture above, our Airbnb was marijuana and soft drug

friendly.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

Before booking your trip, make sure you consider your smoking habits. If
you’re a frequent smoker and are looking for a place where you can rip your
new bong at night before bed then you may want to consider staying at a rental
property instead of a hotel, as most don’t allow smoking indoors. Just be sure
to email potential hosts to find out what their policy is regarding marijuana.
As you can see from the picture above, our Airbnb was marijuana and soft drug
friendly.

## 23\. Be extra careful of bikers while exploring the city stoned.

![The bikers are everywhere and they don’t stop or even slow down very often.

Bike lanes are practically more common than sidewalks in Amsterdam. If you

wander out of a coffeeshop stoned \(and without checking both ways\), there’s

a strong possibility you could put yourself or someone else in

danger.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Aleramo / Getty Images

The bikers are everywhere and they don’t stop or even slow down very often.
Bike lanes are practically more common than sidewalks in Amsterdam. If you
wander out of a coffeeshop stoned (and without checking both ways), there’s a
strong possibility you could put yourself or someone else in danger.

## 24\. Don’t buy weed from anywhere besides coffeeshops.

![And if you’re going with any other drug, then make sure you buy it at a

smart shop. Do not buy drugs from random street dealers.I personally wasn’t

approached by anyone selling drugs during my visit, but did see signs at

numerous shops with warnings that white heroin was being sold on the street

labeled as cocaine. Apparently snorting the substance could lead to very, very

serious health complications. In other words, don’t fuck up your visit by

doing anything stupid. Stick to legitimate establishments, use your best

judgment, and have a great time getting stoned in

Amsterdam!](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

Mathew Guiver / BuzzFeed

And if you’re going with any other drug, then make sure you buy it at a smart
shop. Do not buy drugs from random street dealers.

I personally wasn’t approached by anyone selling drugs during my visit, but
did see signs at numerous shops with warnings that white heroin was being sold
on the street labeled as cocaine. Apparently snorting the substance could lead
to very, very serious health complications.

In other words, don’t fuck up your visit by doing anything stupid. Stick to
legitimate establishments, use your best judgment, and have a great time
getting stoned in Amsterdam!

Share On facebook Share On facebook Share

Share On vk Share On vk Share

Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Share On pinterest
Pin

Share On lineapp Share On lineapp

Share On twitter Share On twitter Share

Share On email Share On email Email

Share On sms Share On sms

Share On whatsapp Share On whatsapp

Share On more Share On more More

Share On tumblr Share On tumblr

Share On link Share On link

Share On copy Share On copy Copy Link

####

## Advertisement

### Connect With BuzzFeed Culture

Facebook Like Us On Facebook Follow Us On Pinterest Follow Us On Pinterest
Follow Us On Twitter Twitter Follow Us On Twitter

BuzzFeed HomeSitemap(C) 2019 BuzzFeed, Inc.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=260954170738952&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

  * Share On facebook Share On facebook Share
  * Share On vk Share On vk Share
  * Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Share On pinterest Pin
  * Share On lineapp Share On lineapp 
  * Share On twitter Share On twitter Share
  * Share On email Share On email Email
  * Share On sms Share On sms 
  * Share On whatsapp Share On whatsapp 
  * Share On more Share On more More
  * Share On tumblr Share On tumblr 
  * Share On link Share On link 
  * Share On copy Share On copy Copy Link

back to top
![](https://pixiedust.buzzfeed.com/v1.gif?source=buzz_web&platform=bpager&type=instrumentation&target=javascript&value=disabled)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

