

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Weed Dealers

Marijuana Use

Income

Cannabis

# How much does a weed dealer make?

UpdateCancel

### Answer Wiki

5 Answers

![Quora

User](https://qsfo2.fs.quoracdn.net/-3-images.new_grid.profile_pic_anon.png-26-da5ea6d307f82722.png)

Anonymous

Answered 88w ago

Answered 88w ago

From a growers perspective..

You don't make much but it's better than working behind a desk 40 hours a
week.

I grow about 40 pounds a year. Pretty small time. All outdoors so no
electricity bills or fancy expensive hardware. Just sun and water and soil.

It cost me about $2000 a year in materials (new pots, netting, fertilizer,
amendments, poles, etc.) to produce that amount.

My options to move it are limited. Basically I can try and sell it myself or I
can sell it to a wholesale broker. Unless you know people who smoke a lot,
like an ounce a week or more, it's really hard to sell that much weed in grams
and eighths.

I can take it to dispensaries and try and sell it to them, but that's a pain
in the ass because it requires testing results (cheap, but time consuming to
get) and then it's usally a consignment deal where I have to wait 30 days to
get paid (which really sucks) and they don't pay much more only like $1500 to
$2000 a pound. But there is also a shit load of competition and many of them
will undercut my pricing because they produce a lot more and can afford to
take $1250 a pound.

The broker pays $1000 a pound. That's pretty low. But he will take most or all
of it in go, which is an advantage.

I also turn all the trim and any small nugs that don't sell into concentrates.
Try not to waste anything and maximize potential income. But even concentrate
is hard to sell in bulk.

The thing is that with legalization and recreationally available weed the
prices will only go down. It will get harder to make a living doing this. But
it's what I've chosen and I can adapt and I can expand and change whatever I
need to do to stay profitable.

14.8k views * View 21 Upvoters

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

  * How much profit can you get from selling weed?

  * How much is a pound of weed?

  * How can I become a weed dealer?

  * How do weed dealers actually make any money?

  * How much do drug dealers pay for weed?

View more

### Related Questions

  * What are your experiences dating a weed dealer?

  * How do weed dealers make a profit?

  * How can I meet with weed dealers easily in a new city?

  * Should I start smoking weed?

  * Is it possible to be addicted to marijuana?

  * How much weed is this?

  * What is a good way to find a weed dealer?

  * Do weed dealers let you pick the strain of weed?

  * Is a weed dealer legal?

  * How much money does a weed dealer make in India?

### Related Questions

  * How much profit can you get from selling weed?

  * How much is a pound of weed?

  * How can I become a weed dealer?

  * How do weed dealers actually make any money?

  * How much do drug dealers pay for weed?

  * What are your experiences dating a weed dealer?

  * How do weed dealers make a profit?

  * How can I meet with weed dealers easily in a new city?

  * Should I start smoking weed?

  * Is it possible to be addicted to marijuana?

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

