

# Unborn Victims of Violence Act

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

See also: Feticide § Laws in the United States

Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004![Great Seal of the United

States](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Great_Seal_of_the_United_States_%28obverse%29.svg/140px-

Great_Seal_of_the_United_States_%28obverse%29.svg.png)

* * *

Long title| An Act To amend title 18, United States Code, and the Uniform Code
of Military Justice to protect unborn children from assault and murder, and
for other purposes.  
Nicknames| Laci and Conner's Law  
Enacted by| the 108th United States Congress  
Citations  
Public law| Pub.L. 108–212  
Statutes at Large| 118 Stat. 568–570  
Codification  
Titles amended| 18, 10  
U.S.C. sections created| 18 U.S.C. § 1841, 10 U.S.C. § 919a  
Legislative history

        
                  *  **Introduced in the House** **as** H.R. 1997 **by** Melissa Hart (R-PA) **on** May 7, 2003
          *  **Committee consideration by** House Judiciary
          *  **Passed the House on** February 26, 2004 (254–163)
          *  **Passed the Senate on** March 25, 2004 (61–38)
          *  **Signed into law by President** George W. Bush **on** April 1, 2004
        

The **Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004** (Public Law 108-212) is a
United States law which recognizes an embryo or fetus in utero as a legal
victim, if they are injured or killed during the commission of any of over 60
listed federal crimes of violence. The law defines "child in utero" as "a
member of the species _Homo sapiens_ , at any stage of development, who is
carried in the womb."[1]

The law is codified in two sections of the United States Code: Title 18,
Chapter 1 (Crimes), §1841 (18 USC 1841) and Title 10, Chapter 22 (Uniform Code
of Military Justice) §919a (Article 119a).

The law applies only to certain offenses over which the United States
government has jurisdiction, including certain crimes committed on federal
properties, against certain federal officials and employees, and by members of
the military. In addition, it covers certain crimes that are defined by
statute as federal offenses wherever they occur, no matter who commits them,
such as certain crimes of terrorism.

Because of principles of federalism embodied in the United States
Constitution, federal criminal law does not apply to crimes prosecuted by the
individual states. However, 38 states also recognize the fetus or "unborn
child" as a crime victim, at least for purposes of homicide or feticide.[2]

The legislation was both hailed and vilified by various legal observers who
interpreted the measure as a step toward granting legal personhood to human
fetuses, even though the bill explicitly contained a provision excepting
abortion, stating that the bill would not "be construed to permit the
prosecution" "of any person for conduct relating to an abortion for which the
consent of the pregnant woman, or a person authorized by law to act on her
behalf", "of any person for any medical treatment of the pregnant woman or her
unborn child" or "of any woman with respect to her unborn child."

However, the reticence of a federal law to authorize federal prosecution of a
particular act committed under federal jurisdiction does not prevent states
from passing their own laws against the act committed under their
jurisdiction. Meanwhile, the definition of all unborn babies as "members of
the species homo sapiens" in section (d) says essentially what proposed
"personhood" laws say.[3] Sponsors of such proposals say such legal language
will trigger the "collapse" clause in _Roe v. Wade_ , by establishing what
they suggest Roe said must be established for legal abortion to end.[4]
Several state supreme courts have ruled that sections (a) through (c) are not
threatened by Roe,[5] but no court has addressed whether Roe can survive the
suggested triggering of its "collapse" clause by section (d).

The bill contained the alternate title of **Laci and Conner's Law** after the
California mother (Laci Peterson) and fetus (Conner Peterson) whose deaths
were widely publicized during the later stages of the congressional debate on
the bill in 2003 and 2004. Husband Scott Peterson was convicted of double
homicide under California's fetal homicide law.

## Contents

        
                  * 1 History
          * 2 Signing
          * 3 Support
          * 4 Opposition
          * 5 Text of the law
          * 6 See also
          * 7 References
          * 8 External links
        

## History[edit]

Prior to enactment of the federal law, the fetus in utero was, as a general
rule, not recognized as a victim of federal crimes of violence. Thus, in a
federal crime that injured a pregnant woman and killed the child in utero," no
homicide was recognized, in most cases.[6]

One exception was the "born-alive rule," applied in _US v. Spencer_ , 839 F.2d
1341 (9th Cir. 1988), a case in which the child was born alive and died
shortly afterwards; therefore there was no doubt that the decedent was once a
living person under the law.

The Unborn Victims of Violence Act was first introduced in Congress in 1999 by
then-Congressman (later Senator) Lindsey Graham (R-SC). It passed the House of
Representatives in 1999 and 2001, but not the Senate. In 2003, the bill was
reintroduced in the House as H.R. 1997 by Rep. Melissa Hart of Pennsylvania.
It was ultimately co-sponsored by 136 other members of the House before it
passed by a vote of 254 in favor to 163 against on February 26, 2004. After
several amendments were rejected, it was passed in the Senate by a vote of
61-38 on March 25, 2004. It was signed into law by President George W. Bush on
April 1, 2004.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/07/TracyAndZachariahAtFuneral.jpg/220px-

TracyAndZachariahAtFuneral.jpg)

A photo of Tracy Marciniak, holding the body of her son Zachariah. Ms.
Marciniak was seriously injured, and Zachariah was killed, by an assault
during the ninth month of the pregnancy. This photo was on display as Ms.
Marciniak testified at a televised hearing in favor of the Unborn Victims of
Violence Act before a subcommittee of the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S.
House of Representatives, on July 8, 2003. It was also displayed, in poster
size, on the floors of the U.S. House and U.S. Senate during the subsequent
debates on the legislation.[7]

## Signing[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d5/H.R._1997_signing.jpg/250px-H.R._1997_signing.jpg)

Signing ceremony at the White House, April 1, 2004.

At the signing ceremony, the President was joined on stage by men and women
who had lost family members in two-victim crimes, including Laci Peterson's
mother, Sharon Rocha. During his remarks at the ceremony, Bush said, "Any time
an expectant mother is a victim of violence, two lives are in the balance,
each deserving protection, and each deserving justice. If the crime is murder
and the unborn child's life ends, justice demands a full accounting under the
law." Senator John Kerry, his main opponent in the 2004 Presidential election,
voted against the bill, saying, "I have serious concerns about this
legislation because the law cannot simultaneously provide that a fetus is a
human being and protect the right of the mother to choose to terminate her
pregnancy."[ _citation needed_ ]

## Support[edit]

Pro-life organizations strongly supported the act. On July 3, 2003, the U.S.
Judiciary Committee heard testimony for and against passage of the UVVA.
Feminists for Life of America President Serrin Foster submitted her own
testimony, as well as that of Sharon Rocha. In addition, Foster argued against
passage of an alternative bill by Rep. Zoe Lofgren, which would have provided
"additional punishment for certain crimes against women when the crimes cause
an interruption in the normal course of their pregnancies" but not treated the
unborn child as a second victim. "We are asking our elected representatives to
honestly answer the question in the case of Laci Peterson and baby Conner,"
Foster asked. "Was there one victim or two? Those who support the single-
victim substitute would deny women justice."[8]

## Opposition[edit]

The Unborn Victims of Violence Act was strongly opposed by most pro-choice
organizations, on grounds that the U.S. Supreme Court's _Roe v. Wade_ decision
said that the human fetus is not a "person" under the Fourteenth Amendment to
the Constitution, and that if the fetus were a Fourteenth Amendment "person,"
then they would have a constitutional right to life. However, the laws of 38
states also recognize the human fetus as the legal victim of homicide (and
often, other violent crimes) during the entire period of prenatal development
(27 states) or during part of the prenatal period (nine states).[9] Legal
challenges to these laws, arguing that they violate _Roe v. Wade_ or other
U.S. Supreme Court precedents, have been uniformly rejected by both the
federal and the state courts, including the supreme courts of California,
Pennsylvania, and Minnesota.[10]

Some prominent legal scholars who strongly support _Roe v. Wade_ , such as
Prof. Walter Dellinger of Duke University Law School, Richard Parker of
Harvard, and Sherry F. Colb of Rutgers Law School, have written that fetal
homicide laws do not conflict with _Roe v. Wade_. Needs working reference.
[11]

A principle that allows language in law to not conflict with Roe, which
logically should trigger Roe's "collapse" clause, was explained in Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services, 492 US 490 (1989). Until such language becomes
the basis for laws that specify penalties for abortion, the issue is not even
before the court, of whether or not such language conflicts with Roe, and if
so, which should be struck down.[12]

## Text of the law[edit]

The operative portion of the law, now codified as Title 18, Section 1841 of
the United States Code, reads as follows:

Sec. 1841. Protection of unborn children

        
                (a) (1) Whoever engages in conduct that violates any of the provisions of law listed in subsection (b) and thereby causes the death of, or bodily injury (as defined in section 1365) to, a child, who is in utero at the time the conduct takes place, is guilty of a separate offense under this section.
        
        
        
        (2) (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the punishment for that separate offense is the same as the punishment provided under Federal law for that conduct had that injury or death occurred to the unborn child's mother.
        
        
        
        
        
        (B) An offense under this section does not require proof that—
        
        (i) the person engaging in the conduct had knowledge or should have had knowledge that the victim of the underlying offense was pregnant; or
        (ii) the defendant intended to cause the death of, or bodily injury to, the unborn child.
        
        
        
        
        
        (C) If the person engaging in the conduct thereby intentionally kills or attempts to kill the unborn child, that person shall instead of being punished under subparagraph (A), be punished as provided under sections 1111, 1112, and 1113 of this title for intentionally killing or attempting to kill a human being.
        
        
        
        
        
        (D) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the death penalty shall not be imposed for an offense under this section.
        
        (b) The provisions referred to in subsection (a) are the following:
        
        (1) Sections 36, 37, 43, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 229, 242, 245, 247, 248, 351, 831, 844 (d), (f), (h)(1), and (i), 924 (j), 930, 1111, 1112, 1113, 1114, 1116, 1118, 1119, 1120, 1121, 1153 (a), 1201 (a), 1203, 1365 (a), 1501, 1503, 1505, 1512, 1513, 1751, 1864, 1951, 1952 (a)(1)(B), (a)(2)(B), and (a)(3)(B), 1958, 1959, 1992, 2113, 2114, 2116, 2118, 2119, 2191, 2231, 2241 (a), 2245, 2261, 2261A, 2280, 2281, 2332, 2332a, 2332b, 2340A, and 2441 of this title.
        (2) Section 408(e) of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 (21 U.S.C. 848 (e)). (3) Section 202 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2283).
        
        (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the prosecution—
        
        (1) of any person for conduct relating to an abortion for which the consent of the pregnant woman, or a person authorized by law to act on her behalf, has been obtained or for which such consent is implied by law;
        (2) of any person for any medical treatment of the pregnant woman or her unborn child; or
        (3) of any woman with respect to her unborn child.
        
        (d) As used in this section, the term "unborn child" means a child in utero, and the term "child in utero" or "child, who is in utero" means a member of the species homo sapiens, at any stage of development, who is carried in the womb.
        

_The provision amending the Uniform Code of Military Justice is functionally
the same, except for minor technical points._

## See also[edit]

        
                  * Born alive rule
          * Fetal rights
          * Feticide
        

## References[edit]

        
                  1. **^** Text of Unborn Victims of Violence Act Archived 2012-01-06 at the Wayback Machine.
          2. **^** [1] "State Homicide Laws That Recognize Unborn Victims."
          3. **^** "Life at Conception Act". National Pro-life Alliance. Retrieved  26 April 2012.
          4. **^** Roe v. Wade's "collapse" clause says: "The appellee and certain amici argue that the fetus is a "person" within the language and meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment. In support of this, they outline at length and in detail the well-known facts of fetal development. _If this suggestion of personhood is established, the appellant's case, of course, collapses, for the fetus' right to life would then be guaranteed specifically by the Amendment._ The appellant conceded as much on reargument. On the other hand, the appellee conceded on reargument that no case could be cited that holds that a fetus is a person within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment."
          5. **^** [2] Constitutional Challenges to State Unborn Victims (Fetal Homicide) Laws."
          6. **^** [3] "Some Cases of Homicides of Unborn Children under Federal or Military Jurisdiction," May 8, 2003. (Examples of fetal-death cases that could not be prosecuted prior to enactment of the Unborn Victims of Violence Act.)
          7. **^** [4] Testimony of Tracy Marciniak on the Unborn Victims of Violence Act (H.R. 1997), Subcommittee on the Constitution, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representatives, July 8, 2003
          8. **^** "The Unborn Victims of Violence Act: Testimony of Serrin M. Foster". Feminists for Life. Retrieved  19 December 2017.
          9. **^** "State Homicide Laws That Recognize Unborn Victims."
          10. **^** Constitutional Challenges to State Unborn Victims (Fetal Homicide) Laws."
          11. **^** "The Unborn Victims of Violence Act and _Roe v. Wade_ ," February 2, 2004.
          12. **^** "...until those courts have applied the...state's view of when life begins...to restrict appellees' [abortionists'] activities in some concrete way, it is inappropriate for federal courts to address its meaning." Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 492 US 490 (1989). Sandra Day O'Connor added in a concurrence, "When the constitutional invalidity of a State's abortion statute actually turns upon the constitutional validity of Roe, there will be time enough to reexamine Roe, and to do so carefully."
        

## External links[edit]

        
                  * Details on consideration of bill by Congress in 2003–2004
          * NRLC archive of extensive resources on state and federal "fetal homicide" laws, pertinent court decisions, case studies of two-victim crimes.
          * Remarks by the President at Signing of the Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004
          * "Crimes That Claim Two Victims." Case studies that figured in the congressional debate over the bill.
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Abortion in the United States

* * *

U.S. Supreme Court cases|

        
                  * _Griswold v. Connecticut_ (1965)
          * _Roe v. Wade_ (1973)
          * _Doe v. Bolton_ (1973)
          * _Harris v. McRae_ (1980)
          * _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services_ (1989)
          * _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992)
          * _Stenberg v. Carhart_ (2000)
          * _Scheidler v. National Organization for Women_ (2006)
          * _Gonzales v. Carhart_ (2007)
        

Federal legislation|

        
                  * Hyde Amendment (1976)
          * Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act (1994)
          * Born-Alive Infants Protection Act (2002)
          * Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003
          * Unborn Victims of Violence Act (2004)
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unborn_Victims_of_Violence_Act&oldid=899697060"

Categories:

        
                  * 108th United States Congress
          * 2004 in law
          * United States federal abortion legislation
          * United States federal criminal legislation
          * Legal issues in pregnancy
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Webarchive template wayback links
          * All articles with unsourced statements
          * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

Add links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 31 May 2019, at 18:40 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

