

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw-new.png) Find
your Lawyer Explore Resources For...

Learn About the Law

  * Accidents and Injuries
  * Arbitration and Mediation
  * Bankruptcy
  * Car Accidents
  * Civil Rights
  * Consumer Protection
  * Criminal Law
  * DUI Law
  * Education Law
  * Elder Law
  * Employment Law
  * Estate Planning
  * Family Law
  * Health Care Law
  * Immigration Law
  * Litigation and Appeals
  * Military Law
  * Product Liability
  * Real Estate Law
  * Small Business Law
  * Social Security and Retirement Planning
  * State Laws
  * Tax Law
  * Traffic Laws

FindLaw Answers

Legal Forms

Blogs

Are you a Legal Professional?

__

Visit Legal Professionals Site

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw-new.png)

  *   * Find a Lawyer

  * Learn About the Law
  * FindLaw Answers
  * Legal Forms
  * Blogs
  * For Legal Professionals

#####

##### Popular Directory Searches

##### More Options

  * Legal Issues
  * Name Search
  * Browse Lawyers
  * Browse Law Firms
  * Browse Types of Cases
  * Help

#####

##### Popular Directory Searches

Cancel

##### More Options

  * Legal Issues
  * Name Search
  * Browse Lawyers
  * Browse Law Firms
  * Browse Types of Cases
  * Help

  * FindLaw

  * Learn About The Law
  * Criminal Law
  * Criminal Charges
  * Drug Possession Overview

# Drug Possession Overview

![Subscribe to FindLaw Newsletters](https://www.findlawimages.com/newsletters-

component/nlmodulefinal.jpg)

__

By submitting this form, you agree to Findlaw.com's terms. We respect your
privacy.

Top Headlines U.S. Supreme Court Modern Practice Is It Legal? Weirdly Legal
Everyday Legal California Lawyers Federal Practice What the L? Law & Tech

**Thank you for subscribing!**

#

Created by FindLaw's team of attorney writers and editors.

Federal and state drug possession laws make it a crime to willfully possess
illegal controlled substances such as marijuana, methamphetamine, cocaine,
LSD, "club drugs," and heroin. These laws also criminalize the possession of
"precursor" chemicals used in drug cultivation and manufacturing, as well as
certain accessories related to drug use. However, what constitutes drug
possession can vary according to the type of drug, the amount, and the
geographic area where the offense took place.

The following drug possession overview covers the elements of a possession
offense, how these laws are categorized, charges for paraphernalia, and other
related matters.

**Requirements to Prove Possession of Drugs**

Possession of certain illicit drugs can violate both federal and state laws.
While drug possession laws vary widely from state to state, the elements of
the offense are generally the same, as prosecutors must be able to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant:

  * Knew the drug in question was a controlled substance; and
  * That he or she knowingly had possession of, or control over, the drug.

Possession also includes what is referred to as "constructive possession."
This means that a defendant had access to an illegal drug even if it was not
specifically on his or her person at the time of arrest. Under constructive
possession, for example, charges may be filed against one or more individuals
who have keys to a van filled with narcotics, assuming all other elements of
the crime are met and no other defenses apply.

**Categories of Drug Possession Laws**

Drug possession laws generally fall into one of two main categories:

  1. Simple possession (for personal use); and
  2. Possession with intent to distribute.

The latter category typically carries stiffer penalties upon conviction,
compared to simple possession, as the goal is to punish and deter drug
dealers. To prove possession with intent to sell, prosecutors may present
evidence such as digital scales, baggies, large quantities of the drug, large
amounts of cash in small bills or testimony from witnesses.

Also, some states have created separate categories of certain drugs, treating
them separately. For example, some states have legalized possession of
marijuana for medical or even recreational use, although it's still considered
illegal under federal law. These laws are constantly changing, which is why
it's important to understand the law in your area.

**Drug Paraphernalia Included within Possession Crimes**

Drug possession laws also prohibit paraphernalia such as syringes, crack pipes
or bongs. The Federal Drug Paraphernalia Statute defines what constitutes drug
paraphernalia but it usually hinges on a determination of "primary use." For
example, a newly purchased water pipe may not be considered a marijuana bong
unless it has drug residue or is sold explicitly as a marijuana bong.

Laws also exist to restrict the possession of certain chemicals or materials
commonly used in the cultivation or manufacturing of drugs, such as the
laboratory equipment used to make methamphetamine.

**Get Legal Help with Your Drug Possession Questions**

As you can see from the drug possession overview above, drug laws in general
have been changing in some states and the conflict between federal and state
laws can be confusing. If you want to learn more about drug possession laws,
or if you need a strong advocate to protect your interests in court, you
should contact an experienced drug crime lawyer in your area.

### Next Steps

Contact a qualified criminal lawyer to make sure your rights are protected.

### Help Me Find a Do-It-Yourself Solution

  * Criminal Law Forms
  * Expungement Handbook - Procedures and Law
  * Bond Forms

## Popular Directory Searches

  * Drug Charge Attorney
  * Assault Defense
  * White Collar Defense

## Criminal Charges

  * Alcohol Crimes
  * Attempt, Conspiracy and Aiding
  * Crimes Against Children
  * Crimes Against Justice
  * Crimes Against the Government
  * Crimes Against the Person
  * Curfew Laws
  * Cyber Crimes
  * Drug Charges
  * Fraud and Financial Crimes
  * Homicide
  * Property Crimes
  * Public Safety Violations
  * Sex Crimes

Back to Top

Learn More About

    
    
    Legal Topics
    State Laws
    Blogs
    FindLaw RSS Feeds
    Abogado
    LawInfo
    Super Lawyers
    

Find a Lawyer

    
    
    Browse by Location
    Browse by Legal Issue
    Browse by Law Firm & Lawyer Profile
    

Get Legal Forms

    
    
    Visit our Legal Forms site
    

Find Answers

    
    
    FindLaw Answers
    Community Guidelines
    

For Lawyers

    
    
    Visit our professional site
    Edit your legal profile
    Website development
    Advertise on our site
    

About Us

    
    
    Company History
    Media
    About FindLaw.com
    Contact Us
    Privacy
    Cookies
    Terms
    Disclaimer
    Advertising
    Jobs
    

Social

    
    
    ![Facebook icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Facebook
    ![Youtube icon](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAGQAAABkCAYAAABw4pVUAAAABHNCSVQICAgIfAhkiAAAAAlwSFlzAAAOxAAADsQBlSsOGwAAABl0RVh0U29mdHdhcmUAd3d3Lmlua3NjYXBlLm9yZ5vuPBoAAAtlSURBVHic7Z15bBzVHcc/v5ndjR2TEAIOJA6e8e6SAKGAFHG04q64BIGWo7fUUAEVKtBKPaigNFCJI39UFFXqBYL+VwmEKo4KVApCCMShpjSUFDDey5BQSKgTJ05s78779Q/vzk4cE9uznvUunc9fb96833tv5rvvfm8WYmJiYmJiYmJiYmJiYmJiYmJiYmJi2h+Zi0iy2Wy3lss3g1yisEqgay7ibXUURgT6QZ+SZPLXAwMD2xuNs2FB0o5zpSAPAYsbjavNGQZdnyuV/txIJA0JUhXjEcBqJJ7PEAb0qkZECS1IJpNZRsV7j7hkTGaXXU5l+7f17whjnAidbKVyE0jDYojwrDE8F7j+AXBUIMioKncE7l8AnNdouhFyqEmN3wRsCGMcWhBB1mlY4wDGsCA/WNxYu8467mqFawIpvZwfLPj3M4574RwkGymqrCOkIKHrfkUzYW2DiHBmOp3urV0b4dn97mOer7ld110CnDEX6UZMNqxhA42xHBLedv+ILM+7qnaRGE89Cxj/pohfnVmqlwDJOUo3ShaFNWyN3pHKV2vOamO4uXq5u6dY3FS7Jyrrmp21ZtMSgqhwamZlpl7Mq9WWCi+8ABWAtWvXJhFavv1olPC9rDlG7MpXgLsB1Ji/ilg/Afz2Y+eOHWeCLAmYjKH8UZDnVMwegT5Uvq3CqZOifkWVxwFENANyXdX/BVWeARA4FmF9VM82G1pGEINcTVUQY1kv28o+FfEFEZV1Wh81fWIs+WKhUNg8KZrfZRznXpAf1710U36wtBEg4zjnAddNxMeruWrvLt2bvlQw6yN5sFnSElUWgMDJqx2nD6BYLI4q+lihUPhX7b4Kfvuh6HenEAPA5EqlW0BfakKWI6FlBAHw4Ms1d0J1A6AA2d7e44FaN/ujfGBqIuO6v8o47uas655e9VJR6w/NyvNc01KCKNYVNXf/4GDev2FZl/thlHepdovT6XQvyveBE43qD+vxeP9uSoYjoKUEAf38qhWrjjjAV7m05hb4sOa2PK+n7i8ra+6E6oe0KS0mCFYlOXZ20CObzXYDpwW8dtYcRm3b9xV895ht/zfCPEZKqwmCiJwVvDaVyqVQf9lU25XPKi0niOp+pQFRPXe+8jIftJwgwIL9rkQ65ikf80IrCvJ/TSxIi9F2goiQmi5MIpGYNkyr0naCaGB5V23dXb8hwzWn53nLp7IVEVMPXne3Em0niIA/GFy4cOHbVAeKwZVF8byV9fBiB2xrY5h+Etb90ed29rSdIAonrFq5sgdgy5Yt41JJnGpULhgole6thRGRC+vh1V/ZfK9Y3KxqnS/JxCm5XO7j5uZ8ZrSdIIBt7OT9VPM+sHXgg8JgwV/2PcZxjgNuqAeX4Pq25gfzf7P2Wqm043yjeVmeOe0oCIpemXHcR13XdQPedtpxrjDI85PW+0/LOI4/uMy67jlecvxVS+VzTcvwLAi/Uc5xW2EKQ0FziuyxoFdh6aeH420m9hw7zchYrlQM9W5bZsUwJAKSFaad4BLg+GZkqFHassr6LDNfJUSBAug2kO2KfGiJbkd1u4F9llq7VcweYBTV4cnGxrbLSc/bc7AEyrZ9iOV5B+7hElkMdIhahxgxiyzoRKTbqHQLuhy0G2Q50Mc8/GCbLcgQyD3JyvhD72zd+kmT054Vx/b0HF5OpK4BvRU4rFnpNrNRf9cTLioWi8Wwac4HfX19jmX0aeC42diFbdSbVSR3taMYAIVCoaS2dRGBlcooaYogqtzTjmLUyOfzgyB3NSOtZghiJGk/3IR0IiVZGX8YtBJ1OpE36gL9A9V5o1UrVh1RSY4/NSM7pZgbLH5tNmllXPdFVBYCGItvFgqFd2ef46l5Z+vWTzKu+zZKpCP8yAUx6Fs1t9j7UoJ92sHC+whLpg80CeVk0EUAttGFs7afPv63IFpBoq+yVN6aPlB7IIEfV1REXkIsJOcnNrp4uNw54h/1skRPUaS+CU7YaAx7q/dCHZqMEgPh+rKzIPqBoY2/7rBl+5Y9wC9q12nXvUECuxJJJH6Zn4PD95Gh+hESrSSRV1kefBR1GtPhuu6MthKt6V5z8GN6JhH5olbkJSTpebunDzU1Gcd5AOQ8AEXvypdKDwFkHedJRaqzt3pjrlR6ekr73r7rEXM7ysqM476ptnV1Pp/vD4ZJp9OrxDP3ABePMtKZcdxh0EdIJG6bvKqoSR2OeiU+8hJivNR4WFsVORJIA2lL5FDfH+mp+YtaU/6qVWUDor+nvgn7RDHmwWCYzNGZE8QzrwJXAJ1V78Ug11L2Xjq2p+fwYPhUpVIO+ywzJfoqK+VF/hBTIlzGxKJUYGcKZ6xevbp+Qtbyfk194nAv8KY/+BOOGU8kbwtGWUmlIh8YRi5IuVyeL0G+kysVj7eE84O+4+PjafDPvPsbu40l5+ZKxZNU5OZ6FFwesG3Ks0QuSFdX17wIIqqbAd4rFl8Dhmr+ljFdAAljeqg//9ZCofA6gIHgh2NWEpgRX7RvUfsLMjIyEnkxnwHBRa4OAEMiuJnOn8lNJBJDAf9UNpv1DxCNdEX/LJH3sjo6Olpqh6Cqf5Y32BXuzPT2rgWgXE4Fl4lU1Q/X1dVlRveMRJq/yAVZuHt3AhiLOp0GSSPW3+HgmyWGhoYSnclotw1HXmUNd3a2w7dJZkRHR0fkzxJ5CUmNp9phq9E2VO6c6kbHcIffpiRGE0kvGXpYNSMif1ljybF2KCFDucHCtGfbx5JjycTcfDf0U4lcENu2W1MQ8XSqPR7ZbHYxlcqttWtjWffk8/ldUH0WL9o+SjOqkxY4I6h27eVbluUBiOrOwMyt/x4qlcpSW7nFt1S9D9gFwDgL9jsPHAGRN+pSqXTPRTyqE+c8qvNLUx7ImYo1a9akQPyxhCeyF8DY9geBYMvXrl2bBJDAnFn1etR3W5Vl4XI/c6JfMRQJ/xCq9e6y6JkZx/lCOZF4hv0/kjm1KfLzrOuePrpnz+0ESqmUZQhg6dKl26gPCBfv3LHj7r6+vpMs1eD81dZadQX+ZGekRC6Iikz78j4NUanvblQuA3kZ5ERqVcjBuUSVV0B+FvDb1/tBvgCwadOmMugDgdR+ZBn9J8rVgdz/NhihNYMfQqNEX2WpzmrHXxAVfXGS1y5Fr1AozMD4ezBpGVh44IXqF+oAJJm8HeGJKe2FR48ulTYGvXSWuxfD0IRG/dMPxliqrwF+FbF379795iXypdKfsq57pCpnitBvLOs3+Xx+MO26y9SwDMCz1P+mlggbjJk4pas2T6Qq5i9lsW8UYTXKa0uOOPw+Avv1BgYGxoAvZY/uW6eWuRSkG3S7qv1EvpR/Ksdkoj/k04y9vUO5UvEIAl8abVPsrON+fJBDQfvRynt7D8u67lnTB2ttMo5z9kzFaIRm7e3dwBz9NcY8IaoS6kvVs6VZu9/PSfe6tzcprTkn67p3iNCUUt5Io76bWXzBWYQ7M73uck1YPw327VsZ13WX2LBRletnaXrAqa+ZEroaSTvuGwInhzAdAn0MtV5X5EPbMtsrIv8ZGxvbvm3btr1h89MIK1asWLhgwYLuhOpRnrG6BV2uwmmCXgkh9hjDP3Kl4toweWng3xH0SZAwghwGci2i1wqKUbBU6UymSDvuiKD7QIYRRpg4Y3hAaVKRfQKjU8RdDwMdotp5wI2JqZEOlC7gUIUOgS6MYoDaJ1AaafBEeDK0bVjDif+dqgwQ/6HLZHYmK+Vs2DOUoRv1iT/A0vW0//hiLjEirG/kQGtDk8lDu3a9s/SwJW8CF9MS0+zzyk4Rvj5QLD7eSCQNz+4P7dz5TnfXsgdJeKPAookDM9K2HxCbJbtB3hLhgWSl/K3+999/Y74zFBMTExMTExMTExMTExMTExMTExMT0wr8D41xyvIsnGuyAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC) YouTube
    ![Twitter icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Twitter
    ![Pinterest icon](data:image/png;base64,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) Pinterest
    

Law Firm Marketing

    
    
    Attorney Websites
    Online Advertising
    Buy a Directory Profile
    

Marketing Resources

    
    
    On-Demand Webcasts
    White Papers
    

* * *

![FindLaw.com Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/findlaw.png)

![Thomson Reuters Logo](https://www.findlawimages.com/latl/tr-logo.png)

Copyright (C) 2019, Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

