

CANNABIS BLOG

  *   *   *   * 

Trustpilot

![en](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/en.png) __

  * ![en](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/en.png)
  * ![es](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/es.png)
  * ![it](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/it.png)
  * ![be](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/bl.png)
  * ![cs](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/cs.png)
  * ![ru](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/ru.png)
  * ![fi](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/fi.png)
  * ![se](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/se.png)
  * ![ro](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/ro.png)
  * ![fr](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/fr.png)
  * ![de](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/de.png)
  * ![nl](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/nl.png)
  * ![ca](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/ca.png)
  * ![pl](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/pl.png)
  * ![pt](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/pt.png)
  * ![hu](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/hu.png)
  * ![el](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/lang/el.png)
  * 

**EUR €**

  *     *       *         * 

**Your Account**

  * Register
  * Log in

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/contact-ico.png) Contact

__

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds//img/rqs_logo_header.svg)

  * Autoflowering Seeds

  * Feminized Seeds

  * CBD Seeds

  * More RQS __

    * USA Premium Seeds
    * CBD oil
    * More CBD
    * Bulk Seeds
    * Growing
    * Companion Planting
    * Vaporizers
    * Merchandise

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds//img/categories-mobile.svg)

  * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/home.svg)

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds//img/user-mobile.svg)

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/contact-ico.png)

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/currencies/EUR-1.png)

    
    
    * Euro
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/currencies/USD.png)
    
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/currencies/EUR-selected.png)
    
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/currencies/CLP.png)
    
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/currencies/GBP.png)
    

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/en-selected.png)

    
    
    * English
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/en-selected.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/fr.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/es.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/de.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/it.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/nl.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/be.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/ca.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/cs.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/pl.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/ru.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/pt.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/fi.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/hu.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/se.png)
    * ![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/flags/el.png)
    

  * Autoflowering seeds 

USA Premium Seeds

  * Feminized seeds 

CBD seeds

  * CBD oil 

More CBD

  * Growing 

Companion Planting

  * Vaporizers 

Merchandise

  * Blog 

Free Seeds

Free Shipping

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds//img/rqs_logo_header.svg)

  * Faq

Seeds limit is exceeded. is maximum quantity. There are seeds in your cart.

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/cart-icon.svg) 0

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/tmcategories-mobile/heart.svg)

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds//img/search-top.svg)

__

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/cart-icon-green.svg)
![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/cart-icon-green-solid.svg) 0
![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/chevron-down-light.svg)
![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/chevron-up-light.svg)

Shopping cart summary

Included FREE items

No products in your shopping cart. Continue shopping.

Subtotal: € 0.00

Continue shopping Check out

Product successfully added to your shopping cart.

Continue Shopping Go to checkout

  1. Home

> The 7 Easy Steps Of Growing Cannabis

# The 7 Easy Steps of Growing Marijuana

Legal cannabis is becoming the norm across the United States and in many other
countries of the world. Hooray!! Although not official, it is ostensibly legal
in most of Europe and if not legal, then certainly tolerated.

So, you have come to the decision to grow your own cannabis. Well done! Soon
you will be part of a rapidly growing culture. The phenomenon of homegrown
marijuana that is sweeping the world.

Growing your own cannabis is a fun and inexpensive way to put high-quality
buds in your jar. Marijuana is a hardy plant that can grow in a wide range of
climates, in greenhouses or indoors all year round.

## CANNABIS IS YOUR FRIEND

Like all gardening, cannabis growing is a skill developed over time. It is
easy to learn but takes a happily stoned lifetime to master. There is no
reason to be intimidated by growing your own. The process is not complicated
and can be as inexpensive or expensive as you like.

Understanding the fundamentals of cannabis growing is a good place to start
your marijuana growing journey. Making informed decisions early will maximise
your end yields. These seven basic steps will give you an excellent knowledge
base to become an expert marijuana gardener.

## STEP 1: CHOOSING YOUR CANNABIS SEEDS

![Cannabis Seeds](/img/cms/image-seeds-large-3.jpg)

The choice is staggering. Sativa, indica, ruderalis, any number of hybrids,
all available at a click. You know what you enjoy from personal experience.
What strains have fitted your groove in the past? What strains have performed
as a satisfactory medicine for your particular ailment? They are probably a
good place to start.

With your personal taste in mind now consider your growing circumstances. Are
you growing in a small cupboard where small fast-maturing plants like
autoflowering strains or indicas will be the most effective use of your space?
Or do you have a nice big backyard where you can grow one or more monsters
directly in the soil or in large pots?

## STEP 2: CANNABIS FUNDAMENTALS

![Cannabis Fundamentals](/img/cms/image-growing-fundamentals-large.jpg)

In order to grow at its best and give you the juicy buds, you love cannabis
requires some fundamental things.

**LIGHT:** For healthy vegetation marijuana needs over twelve hours of light
per twenty-four hour period. Indoors this is controlled by you with timers.
Outdoors germination must be delayed until the plants can be exposed to more
than twelve hours of daylight and receive at least eight hours of direct
sunlight per day.

**GROWING MEDIUM:** Organic growers will use some kinds of soil every time
inside or out. However, soil isn't the only choice. Neutral mediums that are
entirely nutrient dependant include coconut coir, perlite, vermiculite or rock
wool. Aeroponics, purely hydroponic or deep water culture do not use mediums
at all. The suspended root matrix gets nutrients directly from the nutrient
mix.

**AIR:** For strength and proper exchange of gases, cannabis requires fresh
moving air. Outdoors this is no problems your plants will be exposed to breeze
and gale alike. Indoors your plants will need a fresh air intake, stale air
exhaust and a fan for air movement. Still, environments encourage pests,
moulds and weak growth. A buildup of aspirated gases will stunt plant growth.

RELATED STORY

> __ The Different Types of Lights for Cannabis: Pros and Cons

**WATER:** Like all living things cannabis needs water to grow, thrive and
carry out its biological functions. If you live somewhere with regular
rainfall your outdoor crop may get all it needs from nature alone. Large
cannabis plants are notoriously thirsty. If you are going big then you will
certainly need to supplement water between rains.

Indoors water becomes the medium that carries nutrients. Unmodified water is
used to flush hydroponic and soilless systems regularly. The pH of your water
is very important. The canny cannabis grower has a good pH meter as part of a
comprehensive grow kit.

**TEMPERATURE:** Cannabis is a very hardy plant and can survive cold and heat
well. Just like you or me though, it can get stressed and not function well in
the extremes. Cannabis can freeze or boil to death. It can stop growing or go
into stasis. It will go into survival mode if the temperatures are too high or
too cold for too long. Twenty-seven degrees centigrade is the accepted ideal
for vigorous cannabis growth. Indoors this is easy to achieve with fans, air
conditioning units, heating and cooling mats. Lights will certainly generate
heat that needs to be vented.

Outdoors you need to pick your time. Know your particular climate well. Have a
sun cycle app or chart to make sure you get your timing right. Too early and
you risk your plants going into flower immediately, then re-vegging when the
daylight increases. This is unwanted. Your flowers will not form properly when
blooming begins. Too late and you will have small plants with fewer flower
sites.

**NUTRIENTS:** Like all living things cannabis also requires fuel to grow. A
good friable soil mix that is rich with compost, living organisms, vitamins
and minerals can supply your plants with enough food for their whole life
cycle.

Watering with compost tea and other organic mixes like molasses or feather
meals improve soil quality and encourage healthy plant growth.

With hydroponics or neutral mediums you supply all of the plant's lifeblood
with pre-formulated nutrient blends. Usually customised for marijuana
especially. Specialised concoctions are made exclusively for whichever soil-
less medium you choose.

RELATED STORY

> __ Indoor Cannabis Growing: Relative Humidity and Temperatures

**HUMIDITY:** Outdoors you don't really have any control over this factor and
you are at the mercy of your climate. The upside is that the variations in
humidity and the robust biological functions needed to adapt to a changing
grow environment makes your plants exceptionally strong!

Indoors humidity control is very important from seed to flower. Leaves
aspirate atmospheric moisture as part of their day to day functions. Properly
balanced humidity makes for a healthy pest and mould-free environment.

Cupboard, grow tent or dedicated grow room. Directly in the soil or in pots
outdoors. Even in a companion planted garden your marijuana will need to
satisfy all these needs to grow well and supply you with high-quality resin
soaked nuggets.

## STEP 3: LIGHTS FOR INDOOR CANNABIS GROWING

![Cannabis Lighting](/img/cms/image-lighting-large-2.jpg)

With legalisation, there has been an absolute explosion in the choices of
lights and grow chambers for growing cannabis indoors. Your budget then will
be the deciding factor.

**GROW CUPBOARDS:** Fully customised for cannabis and ready to go
sophisticated grow cupboards made by people with decades of experience are
available. If you have the thousands of dollars to spare. Lights, fans,
separate clone, veg and flower chambers, timers and carbon filters all ready
to plug and play.

**LIGHTS FOR EVERY BUDGET:** At the other end of the scale, you can have a
rudimentary yet very efficient CFL (Compact Fluorescent Light) or small LED
panel (Light Emitting Diode) setup for less than three hundred dollars.
Growing great buds in a spare cupboard. Other compact fluorescent lights like
T5 battens come in a range of spectrums for vegging and flowering and can fit
in a small space well.

HPS (High-Pressure Sodium) and MH (Metal Halide) lamps are traditional types
of grow lights. A 1000W HPS with reflectors can efficiently light a 1.5 x
1.5-meter space and provide excellent growth. Similarly, a 600W MH lamp will
light the same sized space and give you world class flowers at the end of the
grow cycle. The heat factor generated by these lights must be considered. If
not exhausted efficiently your grow space will quickly become too hot for
healthy cannabis growth.

## STEP 4: GERMINATION AND CANNABIS SEEDLINGS

![Cannabis Seedlings](/img/cms/image-seedlings-large.jpg)

Beginning your whole cannabis grow adventure is the germination of your seeds.
Each viable seed contains all the information needed to grow the strain of
plant you have chosen. All they need are the right conditions and the life
cycle will begin. Seeds won't germinate until three specific needs are met.
Water, correct temperature (warmth) and a good location.

Growing cannabis is an organic process without strict sets of rules. It is not
a linear system to learn, but an art to be mastered. There are a number of
equally effective methods for germinating cannabis. Over time you will find
the one that works best for you.

**STRAIGHT INTO THE MEDIUM:** Place seeds directly into your medium, this way
you can avoid any transplant shock. More often it is easier to germinate in a
small pot of your chosen medium then pot on to the garden or bigger pots.

**PAPER TOWEL:** Seeds are placed on moistened paper towel on a plate and
placed in a warm dark place. Usually covered with plastic or an upturned plate
to retain moisture and humidity. After a few days to a week, your seeds have
sprouted.

RELATED STORY

> __ Rookie Guide: 3 Steps to Master the Seedling Stage

**JIFFIES, PLUGS AND ROCK WOOL STARTERS:** Easy to maintain as you can have
fifty seeds germinating in a very small space. Once the seedlings are
established they can be put in their final position without damaging roots.

**IN WATER:** Simply soak seeds in enzyme enriched water until you see the tap
root appear then put in your medium. The seedling will quickly strike and
break the surface about a week later.

**GERMINATION STATIONS:** Offering substantial control over the germinating
environment germination stations provide humidity, temperature control and can
accelerate germination times.

When your plants have broken the surface and the cotyledons have shed the seed
husk and opened to reveal the first set of true leaves photosynthesis has
begun. Now you have a true marijuana seedling on its way to becoming a heavy
resinous indoor miniature or booming outdoor tree.

## STEP 5: THE VEGETATIVE PHASE OF CANNABIS

![Vegetative Cannabis Growth](/img/cms/image-vegetation-large.jpg)

The moment green leaves meet the light photosynthesis begins in earnest. Your
plants start to metabolise and the vegetative phase has begun.

**INDOORS:** Lights are set to an eighteen hour day, six hour night light
regimen. This doesn't have to coordinate with the actual daylight hours, you
can set it to times of day that suit you. Running electrical equipment during
off-peak periods can save you a lot of money.

Your plants are happy in an organic soil or they are being fed nutrients
designed for the vegetative phase. Lots of fan-forced breezes keep
temperatures under control and strengthen your young plants. Exotic
disciplines can be used like adding carbon dioxide to the environment. Low-
stress training and scrogging can be used to increase the growth rate and
flower potential of indoor cannabis.

RELATED STORY

> __ Growing cannabis with the SCROG (Screen of green) method

How Long Does The Vegetation Phase Last?

The vegetative phase can last as long as you like. Depending on whether you
want lots of small plants taking up your space as with the Sea Of Green grow
method. Or, choosing a few larger plants topped and mainlined to produce large
flower clusters.

**OUTDOORS:** Cannabis grows rapidly once the daylight hours start to increase
during spring and on into summer. Unlimited root room and good genetics can
see a plant grow to three or four meters during the vegetative phase.

Most contemporary plants are topped and under-shucked continually during the
whole growth phase. This encourages an even canopy that will fill with
homogeneously sized buds during the bloom stage. Cannabis will continue to
vegetate while there are more than twelve hours of daylight. The further away
from the equator, you are the shorter vegetation time your cannabis will have
before starting to flower.

## STEP 6: THE BLOOMING PERIOD OF HEALTHY CANNABIS

![Vegetative Cannabis Growth](/img/cms/image-blooming-large.jpg)

Blooming, flowering and budding all refer to the same phase of growth for the
marijuana plant. The next few months will be exciting times as aromas start to
develop. Interesting floral arrangements also begin to emerge that are
particular to your choice of strain. The blooming phase has distinctive
chapters that are common to all cannabis plants and begin when vegetation
finishes.

Outdoors the first stage of flowering can be seen when Summer's heat has
passed and autumn approaches. Indoors you control when the flowering begins by
changing the lighting schedule to a twelve hour day, twelve hour night
photoperiod. {{{{{{Depending on species cannabis can bloom as a response to
three possible traits.

Depending on species cannabis responds to hormonal changes that make it
continue vegetating or begin blooming. There are typically two types APD and
autoflowering:

  * APD or Absolute Photo Determinate plants rely on a hormone that is sensitive to light to keep vegetating. This hormone prevents flowering when it is active. It is rendered inactive in low light levels and as nights become longer. Twelve hours or more of night will induce flowering.
  * With autoflowering strains, this same hormone is age dependent. The plant stops producing it when it reaches a certain species-specific age and flowering begins regardless of photoperiod. This can be as little as two weeks after germination.

###

RELATED STORY

> __ The Flowering Stage Of Cannabis Week By Week

### The Different Stages Of Blooming

**DIFFERENTIATION:** At the very beginning of the flowering phase a noticeable
change in growth pattern happens. Rather than the striving and stretching
symmetry of vegetation the branch growth begins to zig-zag and compresses with
less distance between nodes. Differentiation is very noticeable.

**BLOOMING:** Flowering follows the same stages in all species, but for
different lengths of time. A quick indica will be cured and in the pipe weeks
before a long maturing sativa.

Soon after differentiation, proper flowers will start to form. Calyxes will
emerge at branch internodes quickly forming pistil covered puffballs. Much
desired resins are already forming in young trichomes on the pistils, calyxes
and leaf surfaces.

The puffballs of calyxes start to stretch along their own spike. This makes
room for fresh fluorescent clusters and bud-specific leaves. Unlike sugar
leafs, these new leaves are thicker, smaller, often heavily crinkled and
covered in trichomes. They are eventually partially submerged by the swelling
flower clusters.

Over the weeks these flower clusters multiply and form large colas covered in
resin swollen trichomes. Left to mature further the calyxes and the trichomes
swell with copious amounts of desirable resins. Full maturity quickly
approaches.

## STEP 7: HARVESTING, DRYING & CURING FOR BEST QUALITY BUDS

![Curing Cannabis](/img/cms/image-curing-large.jpg)

During the last few weeks, nutrients are ignored and your plants will be
flushed out with clean water. This guarantees a pure flavour free of nutrient
and built up salt aftertastes.

### When Is My Cannabis Mature?

Now covered abundantly in trichomes, pistils are shrivelling back and changing
colour. Deep orange, mauve, brown or scarlet may emerge depending on species.
The swollen resin sacks begin to change colour in waves all over the plant.
First, going from clear to milky then milky to amber. The flower clusters are
so swollen they seem to have turned inside out.

These signs mean it is time to harvest the results of your hard work.

  * For higher THC content harvest when trichomes are 20-30% amber.
  * For a broader cannabinoid profile harvest when trichomes are 60-80% amber. Watch carefully as the differences here may only be twenty-four hours.

###

RELATED STORY

> __ When is my cannabis plant ready for harvest

### Harvesting The Marijuana Plant

There is no set way to harvest. Be rakish and learn by doing.

Some will wet trim which is removing all the leaves while the plant is still
standing then break the plant down further. Hanging branches to dry or laying
individual buds on a drying rack. Some will remove the large sugar leaves only
then harvest and hang the whole plant.

There are no set rules except be careful when handling. You want to disturb
the delicate trichomes as little as possible.

### Drying And Curing Cannabis

Dry your buds in a dark cool place with little humidity. Ideally, this process
is very slow and should take a minimum of two weeks.

### Check things often for over drying or moulds

When dry, thin branches will easily snap. Thick branches will still be
slightly flexible.

The chlorophyll has degraded and the green of growth has been replaced with
species dependent colours. Fawn, tan, a pale green or even deep blue and
purple can emerge as the buds true dry colours develop.

![Dry Cure Buds ](/img/cms/dry-cure-buds_2.jpg)

### Storing Cured Buds

At this point loosely pack a well-sealed glass jar with your treasure. Open
the top or "burp" the jar once a day for the first two weeks. This releases
built up humidity that can moulder your buds. Once the flowers are dry to the
touch only burp the jar once a week. You don't want weeks of hard work to be
wrecked by lack of attention.

### How Long Does Cannabis Take To Cure?

You can cure for as long as you like. Remembering that the psychotropic
compounds drop a water molecule when properly cured and become more
psychoactive. This takes at least six weeks when cured under ideal conditions.
The longer the cure the smoother the result. Keep your jars in a dark cool
place. THC breaks down into other cannabinoids over time when exposed to
light.

If you are unsure about bud dryness sample your wares as they dry so you have
a future reference. Dry cannabis doesn't really feel completely dry because of
the waxiness of the resins. You will develop the feel and skill quickly.

Enjoying your own well-grown cannabis is not difficult. Some attention and
patience can reap stinky benefits even from the smallest of spaces.

Happy growing friends!

RELATED STORY

> __ Top Tips To Successfully Dry And Cure Your Fresh Cannabis Buds

## TOP 6 CANNABIS STRAINS THAT ARE EASY TO GROW

### GREEN PUNCH: FAST, BEGINNER-FRIENDLY SATIVA

Most sativas are finicky and require lots of time and experience to be able to
do their thing. But smokers can't stop raving about the energetic high and
delicious taste. If you're throwing caution to the wind and starting off with
a sativa anyway, Green Punch is a great choice.

This Purple Punch X Green Crack cross can take all your mistakes in stride no
matter what you throw at her. She won't care if you over or under water, if
you don't mix your nutrients just right, if the pH is a bit off or you have a
few minor light leaks. She'll still yield very well! After just 55–60 days of
bloom, Green Punch will reward your efforts with up to 500g/m² of beautiful,
multi-coloured buds that are dense and totally saturated with resin.

Green Punch's high, on the other hand, doesn't take it easy on novice smokers.
At 20% THC, the power is dead serious, starting off with Green Crack's raging
energy and focus, before settling down, hours later, into a pain-relieving
physical stone that's the perfect way to wind down. Thank Purple Punch's touch
of indica for that final touch of peaceful calm. The smoke is smooth, silky
and filled with hints of tart citrus, ripe blueberry and sweet grape.

![Green Punch](/img/cms/green-punch_4.jpg)

Buy Green Punch

### EASY BUD: STRAIGHT TO THE POINT

Autoflowering hybrids are popular because they're both fast and simple to
grow. Easy Bud is no exception to that rule. She gets straight to the point
with fast finishes, short heights and a very forgiving nature. If you're on
the hunt for cannabis seeds that are virtually guaranteed to give you some
nice buds even if you're still figuring this growing thing out, Easy Bud is
the way to go.

Easy Bud is a smart choice if you don't have a lot of space. Indoors, she'll
stay under 60cm, but get fat and chunky. The branches will be sturdy enough to
hold her 275–325g/m² payload without needing any type of complicated support
system. Her white indica heritage results in green buds that sparkle with a
frosty sheen of resin, nestled within healthy, dark green leaves.

If you're not an experienced user or you need a little more wake-and-bake in
your stash, Easy Bud has your back! The THC is in the mild range at 12%, for a
functional stone. The buzz takes the edge off, allowing you to chill, but it
probably won't lock you to the couch even if you have zero tolerance. Even
hard-core stoners could use a few of these flowers just in case one of their
lightweight, or overly paranoid, mates shows up.

![Easy Bud](/img/cms/easy-bud_7.jpg)

Buy Easy Bud

### CRITICAL: SERIOUSLY SIMPLE CUP WINNER

Super easy and a Cannabis Cup winner? That's exactly what you'll get with this
medium-sized cash cropper. Although it's simple enough for pure newbies,
Critical delivers enough potent weed to attract the attention of professional
growers. Whether you're new to the game or go by the "work smarter not harder"
creed, this 7-week Afghani X Skunk could easily become your go-to variety
after just a single try.

When grown indoors, Critical is easy to work with because she never gets above
140 cm tall. If you need shorter plants, use either low or high-stress
training techniques, depending on what you prefer. The plants will recover
quickly either way. The colour is predominantly green with some autumn hues
showing up during the last week. Even beginners can see up to 600g/m² after a
very rapid bloom period.

As a 60% indica, 40% sativa, Critical has a fairly balanced stone that affects
both the mind and the body for total relaxation. It's very mellow, with no
excess energy or anxiety. Get a little paranoid when you smoke high-powered
weed? That won't be a problem with Critical, even though it has an 18% THC
level. This weed is as calm as they come. The flavour is classic: pungently
sweet with earthy notes.

![Critical](/img/cms/critical-royal-queen-seeds_1.jpg)

Buy Critical

### WHITE WIDOW: CRYSTALLISED PERFECTION

Known as the mother of the "White" family, White Widow has spawned countless
hybrids, but the original Brazilian Sativa X Indian Indica is still the best
and the easiest to grow. She's won her share of cups, she's dazzled
generations of growers and no true stoner can turn down her snow-covered buds
or her euphoric buzz. Compared to any other strain, White Widow is a real show
piece!

White Widow is a classic Dutch strain, and that wouldn't happen if she
couldn't thrive outdoors in colder temperatures. She does like a lot of light
for super-high yields, so this hybrid is best grown indoors. Other than that,
White Widow isn't fussy. She doesn't require any special attention or have any
peculiar nutrient needs. Just use a good soil or other medium, don't let your
plants dry out, use feed designed for cannabis and you'll have a spectacular
harvest after just 9 weeks of flowering.

Although White Widow only has 50% sativa genetics, she smokes like pure Haze,
for a totally cerebral high. The buzz starts off as a tingle across the face
before it explodes into a huge euphoric cloud of happiness. It's slightly
trippy if you aren't used to smoking this type of weed, so take care if you
usually associate herb with a more physical stone. The taste is crisp and
refreshing, with an unmistakable pine flavour, accented by clean notes of tart
citrus.

![White Widow](/img/cms/white-widow_41.jpg)

Buy White Widow

### ROYAL JACK AUTO: CARRYING ON THE JACK HERER LEGACY

With a shorter height and faster flowering period, Royal Jack Auto puts
classic Jack Herer buds within reach of novice growers. This version stays
true to the original strain, with medical-grade head highs and Jack's
signature spicy aroma. Pair this one with White Widow and your first few grows
will feature a Dutch duo that's hard to beat.

Royal Jack Auto is a fully autoflowering strain. That means she'll start to
show signs of bloom within two weeks of germination even if the lights are on
around the clock. Flowers are fully mature and ready to cut in just 10 weeks
total. Why not grow a few of these automatics side by side with some
photoperiod strains? That way you'll have fully cured, smoke-ready Royal Jack
Auto in hand to make your second trim way more pleasant.

At 16% THC, Royal Jack Auto has a decent potency level for medical use or mild
recreation. It's even good as a functional morning smoke for the highly
tolerant. The high starts off with a burst of creativity and motivation before
it eases slowly into a chill body buzz for a pleasantly mellow ending. The
taste is almost exactly like Jack Herer's fresh herbal flavour.  
![Royal Jack Auto](/img/cms/royal-jack-auto%20\(1\).jpg)

Buy Royal Jack Automatic

### SPECIAL QUEEN 1: TOP QUALITY AT A LOW PRICE

Few beginners make it through their first few grows without ruining a few
seeds or killing a plant or two. Special Queen 1 is a classic Skunk mix that's
reasonably priced so you can harvest a nice supply of pungent flowers without
breaking the bank. Save the more expensive seeds for after you learn the
ropes.

Although she's relatively cheap, Special Queen 1 is no slacker. After just 8
weeks of bloom, sometimes 7, these plants will be covered from head to toe in
Sativa-dominant blooms that have a heavy, permeating smell. They'll grow well
just about anywhere including soil or hydro, indoors or out, trained or
untrained. Yields are very generous at 550g/m² inside, or 550g/plant outside
making Special Queen 1 just as appealing to professional growers as mere
amateurs.

Special Queen 1 improves on original Skunk's potency with an impressive 18%
THC rating that gives this strain staying power. Even though the effect is a
bit stronger and longer lasting, it's still a classic high that's mostly
cerebral with a definite mood lift. Just a few puffs and your eyes will droop,
your smile will widen and your thoughts will expand. Special Queen 1 has a
sweet, fruity taste with a spicy edge.

![Special Queen 1](/img/cms/special-queen-1_10.jpg)

Buy Special Queen 1

## Are you aged 18 or over?

The content on RoyalQueenSeeds.com is only suitable for adults and is reserved
for those of legal age.

Ensure you are aware of the laws of your country.

**By clicking ENTER, you confirm  
you are** **18 years or older**

Enter Go back

#### Cannabis General Info

![Cannabis General Info](/modules/staticblock/images/en_static-block-cannabis-

general-info.jpg)

  * The Cannabis Plant Anatomy
  * The Cannabis Cultivation Timeline
  * The 7 Easy Steps Of Growing Cannabis
  * Guidelines To Help Choose Your Marijuana Seeds

![free cannabis seeds](/modules/atdbanner1/images/SideBanners_RQS_EN1.png)

![Free World Wide Shipping, Fast and Discrete!

](/modules/atdbanner2/images/SideBanners_RQS_EN3.png)

![Royal Queen Seeds Shops](/modules/atdbanner7/images/SideBanners_RQS_EN6.png)

![Best Seed Bank](/modules/atdbanner5/images/SideBanners_Awards.png)

![Bitcanna](/modules/atdbanner3/images/BC_ASoon_green2.png)

#### Categories

  * Autoflowering cannabis seeds
  * Feminized cannabis seeds
  * CBD cannabis seeds
  * USA Premium Seeds
  * CBD oil
  * More CBD
  * Bulk Seeds
    * Feminized Bulk Seeds
    * Autoflowering Bulk Seeds
    * CBD Bulk Seeds
  * Growing
  * Companion Planting
  * Vaporizers
  * Merchandise

Trustpilot

#### Cannabis General Info

![Cannabis General Info](/modules/staticblock/images/en_static-block-cannabis-

general-info.jpg)

  * The Cannabis Plant Anatomy
  * The Cannabis Cultivation Timeline
  * The 7 Easy Steps Of Growing Cannabis
  * Guidelines To Help Choose Your Marijuana Seeds

  * ![free cannabis seeds](/modules/atdbanner1/images/SideBanners_RQS_EN1.png)

  * ![Bitcanna](/modules/atdbanner3/images/BC_ASoon_green2.png)

  * ![Royal Queen Seeds Shops](/modules/atdbanner7/images/SideBanners_RQS_EN6.png)

  * ![Free World Wide Shipping, Fast and Discrete! ](/modules/atdbanner2/images/SideBanners_RQS_EN3.png)

  * ![Best Seed Bank](/modules/atdbanner5/images/SideBanners_Awards.png)

#### Royal Queen Seeds collection

Royal Automatic﻿ Fast Eddy Automatic Royal Bluematic﻿﻿ Royal Cookies Royal
Domina Haze Berry Sour Diesel Amnesia Haze Automatic O.G. Kush Royal Creamatic
Royal Medic Royal Highness Dance World Fruit spirit Royal Cheese Special Queen
Special Kush Royal Moby﻿ Critical Skunk Royal Haze Automatic﻿

#### TOP 10 CANNABIS SEEDS

  1. Northern Light Automatic 
  2. Special Queen 1 
  3. Royal Dwarf 
  4. White Widow 
  5. Amnesia Haze 
  6. Royal AK Automatic 
  7. Amnesia Haze Automatic 
  8. Special Kush 1 
  9. Quick One 
  10. Easy Start 

Top ten Marijuana seeds

#### Join us and get a special welcome gift!

#### We want you to be one of us

### Sing up for the rqs newsletter to

Be the first to know what's going on at RQS

Discover your exclusive welcome gift

Enjoy all our promos and special offers

* * *

#### Join us and get a special welcome gift!

#### Newsletter Sign up

__

Yes, I'm over 18 years.

*By ticking this box, I allow Royal Queen Seeds to send me marketing personalized emails including, but not limited to, events, promotions, offers and discounts. 

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/footer/cannabis-seeds-uk.png)

#### Your Account

  * Your Account
  * Personal information
  * Addresses
  * Discounts
  * Order history

#### Our offers

  * New products
  * Promotions
  * Top sellers
  * Pricelist

#### Information

  * Shipping information
  * Return Policy
  * Frequently asked questions
  * Sponsorship Requests
  * Sitemap

#### About us

  * About us
  * Contact us
  * General conditions
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cannabis cup winners

#### Cannabis Growguide

  * Building your own Grow Room
  * General Information
  * Let's get started
  * Germinating
  * The Growth or Veg phase

#### Marijuana Grow Guide

  * Telling your SOG from your SCROG
  * The blooming phase
  * The last weeks of blooming
  * Harvest Time

#### Cannabis seeds

  * Feminized cannabis seeds
  * Medical cannabis seeds﻿
  * Autoflowering cannabis seeds
  * Cannabis Seed Catalogue in PDF
  * How to preserve seeds

#### Cannabis Seeds Stores

  * Barcelona Cannabis Seeds Shops
  * Amsterdam Cannabis Seeds Shop
  * Our Stores And Locations
  * RQS Store Locator
  * Wholesale

#### Growing Advice

  * Indica or Sativa?
  * Seeds Versus Clones
  * Curing Your Buds
  * The SCROG method
  * Fast Flowering

#### Best marijuana

  * Top 10 Feminized Seeds
  * Top 10 Autoflowering Seeds
  * Top 10 Indica Cannabis 
  * Top 10 Best Sativa Cannabis 

#### Medical cannabis

  * Cannabis as Painkiller
  * Multiple Sclerosis
  * Cannabis for Migraine Headaches

#### Medical Marijuana

  * What is CBD? 
  * Vaporizing vs Smoking
  * Cannabis And Depression
  * Marijuana for Asthmatics

Trustpilot

Trustpilot

![](/themes/royalqueenseeds/img/backtotop-icon.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

