

Skip to main content

__

Reclaiming the future of food and farming

* * *

  * About Us
  * GroundTruth Blog
  * Press
  * Resource Library

![Pesticide Action Network](http://www.panna.org/sites/default/files/35-logo-

web.png)

## Pesticide Action Network

###### Reclaiming the future of food and farming.

  * Take Action
    * Online Action Center
    * Our Campaigns
    * Fair Harvest
    * Healthy Kids
    * Save Our Bees
    * Stop Drift
    * Starting at Home
    * Home
    * Pets
    * Garden
    * Want To Do More?
    * Action Toolkits
    * Speak up!
    * Build community
  * The Pesticide Problem
    * Pesticides: The Big Picture
    * Lynchpin of Industrial Ag
    * Myths & Facts
    * Pesticides 101
    * Food & Farming Derailed
    * Bees in Crisis
    * Farmer Livelihoods At Risk
    * Food: Field to Fork
    * Human Health Harms
    * Cancer
    * Children
    * Reproductive Health
    * Frontline Communities
    * Around the world
    * Farmworkers
    * Rural Families
  * Key Issues
    * Agroecology & Farming Solutions
    * Agroecology: Resilient & Productive
    * U.S. Stories from the Field
      * Biological pest controls: Uncle Matt's Organics
      * Deficit irrigation: Masumoto Family Farm
      * Diverse ecosystems: Terra Bella Farm
      * Rotational grazing: Stephanie Larsen
      * Urban farming in Oakland: Kosodate Farms
    * Global Stories from the Field
      * Burkina Faso: Regenerating soil
      * India: Irrigation & water saving
      * West Africa: Organic cotton & increased yields
    * GMOs, Pesticides & Profit
    * The Pesticide Treadmill
    * Corporate Science & Spin
    * Big Ag's Dirty Little Secret
    * Food Democracy
    * Battling "Free Trade"
    * Democratizing Food
    * Feeding the World
    * Policies that Work
    * Stronger National Policies
    * Statehouses Take the Lead
    * Reclaiming Local Control
  * DONATE
    * Donate to PAN
    * Give Monthly
    * Other Ways to Give
    * Your Gift Makes a Difference
  * Search

## You are here

Home

# PANNA: Pesticides in Tobacco Increase Health Risks

![Andrew Olsen's picture](/sites/default/files/user-default-pic.png)

May 11, 2006 -- Andrew Olsen

Home

See PANUPS updates service, for complete information.

**PAN Reports: Pesticides in Tobacco Increase Health Risks**  
May 12, 2006

**Other Features This Week**

**Hawai'i:** The Navy ordered a local Hawaiian construction company to spread
topsoil contaminated with the pesticide chlordane on the site of a $50-million
housing project located on the Marine Corps Base Hawai'i at K ƒÅne'ohe. It will
house families of junior enlisted personnel. Chlordane has been banned for
import in 95 countries, and is illegal to use in the United States. KGMB TV
reports on how one man is speaking out.

**Virginia:** An angry high school student contaminated a school building with
the household pesticide malathion in revenge against school administrators.
Students and staff were evacuated as the school scrambled to deal with the
toxic poison, easily obtained at local home and garden stores. Local tv
station WBDJ reports.

**California:** Applicators working in a citrus orchard sprayed pesticides
that are dangerous to humans even though they saw people working in a
neighboring Bakersfield-area vineyard, according to a report released by the
Centers for Disease Control. In the May 2005 incident, several of the mostly
female workers went into convulsions and many complained of headaches, nausea
and eye irritation. Read more.

**Western United States:** Researchers from Oregon State University, USGS and
US EPA have found agricultural pesticides in the otherwise pristine winter
snow at Mount Rainier, Sequoia and two other national parks in Colorado and
Montana. The pesticide residues found include some of the older organochlorine
pesticides now banned in the United States, as well as the currently used
pesticides chlorpyrifos, dacthal and endosulfan. Researchers are studying the
consequences for plants, fish and wildlife in the park. Barbara Samora, a
Mount Rainier National Park biologist, told the The News Tribune of Tacoma,
"We thought these areas were pristine, and they're not."

**Oregon:** Weapons of the Weed War. More gardeners are turning to earth-
friendly remedies and gadgets to wipe out weeds. Now that spring has arrived,
more and more people are rejecting the use of chemicals on their gardens and
using smarter methods to deal with weeds. Oregon's Register Guard has the
story.

Elizabeth Anderson was a regular smoker for 10 years. During her last few
years of smoking, she changed her diet to organic foods and promptly noticed
that she now felt sick every time she smoked. "I knew that tobacco is a
heavily-sprayed crop and suspected that my new pesticide-free diet made me
more sensitive to the pesticides in the cigarettes," she says. "I think I was
right, because when I stopped smoking, I stopped feeling sick."

Tobacco growers apply huge amounts of fertilizer, herbicides and pesticides to
their crops during a three-month growing period. In 1997, the last year for
which global data was available, over 5.5 million pounds of the pesticide
fumigant methyl bromide were applied to tobacco fields worldwide. Such liberal
use of pesticides has serious impacts on human health and the environment.

Anderson's concerns--first for herself and now for friends who still smoke--
are well founded. Though there may be other causes for her feeling sick after
smoking, according to a study by Monash University in Australia, research
indicates that tobacco pesticides can be blamed for a much higher-than-average
rate of breast cancer among women in rural England who live near tobacco
fields.

Among the pesticides that are commonly used on tobacco are the highly toxic
aldicarb and chlorpyrifos. Methyl bromide, an ozone-depleting chemical slated
for world-wide elimination, is often used to fumigate the soil prior to
planting tobacco seedlings. Fortunately, there are signs of improvement in
some places. W ith the aim of reducing methyl bromide use 20 percent by 2005,
Brazil went from consuming 1,790 tons in 1998 to 440 tons in 2002.

Some of the pesticides the tobacco industry uses leach into soil and find
their way into streams, rivers and food chains. These substances may
indirectly cause the genetic selection of pesticide-resistant mosquitoes or
flies, making the control of diseases such as malaria particularly difficult.
Wildlife is exposed to tobacco pesticides by accidentally eating toxic
pesticide residues found on plants and insects, through contact with their
skin and eyes, and through inhaling pesticide vapors. This exposure has
devastating health effects for birds and mammals.

However, it was concern for human health, not wildlife that prompted the
massive tobacco litigation settlements in the United States. Liggett Group,
Inc. one of the large tobacco corporations revealed that cigarettes contained
DDT, malathion, endrin, and other pesticides that the company itself described
as "highly toxic."

U.S. tobacco consumption has declined, and by 2003 the federal government was
taking small steps toward limiting support for tobacco farming. The tobacco
companies, the largest and most influential of which are multinational
corporations such as Phillip Morris and Reynolds, began moving both their
production and their marketing efforts overseas. According to a 2001 report by
the Washington, D.C. based Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, tobacco production
in developing countries grew by 128% between 1975 and 1998. Currently, two-
thirds of the world's tobacco is grown in just four countries: China, India,
Brazil, and the United States.

There is growing evidence of government laxity and industry influence over the
tobacco pesticide regulation process. In 2003, the U.S. General Accounting
Office (GAO) found that the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) was failing to
periodically update pesticide residue limits for tobacco and to test imported
and domestic tobacco for pesticide levels. A 2005 study that appeared in the
respected journal _Environmental Health Perspectives_ showed that although
pesticides are regulated nationally and internationally, tobacco companies
sometimes exert considerable influence over the regulatory process. Focusing
on three pesticides that are routinely applied to tobacco crops --methoprene,
the ethylene bisdithiocarbamates and phosphine--the researchers examined
approximately 2,000 internal company documents and 3,885 pages of U.S. EPA
documents for unspecified companies. They found that the tobacco industry
hired former EPA scientists to write reports for the EPA and World Health
Organization favorable to industry regarding pesticide regulations.

The study also showed that the industry tried to avoid European Union tobacco
pesticide regulations by attempting to self-regulate in Europe, using new
European Commission regulations. It was also reported that Philip Morris
encouraged a pesticide manufacturer to apply for higher pesticide tolerance
levels in Malaysia and Europe while keeping tobacco industry interests a
secret from government regulators in those countries.

Meanwhile, people like Elizabeth Anderson are impatient with government
regulators who fail to enforce pesticide regulations and corporations that
appear to value profits more than life itself. Elizabeth is even impatient
with lawsuits against tobacco companies that make no mention of pesticides.
"No one talks about the pesticides in cigarettes," she says. "The only thing
that's recognized is that cigarettes are addictive and you can get cancer from
them. What about the rest of the story? How much of that lung cancer is really
caused by pesticides? Nobody seems to know."

But many people _do_ know that the fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides in
cigarettes are harmful and they're taking action. To find out how you can join
them, click here.

* * *

### References

Barry, M. 1991. The influence of the US Tobacco industry on the health,
economy, and environment of developing countries. _New England_ _J Medicine_ ,
324: 917-9. http://www.ash.org.uk/html/factsheets/html/fact22.html. (accessed
May 8, 2006). ****

Corporate Europe Observer. June 2001. Better Regulation: For Whom? EC Prepares
to Dismantle Business Regulation and Expand Corporate Control. _Corporate
Europe Observer_ http://www.corporateeurope.org/observer9/regulation.html.
(accessed May 8, 2006).

Bromley, P. T., Palmer, W. E., Southern, S. P. 1992. _Pesticides and Wildlife
-Tobacco_. Department of Entomology, NCSU.
http://ipm.ncsu.edu/wildlife/tobacco_wildlife.html. (accessed May 8, 2006).

Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. 2001. _Golden Leaf, Barren Harvest_.
Washington, D.C. http://www.ehponline.org/members/2003/111-5/spheres.html.
(accessed May 8, 2006).

Hickey, E. and Chan, Y. 1998. _Tobacco, Farmers and Pesticides: The Other
Story_. Pesticide Action Network North America, San Francisco, CA.
http://www.panna.org/resources/documents/tobacco.dv.html (accessed May 8,
2006).

Illegal tobacco pesticides linked to high breast cancer rates in rural
England. News Target.com http://www.newstarget.com/004636.html. (accessed May
8, 2006).

McDaniel, P. A., Solomon, G., Malone, R. E. 2005. The Tobacco Industry and
Pesticide Regulations: Case Studies from Tobacco Industry Archives.
_Environmental Health Perspectives,_ 113 (12), pp. 1659-1665.
http://repositories.cdlib.org/postprints/965/.(accessed May 8, 2006).

Osava, M. 2003. _Methyl Bromide on Its Way Out in Brazil and Cuba_.
http://www.tierramerica.net/2003/0623/iacentos2.shtml. (accessed May 8, 2006).

Razak, D. A. 1997. _Toxic Pesticides in Cigarettes_.
http://www.prn2.usm.my/mainsite/bulletin/sun/1997/sun15.html. (accessed May 8,
2006).

Brown, V.J. 2003. Tobacco's Profit, Workers' Loss? _Environmental Health
Perspectives,_ 111(5).
http://www.ehponline.org/members/2003/111-5/spheres.html. (accessed May 8,
2006).

United States General Accounting Office. 2003 _. Pesticides on Tobacco:
Federal Activities to Assess Risks and Monitor Residues_.
http://www.gao.gov/highlights/d03485high.pdf. (accessed May 8, 2006).

PANUPS is a weekly email news service providing resource guides and reporting
on pesticide issues that don't always get coverage by the mainstream media.
It's produced by Pesticide Action Network North America, a non-profit and non-
governmental organization working to advance sustainable alternatives to
pesticides worldwide.

You can join our efforts! We gladly accept donations for our work and all
contributions are tax deductible in the United States. Visit
http://www.panna.org/donate.

* * *

retrieved

  * Add new comment
  * ![Printer-friendly version](http://www.panna.org/modules/print/icons/print_icon.gif) Printer-friendly version

Back to top

## Visit our other sites

![What's on My Food website](/sites/default/files/images/womf-website-

tile_0.png)

![Honey Bee Haven website](/sites/default/files/images/hbh-website-tile_0.png)

## Stay in touch

**** ****

## Contact

Main Office: 2029 University Ave., Suite 200  
Berkeley, CA 94704  
Phone: 510.788.9020

Sacramento Office: 909 12th Street  
Sacramento, CA 95814

Midwest Office: 3438 Snelling Ave  
Upper Level, Minneapolis, MN 55406

¬© PESTICIDE ACTION NETWORK NORTH AMERICA

  * Home
  * Contact
  * Pesticides 101
  * Blog
  * Privacy Policy
  * Comment Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Œ≥-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Œ≥-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Œ≥-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFŒ≤]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Œ≥-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Œ≥-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Œ≥-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFŒ≤]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

