

# Abortion in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Termination of a pregnancy in the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1c/Abortion_limits_in_the_United_States.svg/400px-

Abortion_limits_in_the_United_States.svg.png)

Latest point in pregnancy a woman can get an abortion by state and territory
(without special exceptions, including risk of death to the mother or fetus)

Start of third trimester (25 weeks)

Viability (24-28 weeks)

24 weeks

18–20 weeks

13 weeks

Abortion outlawed

No limit

_Indicates a limit at 6–8 weeks is expected to come into effect  
_ Indicates a ban on abortion is expected to come into effect

**Abortion in the United States** refers to the practice of terminating a
pregnancy, and it is among the most controversial and divisive issues in
American society, culture and politics. Various anti-abortion laws have been
in force in each state since at least 1900.

Before the U.S. Supreme Court decision _Roe v. Wade_ decriminalized abortion
nationwide in 1973, abortion was already legal in several states, but the
decision imposed a uniform framework for state legislation on the subject. It
established a minimal period during which abortion is legal (with more or
fewer restrictions throughout the pregnancy). That basic framework, modified
in _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992), remains nominally in place, although
the effective availability of abortion varies significantly from state to
state, as many counties have no abortion providers.[1] _Planned Parenthood v.
Casey_ held that a law cannot place legal restrictions imposing an undue
burden for "the purpose or effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the
path of a woman seeking an abortion of a nonviable fetus."[2]

The main actors in the abortion debate are most often labeled either as "pro-
choice" or "pro-life", though shades of opinion exist, and most Americans are
considered to be somewhere in the middle.[3] A 2018 Gallup survey found the
percentages that were pro-choice or pro-life were equal (at 48%), but more
people considered abortion morally wrong (48%) than morally acceptable (43%).
The poll results also indicated that Americans harbor a diverse and shifting
set of opinions on the legal status of abortion. The survey found that only
29% of respondents believed abortion should be legal in all circumstances, and
50% of respondents believed that abortion should be legal under certain
circumstances.[4] Recent polling results also found that only 34% of Americans
were satisfied with abortion laws.[5]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Terminology
          * 2 History
            * 2.1 Rise of anti-abortion legislation
            * 2.2 Sherri Finkbine
            * 2.3 Pre- _Roe_ precedents
            * 2.4 _Roe v. Wade_
              * 2.4.1 _Doe v. Bolton_
            * 2.5 Later judicial decisions
          * 3 Current legal status
            * 3.1 Federal legislation
            * 3.2 State-by-state legal status
          * 4 Qualifying requirements for abortion providers
          * 5 Statistics
            * 5.1 Number of abortions
            * 5.2 Medical abortions
            * 5.3 Abortion and religion
            * 5.4 Abortions and ethnicity
            * 5.5 Reasons for abortions
            * 5.6 When women have abortions (by gestational age)
            * 5.7 Safety of abortions
          * 6 Public opinion
            * 6.1 By gender, age, party, and region
            * 6.2 By trimester of pregnancy
            * 6.3 By circumstance or reasons
            * 6.4 Additional polls
            * 6.5 Partial birth abortion
          * 7 Abortion financing
            * 7.1 Medicaid
            * 7.2 Private insurance
            * 7.3 Mexico City policy
          * 8 Positions of U.S. political parties
          * 9 Effects of legalization
          * 10 Unintended live birth
          * 11 See also
          * 12 References
          * 13 Further reading
          * 14 External links
        

## Terminology[edit]

Main article: Abortion

The abortion debate most commonly relates to the "induced abortion" of an
embryo or fetus at some point in a pregnancy, which is also how the term is
used in a legal sense.[6] Some also use the term "elective abortion", which is
used in relation to a claim to an unrestricted right of a woman to an
abortion, whether or not she chooses to have one. The term elective abortion
or voluntary abortion describes the interruption of pregnancy before viability
at the request of the woman, but not for medical reasons.[7]

In medical parlance, "abortion" can refer to either miscarriage or abortion
until the fetus is viable. After viability, doctors call an abortion a
"termination of pregnancy".

## History[edit]

### Rise of anti-abortion legislation[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Map_of_US_abortion_laws_pre-1973.svg/250px-

Map_of_US_abortion_laws_pre-1973.svg.png)

Abortion laws in the U.S. before _Roe_

Illegal (30)

Legal in case of rape (1)

Legal in case of danger to woman's health (2)

Legal in case of danger to woman's health, rape or incest, or likely damaged
fetus (13)

Legal on request (4)

[ _citation needed_ ]

When the United States first became independent, most states applied English
common law to abortion. This meant it was not permitted after quickening, or
the start of fetal movements, usually felt 15–20 weeks after conception.[8]

Abortions became illegal by statute in Britain in 1803 with _Lord
Ellenborough's Act_ , and various anti-abortion statutes began to appear in
the United States in the 1820s that codified or expanded common law. In 1821,
a Connecticut law targeted apothecaries who sold "poisons" to women for
purposes of inducing an abortion, and New York made post-quickening abortions
a felony and pre-quickening abortions a misdemeanor in 1829.[ _citation
needed_ ] Some argue that the early American abortion laws were motivated not
by ethical concerns about abortion but by concern about the procedure's
safety.[ _citation needed_ ] Other legal scholars have pointed out that some
of the early laws punished not only the doctor or abortionist, but also the
woman who hired them.[9]

A number of other factors likely played a role in the rise of anti-abortion
laws. Physicians, who were the leading advocates of abortion criminalization
laws, appear to have been motivated at least in part by advances in medical
knowledge. Science had discovered that conception inaugurated a more or less
continuous process of development, which would produce a new human being if
uninterrupted. Moreover, quickening was found to be neither more nor less
crucial in the process of gestation than any other step. Many physicians
concluded that if society considered it unjustifiable to terminate pregnancy
after the fetus had quickened, and if quickening was a relatively unimportant
step in the gestation process, then it was just as wrong to terminate a
pregnancy before quickening as after quickening.[10] Ideologically, the
Hippocratic Oath and the medical mentality of that age to defend the value of
human life as an absolute also played a significant role in molding opinions
about abortion.[10] Doctors were also influenced by practical reasons to
impose anti-abortion laws. For one, abortion providers tended to be untrained
and not members of medical societies. In an age where the leading doctors in
the nation were attempting to standardize the medical profession, these
"irregulars" were considered a nuisance to public health.[11] The more
formalized medical profession disliked the "irregulars" because they were
competition, often at a cheaper cost.

Despite campaigns to end the practice of abortion, abortifacient advertising
was highly effective, though less so across the Atlantic. Contemporary
estimates of mid-19th century abortion rates suggest between 20-25% of all
pregnancies in the United States during that era ended in abortion.[12] This
era saw a marked shift in those who were obtaining abortions. Before the start
of the 19th century, most abortions were sought by unmarried women who had
become pregnant out of wedlock. Out of 54 abortion cases published in American
medical journals between 1839 and 1880, over half were sought by married
women, and well over 60% of the married women already had at least one
child.[13] The sense that married women were now frequently obtaining
abortions worried many conservative physicians, who were almost exclusively
men. In the post-Civil War era, much of the blame was placed on the burgeoning
women's rights movement.

Though the medical profession expressed hostility toward feminism, many
feminists of the era were opposed to abortion.[14][15] In _The Revolution_ ,
operated by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, an anonymous
contributor signing "A" wrote in 1869 about the subject, arguing that instead
of merely attempting to pass a law against abortion, the root cause must also
be addressed. Simply passing an anti-abortion law would, the writer stated,
"be only mowing off the top of the noxious weed, while the root remains. [...]
No matter what the motive, love of ease, or a desire to save from suffering
the unborn innocent, the woman is awfully guilty who commits the deed. It will
burden her conscience in life, it will burden her soul in death; But oh!
thrice guilty is he who drove her to the desperation which impelled her to the
crime."[15][16][17][18] To many feminists of this era, abortion was regarded
as an undesirable necessity forced upon women by thoughtless men.[19] Even the
"free love" wing of the feminist movement refused to advocate for abortion and
treated the practice as an example of the hideous extremes to which modern
marriage was driving women.[20] Marital rape and the seduction of unmarried
women were societal ills which feminists believed caused the need to abort, as
men did not respect women's right to abstinence.[20]

However, physicians remained the loudest voice in the anti-abortion debate,
and they carried their anti-feminist agenda to state legislatures around the
country, advocating not only anti-abortion laws, but also laws against birth
control. This movement presaged the modern debate over women's body
rights.[21] A campaign was launched against the movement and the use and
availability of contraceptives.

Criminalization of abortion accelerated from the late 1860s, through the
efforts of concerned legislators, doctors, and the American Medical
Association.[22] In 1873, Anthony Comstock created the New York Society for
the Suppression of Vice, an institution dedicated to supervising the morality
of the public. Later that year, Comstock successfully influenced the United
States Congress to pass the Comstock Law, which made it illegal to deliver
through the U.S. mail any "obscene, lewd, or lascivious" material. It also
prohibited producing or publishing information pertaining to the procurement
of abortion or the prevention of conception or venereal disease, even to
medical students.[23] The production, publication, importation, and
distribution of such materials was suppressed under the Comstock Law as being
obscene, and similar prohibitions were passed by 24 of the 37 states.[24]

In 1900, abortion was a felony in every state. Some states included provisions
allowing for abortion in limited circumstances, generally to protect the
woman's life or to terminate pregnancies arising from rape or incest.[25]
Abortions continued to occur, however, and became increasingly available. The
American Birth Control League was founded by Margaret Sanger in 1921 to
promote the founding of birth control clinics and enable women to control
their own fertility.[26]

By the 1930s, licensed physicians performed an estimated 800,000 abortions a
year.[27]

### Sherri Finkbine[edit]

One notable case dealt with a woman named Sherri Finkbine. Born in the area of
Phoenix, Arizona, Sherri had 4 healthy children. However, during her pregnancy
with her 5th child, she had found that the child might have severe
deformities.[28] Finkbine had been taking sleeping pills that contained a drug
called Thalidomide which was also very popular in several countries.[29] She
had later learned that the drug was causing fetal deformities and she wanted
to warn the general public. Finkbine strongly wanted an abortion, however the
abortion laws of Arizona limited her decision. In Arizona, an abortion could
only occur if the mother's life was in danger. She met with a reporter from
_The Arizona Republic_ and told her story. While Sherri Finkbine wanted to be
kept anonymous, the reporter disregarded this idea. On August 18, 1962,
Finkbine traveled to Sweden where she was able to obtain a legal abortion. It
was also confirmed that the child would have been very much deformed.[30]
Sherri Finkbine's story marks a turning point for women as well as the history
of abortion laws occurring in the United States. Sherri Finkbine, unlike many
other women was able to afford going overseas to have the abortion. However,
for the women who have pregnancies that are actually unintended, they may not
be able to afford traveling, leading them to seek more illegal forms of
abortion.

### Pre- _Roe_ precedents [edit]

In 1964, Gerri Santoro of Connecticut died trying to obtain an illegal
abortion and her photo became the symbol of the pro-choice movement. Some
women's rights activist groups developed their own skills to provide abortions
to women who could not obtain them elsewhere. As an example, in Chicago, a
group known as "Jane" operated a floating abortion clinic throughout much of
the 1960s. Women seeking the procedure would call a designated number and be
given instructions on how to find "Jane".[31]

In 1965, the U.S. Supreme Court case _Griswold v. Connecticut_ struck down one
of the remaining contraception Comstock laws in Connecticut and Massachusetts.
However, Griswold only applied to marital relationships. _Eisenstadt v. Baird_
(1972) extended its holding to unmarried persons as well. Following the
_Griswold case_ , the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(ACOG) issued a medical bulletin accepting a recommendation from 6 years
earlier which clarified that conception is implantation, not fertilization;
and consequently birth control methods that prevented implantation became
classified as contraceptives, not abortifacients.

In 1967, Colorado became the first state to decriminalize abortion in cases of
rape, incest, or in which pregnancy would lead to permanent physical
disability of the woman. Similar laws were passed in California, Oregon, and
North Carolina. In 1970, Hawaii became the first state to legalize abortions
on the request of the woman,[32] and New York repealed its 1830 law and
allowed abortions up to the 24th week of pregnancy. Similar laws were soon
passed in Alaska and Washington. In 1970, Washington held a referendum on
legalizing early pregnancy abortions, becoming the first state to legalize
abortion through a vote of the people.[33] A law in Washington, D.C., which
allowed abortion to protect the life or health of the woman, was challenged in
the Supreme Court in 1971 in _United States v. Vuitch_. The court upheld the
law, deeming that "health" meant "psychological and physical well-being",
essentially allowing abortion in Washington, D. C. By the end of 1972, 13
states had a law similar to that of Colorado, while Mississippi allowed
abortion in cases of rape or incest only and Alabama and Massachusetts allowed
abortions only in cases where the woman's physical health was endangered. In
order to obtain abortions during this period, women would often travel from a
state where abortion was illegal to states where it was legal. The legal
position prior to _Roe v. Wade_ was that abortion was illegal in 30 states and
legal under certain circumstances in 20 states.[34]

In the late 1960s, a number of organizations were formed to mobilize opinion
both against and for the legalization of abortion. In 1966, the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops assigned Monsignor James T. McHugh to document
efforts to reform abortion laws, and anti-abortion groups began forming in
various states in 1967. In 1968, McHugh led an advisory group which became the
National Right to Life Committee.[35][36] The forerunner of the NARAL Pro-
Choice America was formed in 1969 to oppose restrictions on abortion and
expand access to abortion.[37] Following _Roe v. Wade_ , in late 1973, NARAL
became the National Abortion Rights Action League.

### _Roe v. Wade_ [edit]

Main article: Roe v. Wade

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/USSC_justice_group_photo-1973_current.jpg/350px-

USSC_justice_group_photo-1973_current.jpg)

The United States Supreme Court membership in 1973.

Prior to _Roe v. Wade_ , 30 states prohibited abortion without exception, 16
states banned abortion except in certain special circumstances (e.g., rape,
incest, health threat to mother), 3 states allowed residents to obtain
abortions, and New York allowed abortions generally.[38] Early that year, on
January 22, 1973, the Supreme Court in _Roe v. Wade_ invalidated all of these
laws, and set guidelines for the availability of abortion. _Roe_ established
that the right of privacy of a woman to obtain an abortion "must be considered
against important state interests in regulation".[39] _Roe_ established a
"trimester" (i.e., 12 week) threshold of state interest in the life of the
fetus corresponding to its increasing "viability" (likelihood of survival
outside the uterus) over the course of a pregnancy, such that states were
prohibited from banning abortion early in pregnancy but allowed to impose
increasing restrictions or outright bans later in pregnancy.

In deciding _Roe v. Wade_ , the Supreme Court ruled that a Texas statute
forbidding abortion except when necessary to save the life of the mother was
unconstitutional. The Court arrived at its decision by concluding that the
issue of abortion and abortion rights falls under the right to privacy (in the
sense of the right of a person not to be encroached by the state). In its
opinion, it listed several landmark cases where the court had previously found
a right to privacy implied by the Constitution. The Court did not recognize a
right to abortion in all cases:

> State regulation protective of fetal life after viability thus has both
logical and biological justifications. If the State is interested in
protecting fetal life after viability, it may go so far as to proscribe
abortion during that period, except when it is necessary to preserve the life
or health of the mother.[40]

The Court held that a right to privacy existed and included the right to have
an abortion. The court found that a mother had a right to abortion until
viability, a point to be determined by the abortion doctor. After viability a
woman can obtain an abortion for health reasons, which the Court defined
broadly to include psychological well-being.

A central issue in the _Roe_ case (and in the wider abortion debate in
general) is whether human life or personhood begins at conception, birth, or
at some point in between. The Court declined to make an attempt at resolving
this issue, noting: "We need not resolve the difficult question of when life
begins. When those trained in the respective disciplines of medicine,
philosophy, and theology are unable to arrive at any consensus, the judiciary,
at this point in the development of man's knowledge, is not in a position to
speculate as to the answer." Instead, it chose to point out that historically,
under English and American common law and statutes, "the unborn have never
been recognized ... as persons in the whole sense", and thus, the fetuses are
not legally entitled to the protection afforded by the right to life
specifically enumerated in the Fourteenth Amendment. So, rather than asserting
that human life begins at any specific point, the court simply declared that
the State has a "compelling interest" in protecting "potential life" at the
point of viability.

#### _Doe v. Bolton_ [edit]

Main article: Doe v. Bolton

Under _Roe v. Wade_ , state governments may not prohibit late terminations of
pregnancy when "necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother", even
if it would cause the demise of a viable fetus.[41] This rule was clarified by
the 1973 judicial decision _Doe v. Bolton_ , which specifies "that the medical
judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors — physical, emotional,
psychological, familial, and the woman's age — relevant to the well-being of
the patient".[42][43][44] It is by this provision for the mother's mental
health that women in the US legally choose abortion after viability when
screenings reveal abnormalities that do not cause a baby to die shortly after
birth.[45][46][47][48]

### Later judicial decisions[edit]

In the 1992 case of _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , the Court abandoned
_Roe's_ strict trimester framework but maintained its central holding that
women have a right to choose to have an abortion before viability.[49] _Roe_
had held that statutes regulating abortion must be subject to "strict
scrutiny" — the traditional Supreme Court test for impositions upon
fundamental Constitutional rights. _Casey_ instead adopted the lower, undue
burden standard for evaluating state abortion restrictions,[50] but re-
emphasized the right to abortion as grounded in the general sense of liberty
and privacy protected under the constitution: "Constitutional protection of
the woman's decision to terminate her pregnancy derives from the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. It declares that no State shall 'deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.' The
controlling word in the cases before us is 'liberty'."[51]

The Supreme Court continues to grapple with cases on the subject. On April 18,
2007, it issued a ruling in the case of _Gonzales v. Carhart_ , involving a
federal law entitled the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 which
President George W. Bush had signed into law. The law banned intact dilation
and extraction, which opponents of abortion rights referred to as "partial-
birth abortion", and stipulated that anyone breaking the law would get a
prison sentence up to 2.5 years. The United States Supreme Court upheld the
2003 ban by a narrow majority of 5-4, marking the first time the Court has
allowed a ban on any type of abortion since 1973. The opinion, which came from
justice Anthony Kennedy, was joined by Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence
Thomas, and the two recent appointees, Samuel Alito and Chief Justice John
Roberts.

In the case of _Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt_ , the Supreme Court in a
5-3 decision on June 27, 2016 swept away forms of state restrictions on the
way abortion clinics can function. The Texas legislature enacted in 2013
restrictions on the delivery of abortions services that created an undue
burden for women seeking an abortion by requiring abortion doctors to have
difficult-to-obtain "admitting privileges" at a local hospital and by
requiring clinics to have costly hospital-grade facilities. The Court struck
down these two provisions "facially" from the law at issue—that is, the very
words of the provisions were invalid, no matter how they might be applied in
any practical situation. According to the Supreme Court, the task of judging
whether a law puts an unconstitutional burden on a woman's right to abortion
belongs with the courts, and not the legislatures.[52]

## Current legal status[edit]

### Federal legislation[edit]

Since 1995, led by congressional Republicans, the U.S. House of
Representatives and U.S. Senate have moved several times to pass measures
banning the procedure of intact dilation and extraction, commonly known as
partial birth abortion. Such measures passed twice by wide margins, but
President Bill Clinton vetoed those bills in April 1996 and October 1997 on
the grounds that they did not include health exceptions. Congressional
supporters of the bill argue that a health exception would render the bill
unenforceable, since the _Doe v. Bolton_ decision defined "health" in vague
terms, justifying any motive for obtaining an abortion. Congress was
unsuccessful with subsequent attempts to override the vetoes.

The Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002 ("BAIPA") was enacted August 5,
2002 by an Act of Congress and signed into law by George W. Bush. It asserts
the human rights of infants born after a failed attempt to induce abortion. A
"born-alive infant" is specified as a "person, human being, child,
individual". "Born alive" is defined as the complete expulsion of an infant at
any stage of development that has a heartbeat, pulsation of the umbilical
cord, breath, or voluntary muscle movement, no matter if the umbilical cord
has been cut or if the expulsion of the infant was natural, induced labor,
cesarean section, or induced abortion.

On October 2, 2003, with a vote of 281-142, the House approved the Partial-
Birth Abortion Ban Act to ban partial-birth abortion, with an exemption in
cases of fatal threats to the woman. Through this legislation, a doctor could
face up to two years in prison and civil lawsuits for performing such a
procedure. A woman undergoing the procedure could not be prosecuted under the
measure. On October 21, 2003, the United States Senate passed the bill by a
vote of 64-34, with a number of Democrats joining in support. The bill was
signed by President George W. Bush on November 5, 2003, but a federal judge
blocked its enforcement in several states just a few hours after it became
public law. The Supreme Court upheld the nationwide ban on the procedure in
the case _Gonzales v. Carhart_ on April 18, 2007, signaling a substantial
change in the Court's approach to abortion law.[53] The 5-4 ruling said the
_Partial Birth Abortion Ban Act_ does not conflict with previous decisions
regarding abortion.

The current judicial interpretation of the U.S. Constitution regarding
abortion, following the Supreme Court of the United States's 1973 landmark
decision in _Roe v. Wade_ , and subsequent companion decisions, is that
abortion is legal but may be restricted by the states to varying degrees.
States have passed laws to restrict late-term abortions, require parental
notification for minors, and mandate the disclosure of abortion risk
information to patients prior to the procedure.[54]

The official report of the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, issued in 1983
after extensive hearings on the Human Life Amendment (proposed by Senators
Orrin Hatch and Thomas Eagleton), stated that

> Thus, the [Judiciary] Committee observes that no significant legal barriers
of any kind whatsoever exist today in the United States for a mother to obtain
an abortion for any reason during any stage of her pregnancy.[55]

One aspect of the legal abortion regime now in place has been determining when
the fetus is "viable" outside the womb as a measure of when the "life" of the
fetus is its own (and therefore subject to being protected by the state). In
the majority opinion delivered by the court in _Roe v. Wade_ , viability was
defined as "potentially able to live outside the mother's womb, albeit with
artificial aid. Viability is usually placed at about seven months (28 weeks)
but may occur earlier, even at 24 weeks". When the court ruled in 1973, the
then-current medical technology suggested that viability could occur as early
as 24 weeks. Advances over the past three decades have allowed fetuses that
are a few weeks less than 24 weeks old to survive outside the woman's womb.
These scientific achievements, while life-saving for premature babies, have
made the determination of being "viable" somewhat more complicated.[ _citation
needed_ ]

As of 2006[update], the youngest child to survive a premature birth in the
United States was a girl born at Kapiolani Medical Center in Honolulu, Hawaii
at 21 weeks and 3 days gestation.[56] Because of the split between federal and
state law, legal access to abortion continues to vary by state. Geographic
availability varies dramatically, with 87 percent of U.S. counties having no
abortion provider.[57] Moreover, due to the Hyde Amendment, many state health
programs do not cover abortions; currently 17 states (including California,
Illinois and New York) offer or require such coverage.[58]

The legality of abortion is frequently a major issue in nomination battles for
the U.S. Supreme Court. Nominees typically remain silent on the issue during
their hearings, as the issue may come before them as judges.

The Unborn Victims of Violence Act, commonly known as "Laci and Conner's Law"
was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Bush on April 1, 2004,
allowing two charges to be filed against someone who kills a pregnant mother
(one for the mother and one for the fetus). It specifically bans charges
against the mother and/or doctor relating to abortion procedures.
Nevertheless, it has generated much controversy among pro-choice advocates who
view it as a potential step in the direction of banning abortion.

The Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act is a United States Congress bill
to ban late-term abortions nationwide after 20 weeks post-fertilization on the
basis that the fetus is capable of feeling pain during an abortion at and
after that point of pregnancy. The bill was first introduced in Congress in
2013. It successfully passed the House of Representatives in 2013, 2015, and
2017, but has yet to pass the Senate. Opponents of the bill reject the claims
made by the bill's supporters regarding fetal development, and argue that such
a restriction would endanger women's health.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/AbortionRestrictions2013.svg/220px-

AbortionRestrictions2013.svg.png)

This map demonstrates an increase in abortion restrictions and a simultaneous
decrease in abortion access in the US in 2013. An index of abortion access was
created using the supply of abortion providers, TRAP laws, gestational
restrictions, and parental notification laws to measure abortion access in the
US.

### State-by-state legal status[edit]

Main articles: Abortion in the United States by state and Types of abortion
restrictions in the United States

Abortion is legal in all U.S. states, and every state has at least one
abortion clinic.[59][60] Abortion is a controversial political issue, and
regular attempts to restrict it occur in most states. One such case,
originating in Texas, led to the Supreme Court case of _Whole Woman's Health
v. Hellerstedt_ (2016) in which several Texas restrictions were struck
down.[61]

The issue of minors and abortion is regulated at state level, and 37 states
require some parental involvement, either in the form of parental consent or
in the form of parental notification. In certain situations, the parental
restrictions can be overridden by a court.[62] Mandatory waiting periods,
mandatory ultrasounds and scripted counseling are common abortion regulations.
Abortion laws are generally stricter in conservative Southern states than they
are in other parts of the country.

In 2019, New York passed the Reproductive Health Act (RHA), which repealed a
pre- _Roe_ provision that banned third-trimester abortions except in cases
where the continuation of the pregnancy endangered a pregnant woman's
life.[63][64]

Abortion in the Northern Mariana Islands, a United States Commonwealth
territory, is illegal.

Alabama House Republicans passed a law on April 30, 2019 that will criminalize
abortion if it goes into effect.[65] Dubbed the "Human Life Protection Act",
it offers only two exceptions: serious health risk to the mother or a lethal
fetal anomaly.[66] It will also make the procedure a Class A felony.[67]
Twenty-five male Alabama senators voted to pass the law on May 13.[68] The
next day, Alabama governor Kay Ivey signed the bill into law, primarily as a
symbolic gesture in hopes of challenging _Roe v. Wade_ in the Supreme
Court.[69][70]

Since Alabama introduced the first modern Anti-Abortion legislation in April
2019, five other states have also adopted abortion laws including Mississippi,
Kentucky, Ohio, Georgia and most recently Louisiana on May 30, 2019

## Qualifying requirements for abortion providers[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/Map_of_US_minor_abortion_laws.svg/220px-

Map_of_US_minor_abortion_laws.svg.png)

Map showing which states require parental involvement (minors).

Parental notification or consent not required

One parent must be informed beforehand

Both parents must be informed beforehand

One parent must consent beforehand

Both parents must consent beforehand

One parent must consent and be informed beforehand

Parental notification law currently enjoined

Parental consent law currently enjoined

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a6/Map_of_US_mandatory_waiting_period_laws.svg/200px-

Map_of_US_mandatory_waiting_period_laws.svg.png)

Mandatory waiting period laws in the U.S.

No mandatory waiting period

Waiting period of less than 24 hours

Waiting period of 24 hours or more

Waiting period law currently enjoined

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Map_of_US%2C_pre-

abortion_counselling_law.svg/200px-Map_of_US%2C_pre-

abortion_counselling_law.svg.png)

Abortion counseling laws in the U.S.

No mandatory counselling

Counselling in person, by phone, mail, and/or other

Counselling in person only

Counselling law enjoined

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Map_of_US_mandatory_ultrasound_laws.svg/200px-

Map_of_US_mandatory_ultrasound_laws.svg.png)

Mandatory ultrasound laws in the U.S.

Mandatory. Must display image.

Mandatory. Must offer to display image.

Mandatory. Law unenforceable.

Not mandatory. If ultrasound is performed, must offer to display image.

Not mandatory. Must offer ultrasound.

Not mandatory.

Qualifying requirements for performing abortions vary from state to state.[71]
Currently, California, Oregon, Montana, Vermont, and New Hampshire allow
qualified non-physician health professionals, such as physicians' assistants,
nurse practitioners, and certified nurse midwives, to do first-trimester
aspiration abortions and to prescribe drugs for medical abortions. Washington
State, New Mexico, Illinois, Alaska, Maryland, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and
New Jersey allow qualified non-physicians to prescribe drugs for medical
abortions only.[72] New York's Reproductive Health Act--passed in 2019--allows
non-physician health professionals acting within their scope of practice to
perform abortion procedures.[73] In all other states, only licensed physicians
may perform abortions.[74] In 2016, the FDA issued new guidelines recommending
that qualified non-physician health-care professionals be allowed to prescribe
mifepristone in all states; however, these guidelines are not binding, and
states are free to determine their own policies regarding mifepristone.[75]

## Statistics[edit]

Main article: Abortion statistics in the United States

Because reporting of abortions is not mandatory, statistics are of varying
reliability. Both the Centers For Disease Control (CDC)[76] and the Guttmacher
Institute regularly compile these statistics.[77][78]

![Chart source: CDC,

2005](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/41/Number_of_Abortions_in_US_%282005%29.gif)

![U.S. abortion rate, 1973-2014, data collected by the Guttmacher

Institute.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/db/U.S._abortion_rate%2C_1973-2014%2C_data_collected_by_the_Guttmacher_Institute.jpg)

### Number of abortions[edit]

The annual number of legal induced abortions in the US doubled between 1973
and 1979, and peaked in 1990. There was a slow but steady decline throughout
the 1990s. Overall, the number of annual abortions decreased by 6% between
2000 and 2009, with temporary spikes in 2002 and 2006.[79]

By 2011, abortion rate in the nation dropped to its lowest point since the
Supreme Court legalized the procedure. According to a study performed by
Guttmacher Institute, long-acting contraceptive methods had a significant
impact in reducing unwanted pregnancies. There were fewer than 17 abortions
for every 1,000 women of child-bearing age. That was a 13%-decrease from
2008's numbers and slightly higher than the rate in 1973, when the Supreme
Court's _Roe v. Wade_ decision legalized abortion. The study indicated a long-
term decline in the abortion rate. The rate has dropped significantly from its
all-time high in 1981, when there were roughly 30 abortions for every 1,000
women of reproductive age. The overall number of abortions also fell 13% from
2008 to nearly 1.1 million in 2011. In 2013, the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention also reported a decline in abortion rates.[80][81][82][83]

### Medical abortions[edit]

A Guttmacher Institute survey of abortion providers estimated that early
medical abortions accounted for 17% of all non-hospital abortions and slightly
over one-quarter of abortions before 9 weeks gestation in the United States in
2008.[84] Medical abortions voluntarily reported to the CDC by 34 reporting
areas (excluding Alabama, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii,
Illinois, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire,
Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Vermont, Wisconsin, and Wyoming) and published in its
annual abortion surveillance reports have increased every year since the
September 28, 2000 FDA approval of mifepristone (RU-486): 1.0% in 2000, 2.9%
in 2001, 5.2% in 2002, 7.9% in 2003, 9.3% in 2004, 9.9% in 2005, 10.6% in
2006, 13.1% in 2007, 15.8% in 2008, 17.1% in 2009 (25.2% of those at less than
9 weeks gestation).[85] Medical abortions accounted for 32% of first-trimester
abortions at Planned Parenthood clinics in 2008.[86]

### Abortion and religion[edit]

Abortion is common among religiously identified women. According to the
Guttmacher Institute, "more than 7 in 10 U.S. women obtaining an abortion
report a religious affiliation (37% protestant, 28% Catholic, and 7% other),
and 25% attend religious services at least once a month. The abortion rate for
protestant women is 15 per 1,000 women, while Catholic women have a slightly
higher rate, 22 per 1,000."[87]

### Abortions and ethnicity[edit]

Abortion rates tend to be higher among minority women in the U.S. In
2000-2001, due to lower access to health care and contraception, the rates
among black and Hispanic women were 49 per 1,000 and 33 per 1,000,
respectively, vs. 13 per 1,000 among non-Hispanic white women. Note that this
figure includes all women of reproductive age, including women that are not
pregnant. In other words, these abortion rates reflect the rate at which U.S.
women of reproductive age have an abortion each year.[88] While White women
obtain 60% of all abortions, African American women are three times more
likely to have an abortion.[89] In 2012, New York City reported abortions
(31,328) outnumber live births (24,758) for black children. Black and Hispanic
abortions combined (54,245), account for 73% of the total abortions in the
city in 2012, according to a report by the New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene, Office of Vital Statistics.[90][91]

In 2004, the rates of abortion by ethnicity in the U.S. were 50 abortions per
1,000 black women, 28 abortions per 1,000 Hispanic women, and 11 abortions per
1,000 white women.[92][93]

### Reasons for abortions[edit]

A 1998 study revealed that in 1987 to 1988, women reported the following as
their primary reasons for choosing an abortion:[94][95]

Percentage

of women

| Primary reason for choosing an abortion  
---|---  
25.5% | Want to postpone childbearing  
21.3% | Cannot afford a baby  
14.1% | Has relationship problem or partner does not want pregnancy  
12.2% | Too young; parent(s) or other(s) object to pregnancy  
10.8% | Having a child will disrupt education or employment  
7.9% | Want no (more) children  
3.3% | Risk to fetal health  
2.8% | Risk to maternal health  
2.1% | Other

The source of this information takes findings into account from 27 nations
including the United States, and therefore, these findings may not be typical
for any one nation.

According to a 1987 study that included specific data about late abortions (i.
e., abortions "at 16 or more weeks' gestation"),[96] women reported that
various reasons contributed to their having a late abortion:

Percentage

of women

| Reasons contributing to a late abortion  
---|---  
71% | Woman did not recognize she was pregnant or misjudged gestation  
48% | Woman had found it hard to make arrangements for an earlier abortion  
33% | Woman was afraid to tell her partner or parents  
24% | Woman took time to decide to have an abortion  
8% | Woman waited for her relationship to change  
8% | Someone had earlier pressured woman not to have abortion  
6% | Something changed some time after woman became pregnant  
6% | Woman did not know timing is important  
5% | Woman did not know she could get an abortion  
2% | A fetal problem was diagnosed late in pregnancy  
11% | Other.

In 2000, cases of rape or incest accounted for 1% of abortions.[97]

A 2004 study by the Guttmacher Institute reported that women listed the
following amongst their reasons for choosing to have an abortion:[95]

Percentage

of women

| Reason for choosing to have an abortion  
---|---  
74% | Having a baby would dramatically change my life  
73% | Cannot afford a baby now  
48% | Do not want to be a single mother or having relationship problems  
38% | Have completed my childbearing  
32% | Not ready for another child  
25% | Do not want people to know I had sex or got pregnant  
22% | Do not feel mature enough to raise another child  
14% | Husband or partner wants me to have an abortion  
13% | Possible problems affecting the health of the fetus  
12% | Concerns about my health  
6% | Parents want me to have an abortion  
1% | Was a victim of rape  
less than .5% | Became pregnant as a result of incest

A 2008 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) shows that rates of unintended
pregnancy are highest among Blacks, Hispanics, and women with lower socio-
economic status.[98]

        
                  * 70% of all pregnancies among Black women were unintended
          * 57% of all pregnancies among Hispanic women were unintended
          * 42% of all pregnancies among White women were unintended
        

### When women have abortions (by gestational age)[edit]

According to the Centers for Disease Control, in 2011, most (64.5%) abortions
were performed by ≤8 weeks' gestation, and nearly all (91.4%) were performed
by ≤13 weeks' gestation. Few abortions (7.3%) were performed between 14–20
weeks' gestation or at ≥21 weeks' gestation (1.4%). From 2002 to 2011, the
percentage of all abortions performed at ≤8 weeks' gestation increased 6%.
[99]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/US_abortion_by_gestational_age_2004_histogram.svg/220px-

US_abortion_by_gestational_age_2004_histogram.svg.png)

Abortion in the United States by gestational age, 2004. (Data source: Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention)

### Safety of abortions[edit]

See also: Abortion § Safety

In the US, the risk of death from carrying a child to term is approximately 14
times greater than the risk of death from a legal abortion.[100] The risk of
abortion-related mortality increases with gestational age, but remains lower
than that of childbirth through at least 21 weeks' gestation.[101][102][103]

## Public opinion[edit]

See also: Societal attitudes towards abortion, United States abortion-rights
movement, and United States anti-abortion movement

Americans have been equally divided on the issue; a May 2018 Gallup poll
indicated that 48% of Americans described themselves as pro-choice and 48%
described themselves as pro-life. A July 2018 poll indicated that only 28% of
Americans wanted the Supreme Court to overturn Roe vs. Wade, while 64% did not
want the ruling to be overturned.[104]

In January 2013, a majority of Americans believed abortion should be legal in
all or most cases, according to a poll by NBC News and _The Wall Street
Journal_.[105] Approximately 70% of respondents opposed _Roe v. Wade_ being
overturned.[105] A poll by the Pew Research Center yielded similar
results.[106] Moreover, 48% of Republicans opposed overturning _Roe_ ,
compared to 46% who supported overturning it.[106]

Gallup declared in May 2010 that more Americans identifying as "pro-life" is
"the new normal", while also noting that there had been no increase in
opposition to abortion. It suggested that political polarization may have
prompted more Republicans to call themselves "pro-life".[107] The terms "pro-
choice" and "pro-life" do not always reflect a political view or fall along a
binary; in one Public Religion Research Institute poll, seven in ten Americans
described themselves as "pro-choice" while almost two-thirds described
themselves as "pro-life". The same poll found that 56% of Americans were in
favor of legal access to abortion in all or some cases.[108]

Date of poll | Pro-life | Pro-choice | Mixed / neither | Don't know what terms
mean | No opinion  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
2016, May 4–8 | 46% | 47% | 3% | 3% | 2%  
2015, May 6–10 | 44% | 50% | 3% | 2% | 1%  
2014, May 8–11 | 46% | 47% | 3% | 3% | -  
2013, May 2–7 | 48% | 45% | 3% | 3% | 2%  
2012, May 3–6 | 50% | 41% | 4% | 3% | 3%  
2011, May 5–8 | 45% | 49% | 3% | 2% | 2%  
2010, March 26–28 | 46% | 45% | 4% | 2% | 3%  
2009, November 20–22 | 45% | 48% | 2% | 2% | 3%  
2009, May 7–10 | 51% | 42% | - | 0 | 7%  
2008, September 5–7 | 43% | 51% | 2% | 1% | 3%

### By gender, age, party, and region[edit]

Pew Research Center polling shows little change in views from 2008 to 2012;
modest differences based on gender or age.[109]  
(The original article's table also shows by party affiliation, religion, and
education level.)

| 2011-2012 | 2009-2010 | 2007-2008  
---|---|---|---  
| Legal | Illegal | Don't Know | Legal | Illegal | Don't Know | Legal |
Illegal | Don't Know  
Total | 53% | 41% | 6% | 48% | 44% | 8% | 54% | 40% | 6%  
| | |  
Men | 51% | 43% | 6% | 46% | 46% | 9% | 52% | 42% | 6%  
Women | 55% | 40% | 5% | 50% | 43% | 7% | 55% | 39% | 5%  
| | |  
18-29 | 53% | 44% | 3% | 50% | 45% | 5% | 52% | 45% | 3%  
30-49 | 54% | 42% | 4% | 49% | 43% | 7% | 58% | 38% | 5%  
50-64 | 55% | 38% | 7% | 49% | 42% | 9% | 56% | 38% | 6%  
65+ | 48% | 43% | 9% | 39% | 49% | 12% | 45% | 44% | 11%

A January 2003 CBS News/ _The New York Times_ poll examined whether Americans
thought abortion should be legal or not, and found variations in opinion which
depended upon party affiliation and the region of the country.[110] The margin
of error is +/- 4% for questions answered of the entire sample ("overall"
figures) and may be higher for questions asked of subgroups (all other
figures).[110]

Group | Generally available | Available, but with stricter limits than now |
Not permitted  
---|---|---|---  
Overall | 39% | 38% | 22%  
Women | 37% | 37% | 24%  
Men | 40% | 40% | 20%  
Democrats | 43% | 35% | 21%  
Republicans | 29% | 41% | 28%  
Independents | 42% | 38% | 18%  
Northeasterners | 48% | 31% | 19%  
Midwesterners | 34% | 40% | 25%  
Southerners | 33% | 41% | 25%  
Westerners | 43% | 40% | 16%

### By trimester of pregnancy[edit]

A CNN/ _USA Today_ /Gallup poll in January 2003 asked about the legality of
abortion by trimester, using the question, "Do you think abortion should
generally be legal or generally illegal during each of the following stages of
pregnancy?"[111] This same question was also asked by Gallup in March 2000 and
July 1996.[112][113] Polls indicates general support of legal abortion during
the first trimester, although support drops dramatically for abortion during
the second and third trimester.

Since the 2011 poll, support for legal abortion during the first trimester has
declined.

| 2018 Poll | 2012 Poll | 2011 Poll | 2003 Poll | 2000 Poll | 1996 Poll  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
| Legal | Illegal | Legal | Illegal | Legal | Illegal | Legal | Illegal |
Legal | Illegal | Legal | Illegal  
First trimester | 60% | 34% | 61% | 31% | 62% | 29% | 66% | 35% | 66% | 31% |
64% | 30%  
Second trimester | 28% | 65% | 27% | 64% | 24% | 71% | 25% | 68% | 24% | 69% |
26% | 65%  
Third trimester | 13% | 81% | 14% | 80% | 10% | 86% | 10% | 84% | 8% | 86% |
13% | 82%

### By circumstance or reasons[edit]

According to Gallup's long-time polling on abortion, the majority of Americans
are neither strictly Pro-Life or Pro-Choice; it depends upon circumstances.
Gallup polling from 1996 to 2009 consistently reveals that when asked the
question, "Do you think abortions should be legal under any circumstances,
legal only under certain circumstances, or illegal in all circumstances?",
Americans repeatedly answer 'legal only under certain circumstances'.
According to the poll, in any given year 48-57% say legal only under certain
circumstances (for 2009, 57%), 21-34% say legal under any circumstances (for
2009, 21%), and 13-19% illegal in all circumstances (for 2009, 18%), with 1-7%
having no opinion (for 2009, 4%).[112]

" _Do you think abortions should be legal under any circumstances, legal only
under certain circumstances, or illegal in all circumstances?_ "

| Legal under any circumstances | Legal only under certain circumstances |
Illegal in all circumstances | No opinion  
---|---|---|---|---  
2018 May 1-10 | 29% | 50% | 18% | 2%  
2017 May 3-7 | 29% | 50% | 18% | 3%  
2016 May 4-8 | 29% | 50% | 19% | 2%  
2015 May 6-10 | 29% | 51% | 19% | 1%  
2014 May 8-11 | 28% | 50% | 21% | 2%  
2013 May 2-7 | 26% | 52% | 20% | 2%  
2012 Dec 27-30 | 28% | 52% | 18% | 3%  
2012 May 3-6 | 25% | 52% | 20% | 3%  
2011 Jul 15-17 | 26% | 51% | 20% | 3%  
2011 June 9-12 | 26% | 52% | 21% | 2%  
2011 May 5–8 | 27% | 49% | 22% | 3%  
2009 Jul 17-19 | 21% | 57% | 18% | 4%  
2009 May 7–10 | 22% | 53% | 23% | 2%  
2008 May 8–11 | 28% | 54% | 18% | 2%  
2007 May 10–13 | 26% | 55% | 17% | 1%  
2006 May 8–11 | 30% | 53% | 15% | 2%

According to the aforementioned poll,[112] Americans differ drastically based
upon situation of the pregnancy, suggesting they do not support unconditional
abortions. Based on two separate polls taken May 19–21, 2003, of 505 and 509
respondents respectively, Americans stated their approval for abortion under
these various circumstances:

Poll Criteria | Total | Poll A | Poll B  
---|---|---|---  
When the woman's life is endangered | 78% | 82% | 75%  
When the pregnancy was caused by rape or incest | 65% | 72% | 59%  
When the child would be born with a life-threatening illness | 54% | 60% | 48%  
When the child would be born mentally disabled | 44% | 50% | 38%  
When the woman does not want the child for any reason | 32% | 41% | 24%

Another separate trio of polls taken by Gallup in 2003, 2000, and 1996,[112]
revealed public support for abortion as follows for the given criteria:

Poll criteria | 2003 Poll | 2000 Poll | 1996 Poll  
---|---|---|---  
When the woman's life is endangered | 85% | 84% | 88%  
When the woman's physical health is endangered | 77% | 81% | 82%  
When the pregnancy was caused by rape or incest | 76% | 78% | 77%  
When the woman's mental health is endangered | 63% | 64% | 66%  
When there is evidence that the baby may be physically impaired | 56% | 53% |
53%  
When there is evidence that the baby may be mentally impaired | 55% | 53% |
54%  
When the woman or family cannot afford to raise the child | 35% | 34% | 32%

Gallup furthermore established public support for many issues supported by the
Pro-Life community and opposed by the Pro-Choice community:[112]

Legislation | 2003 Poll | 2000 Poll | 1996 Poll  
---|---|---|---  
A law requiring doctors to inform patients about alternatives to abortion
before performing the procedure | 88% | 86% | 86%  
A law requiring women seeking abortions to wait 24 hours before having the
procedure done | 78% | 74% | 73%  
Legislation | 2005 Poll | 2003 Poll | 1996 Poll | 1992 Poll  
---|---|---|---|---  
A law requiring women under 18 to get parental consent for any abortion | 69%
| 73% | 74% | 70%  
A law requiring that the husband of a married woman be notified if she decides
to have an abortion | 64% | 72% | 70% | 73%

An October 2007 CBS News poll explored under what circumstances Americans
believe abortion should be allowed, asking the question, "What is your
personal feeling about abortion?" The results were as follows:[111]

Permitted in all cases | Permitted, but subject to greater restrictions than
it is now | Only in cases such as rape, incest, or to save the woman's life |
Only permitted to save the woman's life | Never | Unsure  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
26% | 16% | 34% | 16% | 4% | 4%

### Additional polls[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/USA_Gallup_abortion_opinion_poll.jpg/250px-

USA_Gallup_abortion_opinion_poll.jpg)

Results of Gallup opinion poll in USA since 1975 - legal restriction of
abortion[114]

        
                  * A June 2000 _Los Angeles Times_ survey found that, although 57% of polltakers considered abortion to be murder, half of that 57% believed in allowing women access to abortion. The survey also found that, overall, 65% of respondents did not believe abortion should be legal after the first trimester, including 72% of women and 58% of men. Further, the survey found that 85% of Americans polled supported abortion in cases of risk to a woman's physical health, 54% if the woman's mental health was at risk, and 66% if a congenital abnormality was detected in the fetus.[115]
          * A July 2002 Public Agenda poll found that 44% of men and 42% of women thought that "abortion should be generally available to those who want it", 34% of men and 35% of women thought that "abortion should be available, but under stricter than limits it is now", and 21% of men and 22% of women thought that "abortion should not be permitted".[116]
          * A January 2003 ABC News/ _The Washington Post_ poll also examined attitudes towards abortion by gender. In answer to the question, "On the subject of abortion, do you think abortion should be legal in all cases, legal in most cases, illegal in most cases or illegal in all cases?", 25% of women responded that it should be legal in "all cases", 33% that it should be legal in "most cases", 23% that it should be illegal in "most cases", and 17% that it should be illegal in "all cases". 20% of men thought it should be legal in "all cases", 34% legal in "most cases", 27% illegal in "most cases", and 17% illegal in "all cases".[116]
          * Most Fox News viewers favor both parental notification as well as parental consent, when a minor seeks an abortion. A Fox News poll in 2005 found that 78% of people favor a notification requirement, and 72% favor a consent requirement.[117]
          * An April 2006 Harris poll on _Roe v. Wade_ , asked, "In 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court decided that states' laws which made it illegal for a woman to have an abortion up to three months of pregnancy were unconstitutional, and that the decision on whether a woman should have an abortion up to three months of pregnancy should be left to the woman and her doctor to decide. In general, do you favor or oppose this part of the U.S. Supreme Court decision making abortions up to three months of pregnancy legal?", to which 49% of respondents indicated favor while 47% indicated opposition. The Harris organization has concluded from this poll that, "49 percent now support Roe vs. Wade".[118]
          * Two polls were released in May 2007 asking Americans "With respect to the abortion issue, would you consider yourself to be pro-choice or pro-life?" May 4–6, a CNN poll found 45% said pro-choice and 50% said pro-life.[119] Within the following week, a Gallup poll found 50% responding pro-choice and 44% pro-life.[120]
          * In 2011, a poll conducted by the Public Religion Research Institute found that 43% of respondents identified themselves as both "pro-life" and "pro-choice".[121]
        

### Partial birth abortion[edit]

See also: Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act

"Partial-Birth abortion" is nomenclature for a procedure called intact
dilation and extraction generally used by those who oppose the procedure. A
Rasmussen Reports poll four days after the Supreme Court's opinion in
_Gonzales v. Carhart_ found that 40% of respondents "knew the ruling allowed
states to place some restrictions on specific abortion procedures." Of those
who knew of the decision, 56% agreed with the decision and 32% were
opposed.[122] An ABC poll from 2003 found that 62% of respondents thought
partial-birth abortion should be illegal; a similar number of respondents
wanted an exception "if it would prevent a serious threat to the woman's
health".

Gallup has repeatedly queried the American public on this issue, as seen on
its _Abortion_ page:[112]

Legislation | 2003 | 2000 | 2000 | 2000 | 1999 | 1998 | 1997 | 1996  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
A law which would make it illegal to perform a specific abortion procedure
conducted in the last six months (or second and/or third trimester) of
pregnancy known by some opponents as a partial birth abortion, except in cases
necessary to save the life of the mother | 70% | 63% | 66% | 64% | 61% | 61% |
55% | 57%

## Abortion financing[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/12/State_abortion_funding.svg/220px-

State_abortion_funding.svg.png)

State Medicaid coverage of medically necessary abortion services.  
**Navy blue** : Medicaid covers medically necessary abortion for low-income
women through legislation  
**Royal blue** : Medicaid covers medically necessary abortions for low-income
women under court order  
**Gray** : Medicaid denies abortion coverage for low-income women except for
cases of rape, incest, or life endangerment.

The abortion debate has also been extended to the question of who pays the
medical costs of the procedure, with some states using the mechanism as a way
of reducing the number of abortions. The cost of an abortion varies depending
on factors such as location, facility, timing, and type of procedure. In 2005,
a non-hospital abortion at 10 weeks' gestation ranged from $90 to $1,800
(average: $430), whereas an abortion at 20 weeks' gestation ranged from $350
to $4,520 (average: $1,260). Costs are higher for a medical abortion than a
first-trimester surgical abortion.

### Medicaid[edit]

The Hyde Amendment is a federal legislative provision barring the use of
federal Medicaid funds to pay for abortions except for rape and incest.[123]
The provision, in various forms, was in response to _Roe v. Wade_ , and has
been routinely attached to annual appropriations bills since 1976, and
represented the first major legislative success by the pro-life movement. The
law requires that states cover abortions under Medicaid in the event of rape,
incest, and life endangerment. Based on the federal law:

        
                  * 32 states and D. C. fund abortions through Medicaid only in the cases of rape, incest, or life endangerment. SD covers abortions only in the cases of life endangerment, which does not comply with federal requirements under the Hyde Amendment. IN, UT, and WI have expanded coverage to women whose physical health is jeopardized, and IA, MS, UT, and VA also include fetal abnormality cases.
          * 17 states (AK, AZ, CA, CT, HI, IL, MD, MA, MN, MT, NJ, NM, NY, OR, VT, WA, WV) use their own funds to cover all or most "medically necessary" abortions sought by low-income women under Medicaid, 13 of which are required by State court orders to do so.[124]
        

### Private insurance[edit]

        
                  * 5 states (ID, KY, MO, ND, OK) restrict insurance coverage of abortion services in private plans: OK limits coverage to life endangerment, rape or incest circumstances; and the other four states limit coverage to cases of life endangerment.
          * 12 states (CO, IL, KY, MA, MS, NE, ND, OH, PA, RI, SC, VA) restrict abortion coverage in insurance plans for public employees, with CO and KY restricting insurance coverage of abortion under any circumstances.
          * U.S. laws also ban federal funding of abortions for federal employees and their dependents, Native Americans covered by the Indian Health Service, military personnel and their dependents, and women with disabilities covered by Medicare.[125]
        

### Mexico City policy[edit]

Under this policy, US federal funding to NGOs that provide abortion is not
permitted.

## Positions of U.S. political parties[edit]

Though members of both major political parties come down on either side of the
issue, the Republican Party is often seen as being pro-life, since the
official party platform opposes abortion and considers unborn children to have
an inherent right to life. Republicans for Choice represents the minority of
that party. In 2006, pollsters found that 9% of Republicans favor the
availability of abortion in most circumstances.[126] Of Republican National
Convention delegates in 2004, 13% believed that abortion should be generally
available, and 38% believed that it should not be permitted. The same poll
showed that 17% of all Republican voters believed that abortion should be
generally available to those who want it, while 38% believed that it should
not be permitted.[127]

The Democratic Party platform considers abortion to be a woman's right.
Democrats for Life of America represents the minority of that party. In 2006,
pollsters found that 74% of Democrats favor the availability of abortion in
most circumstances.[126] However, a Zogby International poll in 2004 found
that 43% of all Democrats believed that abortion "destroys a human life, and
is manslaughter".[128] Of Democratic National Convention delegates in 2004,
75% believed that abortion should be generally available, and 2% believed that
abortion should not be permitted. The same poll showed that 49% of all
Democratic voters believed that abortion should be generally available to
those who want it, while 13% believed that it should not be permitted.[129]

The Green Party of the United States supports legal abortion as a woman's
right.

The Libertarian Party platform (2012) states that "government should be kept
out of the matter, leaving the question to each person for their conscientious
consideration".[130] Abortion is a contentious issue among Libertarians, and
the Maryland-based organization Libertarians for Life opposes the legality of
abortion in most circumstances.

The issue of abortion has become deeply politicized: in 2002, 84% of state
Democratic platforms supported the right to having an abortion while 88% of
state Republican platforms opposed it. This divergence also led to Christian
Right organizations like Christian Voice, Christian Coalition and Moral
Majority having an increasingly strong role in the Republican Party. This
opposition has been extended under the Foreign Assistance Act: in 1973 Jesse
Helms introduced an amendment banning the use of aid money to promote abortion
overseas, and in 1984 the Mexico City Policy prohibited financial support to
any overseas organization that performed or promoted abortions. The "Mexico
City Policy" was revoked by President Bill Clinton and subsequently reinstated
by President George W. Bush. President Barack Obama overruled this policy by
Executive Order on January 23, 2009,[131] and it was reinstated on January 23,
2017, by President Donald Trump.

## Effects of legalization[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Ms._magazine_Cover_-

_Winter_2013.jpg/220px-Ms._magazine_Cover_-_Winter_2013.jpg)

The 2013 winter issue of _Ms. magazine_ was about abortion rights

The risk of death due to legal abortion has fallen considerably since
legalization in 1973, due to increased physician skills, improved medical
technology, and earlier termination of pregnancy.[132] From 1940 through 1970,
deaths of pregnant women during abortion fell from nearly 1,500 to a little
over 100.[132] According to the Centers for Disease Control, the number of
women who died in 1972 from illegal abortion was thirty-nine.[133]

The Roe effect is an hypothesis which suggests that since supporters of
abortion rights cause the erosion of their own political base by having fewer
children, the practice of abortion will eventually lead to the restriction or
illegalization of abortion. The legalized abortion and crime effect is another
controversial theory that posits legal abortion reduces crime, because
unwanted children are more likely to become criminals.

Since Roe v Wade, there have been numerous attempts to reverse the decision.
In the 2011 election season, Mississippi placed an amendment on the ballot
that redefine how the state viewed abortion. The personhood amendment defined
personhood as "every human being from the moment of fertilization, cloning or
the functional equivalent thereof". If passed, it would have been illegal to
get an abortion in the state.[134]

On July 11, 2012, a Mississippi federal judge ordered an extension of his
temporary order to allow the state's only abortion clinic to stay open. The
order will stay in place until U.S. District Judge Daniel Porter Jordan III
can review newly drafted rules on how the Mississippi Department of Health
will administer a new abortion law. The law in question came into effect on
July 1, 2012.[135]

## Unintended live birth[edit]

Although it is uncommon, women sometimes give birth in spite of an attempted
abortion.[136][137][138][139][140][141][142] Reporting of livebirth after
attempted abortion may not be consistent from state to state, but 38 were
recorded in one study in upstate New York in the two-and-a-half years before
_Roe v. Wade_.[143] Under the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002,
medical staff must report live birth if they observe any breathing, heartbeat,
umbilical cord pulsation, or confirmed voluntary muscle movement, regardless
of gestational age.[144][145] To ensure the success of the abortion procedure,
doctors are advised to induce fetal death before abortion procedures after 21
weeks gestation, especially when performing induced labor
abortion.[146][147][148]

## See also[edit]

        
                  * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/32px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png)United States portal
        
          * Abortion and religion
          * Abortion by country
          * Anti-abortion violence in the United States
          * Catholic Church and abortion in the United States
          * Feminism in the United States
          * Reproductive rights
          * Types of abortion restrictions in the United States
          * War on Women
        

Notable cases

        
                  * Becky Bell, an American teenage girl who died as a result of an unsafe abortion in 1988.
          * Sherri Finkbine, an actress who had difficulty seeking an abortion for her Thalidomide deformed baby.
          * Gerardo Flores, convicted in 2005 on two counts of capital murder for giving his girlfriend, who was carrying twins, an at-home abortion.
          * Rosie Jimenez, an American woman who died the first recorded death due to an illegal abortion after federal Medicaid funds for abortions were removed by the Hyde Amendment.
          * Gerri Santoro, an American woman who died because of an illegal abortion in 1964.
        

## References[edit]

        
                  1. **^** Alesha Doan (2007). _Opposition and Intimidation: The Abortion Wars and Strategies of Political Harassment_. University of Michigan Press. p. 57. ISBN 9780472069750.
          2. **^** Casey, 505 U.S. at 877.
          3. **^** Saad, Lydia (August 8, 2011). "Plenty of Common Ground Found in Abortion Debate". Gallup.com. Retrieved 2013-08-08.
          4. **^** Jeffrey Jones (Jun 11, 2018). "U.S. Abortion Attitudes Remain Closely Divided". Gallup.
          5. **^** "Abortion | Gallup Historical Trends". Gallup.com. Retrieved  2014-08-10.
          6. **^** According to the Supreme Court's decision in _Roe v. Wade_ :
        

> (a) For the stage prior to approximately the end of the first trimester, the
abortion decision and its effectuation must be left to the medical judgement
of the pregnant woman's attending physician.

>

> (b) For the stage subsequent to approximately the end of the first
trimester, the State, in promoting its interest in the health of the mother,
may, if it chooses, regulate the abortion procedure in ways that are
reasonably related to maternal health.

>

> (c) For the stage subsequent to viability, the State in promoting its
interest in the potentiality of human life may, if it chooses, regulate, and
even proscribe, abortion except where it is necessary, in appropriate medical
judgement, for the preservation of the life or health of the mother.

Likewise, _Black's Law Dictionary_ defines abortion as "knowing destruction"
or "intentional expulsion or removal".

        
                  7. **^** Watson, Katie (20 Dec 2019). "JD". _AMA Journal of Ethics_. doi:10.1001/amajethics.2018.1175. Retrieved  17 May 2019.
          8. **^** Levene, Malcolm et al. _Essentials of Neonatal Medicine_ (Blackwell 2000), page 8. Retrieved 2007-02-15.
          9. **^** Alford, Suzanne M. (2003). "Is Self-Abortion a Fundamental Right?". _Duke Law Journal_. **52** (5): 1011–29. JSTOR 1373127. PMID 12964572.
          10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press. pp. 35–36. ISBN 978-0195026160.
          11. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0195026160.
          12. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press. pp. 76–82. ISBN 978-0195026160.
          13. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press. pp. 100–101. ISBN 978-0195026160.
          14. **^** Gordon, Sarah Barringer. "Law and Everyday Death: Infanticide and the Backlash against Woman's Rights after the Civil War." _Lives of the Law_. Austin Sarat, Lawrence Douglas, and Martha Umphrey, Editors. (University of Michigan Press 2006) p. 67
          15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Schiff, Stacy. "Desperately Seeking Susan." October 13, 2006, _New York Times_. Retrieved February 5, 2009.
          16. **^** "Marriage and Maternity". __The Revolution__. Susan B. Anthony. July 8, 1869. Retrieved  2009-04-21.
          17. **^** Susan B. Anthony, "Marriage and Maternity", Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine _The Revolution_ (1869-07-08), via University Honors Program, Syracuse University.
          18. **^** Federer, William. _American Minute_ , page 81 (Amerisearch 2003).
          19. **^** James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press. p. 110. ISBN 978-0195026160.
          20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ James C. Mohr (1978). _Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy_. Oxford University Press. p. 112. ISBN 978-0195026160.
          21. **^** Hartmann, B (1997). "Population control I: Birth of an ideology". _International Journal of Health Services_. **27** (3): 523–40. doi:10.2190/bl3n-xajx-0yqb-vqbx. PMID 9285280.
          22. **^** Lewis, Jone Johnson. "Abortion History: A History of Abortion in the United States". _Women's History section of About.com_. About.com. Retrieved  2006-07-07.
          23. **^** https://archive.org/stream/anthonycomstockh00bennuoft#page/1017/mode/1up Anthony Comstock: His Career of Cruelty and Crime A Chapter from "Champions of the Church". DeRobigne Mortimer Bennett. 1878.
          24. **^** Kevles, Daniel J. (July 22, 2001). "The Secret History of Birth Control". The New York Times. Retrieved 2006-10-21.
          25. **^** "A Political, Public & Moral Look at Abortion". _New York University_. New York University. February 28, 2006. Retrieved  February 16, 2016.
          26. **^** Kathryn Cullen-DuPont (1 August 2000). _Encyclopedia of women's history in America_. Infobase Publishing. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-8160-4100-8. Retrieved 28 November 2011.
          27. **^** Boyer, Paul S., ed. (2006). _The Oxford companion to United States history_. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-19-508209-8.
          28. **^** "Sherri Finkbine's Abortion: Its Meaning 50 Years Later". _Planned Parenthood Advocates of Arizona_. 2012-08-15. Retrieved  2017-12-02.
          29. **^** Braun, Whitny (2015-12-29). "Thalidomide: The Connection Between a Statue in Trafalgar Square, a 1960s Children's Show Host and the Abortion Debate". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved  2017-12-02.
          30. **^** "Click - Debating Reproductive Rights - Reproductive Rights and Feminism, History of Abortion Battle, History of Abortion Debate, Roe v. Wade and Feminists". _www.cliohistory.org_. Retrieved  2017-12-02.
          31. **^** Johnson, Linnea. "Something Real: Jane and Me. Memories and Exhortations of a Feminist Ex-Abortionist". CWLU Herstory Project. Archived from the original on 2011-07-25. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
          32. **^** "Medicine: Abortion on Request". _Time_. March 9, 1970. Retrieved  2012-10-15. (subscription required)
          33. **^** "Abortion Reform in Washington State - HistoryLink.org". _www.historylink.org_. Retrieved  2017-10-09.
          34. **^** Kliff, Sarah (January 22, 2013). "CHARTS: How Roe v. Wade changed abortion rights". _The Washington Post_.
          35. **^** Cassidy, Keith (1995). "The Right to Life Movement". In Donald T. Critchlow (ed.). _The Politics of Abortion and Birth Control in Historical Perspective_. Issues in Policy History. Penn State Press. p. 140. ISBN 9780271015705.
          36. **^** Staggenborg, Suzanne (1994). _The Pro-Choice Movement: Organization and Activism in the Abortion Conflict_. Oxford University Press. p. 35. ISBN 9780195089257.
          37. **^** "Content Module Example Page - NWHN".
          38. **^** Lessons from Before Roe: Will Past be Prologue? The Guttmacher Policy Review, Vol. 6 Iss. 1, March 1, 2003. Retrieved 11 January 2017.
          39. **^** _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113, 154 (1973) "We, therefore, conclude that the right of personal privacy includes the abortion decision, but that this right is not unqualified, and must be considered against important state interests in regulation."
          40. **^** _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113[ _permanent dead link_ ] (1972). Findlaw.com. Retrieved 2011-04-14.
          41. **^** _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113, 164 (1973) ("If the State is interested in protecting fetal life after viability, it may go so far as to proscribe abortion during [the third trimester], except when it is necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother.")
          42. **^** _Doe v. Bolton_ , 410 U.S. 179, 192 (1973)
          43. **^** "Frontline / Abortion Wars / Roe v Wade and Beyond". _www.pbs.org_. Retrieved  5 October 2015.
          44. **^** "The Right to Choose at 25: Looking Back and Ahead". _www.aclu.org_. Retrieved  5 October 2015.
          45. **^** Dailard, Cynthia (June 1999). "Issues and Implications, Abortion Restrictions and the Drive for Mental Health Parity: A Conflict in Values?". _The Guttmacher Report on Public Policy_. **2** (3). Retrieved  2 October 2015.
          46. **^** Palley, Marian Lief and Howard (2014). _The Politics of Women's Health Care in the US_. New York and London: Palgrave Pivot. p. 74. ISBN 9781137008633. Retrieved 5 October 2015.
          47. **^** "Abortion after the First Trimester in the United States" (PDF). Planned Parenthood. February 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2015.
          48. **^** "Fetal Viability And Late-Term Abortion: The Facts And The Law". _www.democraticunderground.com_. Retrieved  5 October 2015.
          49. **^** _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , 505 U.S. 833, 878 (1992)
          50. **^** _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , 505 U.S. 833, 878 (1992) ("(a) To protect the central right recognized by _Roe v. Wade_ while at the same time accommodating the State's profound interest in potential life, we will employ the undue burden analysis as explained in this opinion. An undue burden exists, and therefore, a provision of law is invalid, if its purpose or effect is to place a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion before the fetus attains viability.")
          51. **^** _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ , 505 U.S. 833, 846 (1992)
          52. **^** Denniston, Lyle (June 27, 2016). "Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt - Opinion analysis: Abortion rights reemerge strongly". _SCOTUSblog_. Retrieved  June 29, 2016.
          53. **^** Greenhouse, Linda (April 19, 2007). "Justices Back Ban on Method of Abortion". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  January 3, 2010.
          54. **^** Interactive maps comparing U.S. abortion restrictions by state, LawServer
          55. **^** Report, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, on Senate Joint Resolution 3, 98th Congress, 98-149, June 7, 1983, p. 6.
          56. **^** Baptist Hospital of Miami, Fact Sheet at the Wayback Machine (archived March 26, 2009). (archived from the original on 2009-03-26)
          57. **^** "Access to Abortion" (PDF). National Abortion Federation. 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 2007-06-17.
          58. **^** " "Public Funding for Abortion" (map)" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-08-08.
          59. **^** "Using Abortion Pills for Safe Abortion in the USA. Self-Managed Abortion; Safe and Supported (SASS). — Women Help Women Consultation". Consult.womenhelp.org. 2017-01-12. Retrieved  2017-07-21.
          60. **^** Politics (2017-02-10). "Here's how many abortion clinics are in each state". Business Insider. Retrieved 2017-07-21.
          61. **^** "Strict Texas abortion law struck down". _BBC News_. 27 June 2016  - via www.bbc.com.
          62. **^** "Parental Involvement in Minors' Abortions". 14 March 2016.
          63. **^** "New York Dems Flex Muscles, Pass Reproductive Health Act". CBSNewYork. 2019-01-22.
          64. **^** Russo, Amy (2019-01-23). "Andrew Cuomo Signs Abortion Bill Into Law, Codifying Roe v. Wade". _Huffington Post_.
          65. **^** Stracqualursi, Veronica (May 1, 2019). "Alabama House passes bill that would make abortion a felony". _CNN_. Retrieved  May 2, 2019.
          66. **^** Elliott, Debbie (May 1, 2019). "Alabama Lawmakers Move To Outlaw Abortion In Challenge To Roe V. Wade". _NPR.org_. Retrieved  May 6, 2019.
          67. **^** Smith, Kate (May 13, 2019). "Ahead of Alabama abortion bill debate, Lieutenant Governor fights against rape and incest exceptions". _CBS News_. Retrieved  May 14, 2019.
          68. **^** Garrand, Danielle (May 15, 2019). "Alabama just criminalized abortions – and every single yes vote was cast by a white man". _CBS News_. Retrieved  May 15, 2019.
          69. **^** Kelly, Caroline (May 15, 2019). "Alabama governor signs nation's most restrictive anti-abortion bill into law". _CNN_. Retrieved  May 15, 2019.
          70. **^** Rambaran, Vandana (May 15, 2019). "Alabama 'has gone too far' with 'extreme' abortion bill, Pat Robertson says". _Fox News_. Retrieved  May 15, 2019.
          71. **^** Advancing access to abortion care. ANSIRH (2013-01-24). Retrieved on 2015-04-12.
          72. **^** "Study: Abortions Are Safe When Performed By Nurse Practitioners, Physician Assistants, Certified Nurse Midwives". Retrieved  25 January 2017.
          73. **^** https://thehill.com/homenews/state-watch/426533-new-york-passes-bill-expanding-abortion-access
          74. **^** Technically, Colorado, Kansas, and West Virginia do not have laws forbidding non-physicians from doing abortions, but liability issues effectively prevent non-physicians from doing them in these states.
          75. **^** "FDA relaxes guidelines for abortion pill - The Portland Press Herald". 30 March 2016. Retrieved  25 January 2017.
          76. **^** "CDCs Abortion Surveillance System FAQs". Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2012-11-21. Retrieved  2013-08-08.
          77. **^** Jones, Rachel K.; Kooistra, Kathryn (March 2011). "Abortion Incidence and Access to Services in the United States, 2008" (PDF). _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **43** (1): 41–50. doi:10.1363/4304111. PMID 21388504. Retrieved  8 December 2017.
          78. **^** Jones, Rachel K.; Jerman, Jenna (March 2011). "Abortion Incidence and Service Availability in the United States, 2014" (PDF). _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **49** (1): 17–27. doi:10.1363/psrh.12015. Retrieved  8 December 2017.
          79. **^** D. Elam-Evans, Ph.D., Laurie. "Abortion Surveillance --- United States, 2000". Center for Disease Control. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
          80. **^** Somashekhar, Sandhya (2 February 2014). "Study: Abortion rate at lowest point since 1973". _Washington Post_. Retrieved  3 February 2014.
          81. **^** Moon, Angela (2 February 2014). "U.S. abortion rate hits lowest level since 1973: study". _Reuters_. Retrieved  3 February 2014.
          82. **^** Bassett, Laura (2 February 2014). "U.S. Abortion Rate Hits Lowest Point Since 1973". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved  3 February 2014.
          83. **^** Jayson, Sharon (2 February 2014). "Abortion rate at lowest level since 1973". _USA Today_. Retrieved  3 February 2014.
          84. **^** Jones, Rachel K.; Kooistra, Kathryn (March 2011). "Abortion incidence and access to services in the United States, 2008" (PDF). _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **43** (1): 41–50. doi:10.1363/4304111. PMID 21388504. 94% of non-hospital medical abortions used mifepristone and misoprostol—6% used methotrexate and misoprostol—in the United States in 2008.
          85. **^** Pazol, Karen; Creanga, Andreea A.; Zane, Suzanne B.; Burley, Kim D.; Jamieson, Denise J; Division of Reproductive Health (November 23, 2012). "Abortion surveillance - United States, 2009" (PDF). _MMWR Surveillance Summaries_. **61** (8): 1–44. PMID 23169413.
          86. **^** Fjerstad, Mary; Trussell, James; Sivin, Irving; Lichtenberg, E. Steve; Cullins, Vanessa (July 9, 2009). "Rates of serious infection after changes in regimens for medical abortion" (PDF). _New England Journal of Medicine_. **361** (2): 145–151. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0809146. PMC 3568698. PMID 19587339.
          87. **^** Jones, Rachel K (June 2011). "Changes in Abortion Rates Between 2000 and 2008 and Lifetime Incidence of Abortion". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **117** (6): 1358–1366. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e31821c405e. PMID 21606746. Retrieved  30 December 2015.
          88. **^** Guttmacher.org"Get "In the Know": Questions About Pregnancy, Contraception and Abortion". Archived from the original on 2008-03-11. Retrieved 2007-04-26.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
          89. **^** The Center for Bio-Ethical Reform Archived January 8, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
          90. **^** "NYC Induced Abortion Summary by Woman's Race/Ethnicity". Retrieved  2016-10-10., NYC Dept of Health and Mental Hygiene, Office of Vital Statistics, New York State, 2012
          91. **^** "NYC: More Black Babies Killed by Abortion Than Born". 2014-02-20. Retrieved  2016-11-11., Chapman, M. W.|CNS News|February 20, 2014
          92. **^** Abortion Rate Falls, But Not Equally for All Women, Time magazine, September 23, 2008
          93. **^** Abortion and Women of Color: The Bigger Picture, Guttmacher Policy Review, Volume 11, Issue 3
          94. **^** Bankole, Akinrinola; Singh, Susheela; Haas, Taylor (1998). "Reasons Why Women Have Induced Abortions: Evidence from 27 Countries". _International Family Planning Perspectives_. **24** (3): 117–27, 152. doi:10.2307/3038208. JSTOR 3038208.
          95. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Finer, Lawrence B.; Frohwirth, Lori F.; Dauphinee, Lindsay A.; Singh, Susheela; Moore, Ann M. (September 2005). "Reasons U.S. Women Have Abortions: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives" (PDF). _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_. **37** (3): 110–8. doi:10.1111/j.1931-2393.2005.tb00045.x. JSTOR 3650599. PMID 16150658.
          96. **^** Torres, Aida; Forrest, Jacqueline Darroch (Jul–Aug 1988). "Why Do Women Have Abortions?". _Family Planning Perspectives_. **20** (4): 169–76. doi:10.2307/2135792. JSTOR 2135792. PMID 3243347. " Some 42 facilities were originally invited to participate in the study; these include six at which a relatively large number of late abortions (those at 16 or more weeks' gestation) were performed."
          97. **^** "Induced Abortion Facts in Brief" (2002) (13,000 out of 1.31 million abortions in 2000 were on account of rape or incest). Retrieved via InfoPlease 2007-01-07. Adapted from "Alan Guttmacher Institute, Induced Abortion, Facts in Brief, 2002". Facts in Brief Archived 2007-10-13 at the Wayback Machine from Guttmacher Institute does not include the 13 000 statistic though, nor does the 2003 version.
          98. **^** Dehlendorf, Christine; Lisa Harris (1 October 2013). "Disparities in Abortion Rates: A Public Health Approach". _American Journal of Public Health_. **103** (10): 1772–1779. doi:10.2105/ajph.2013.301339. PMC 3780732. PMID 23948010. Retrieved  3 October 2013.
          99. **^** "Abortion Surveillance — United States, 2011". Retrieved  25 January 2017.
          100. **^** Raymond, E. G.; Grimes, D. A. (2012). "The Comparative Safety of Legal Induced Abortion and Childbirth in the United States". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **119** (2, Part 1): 215–219. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e31823fe923. PMID 22270271. "
        

> ...The pregnancy-associated mortality rate among women who delivered live
neonates was 8.8 deaths per 100,000 live births. The mortality rate related to
induced abortion was 0.6 deaths per 100,000 abortions...The risk of death
associated with childbirth is approximately 14 times higher than that with
abortion.

"

        
                  101. **^** Bartlett LA; Berg CJ; Shulman HB; et al. (April 2004). "Risk factors for legal induced abortion-related mortality in the United States". _Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **103** (4): 729–37. doi:10.1097/01.AOG.0000116260.81570.60. PMID 15051566.
          102. **^** Trupin, Suzanne (27 May 2010). "Elective Abortion". eMedicine. Archived from the original on 14 December 2004. Retrieved 1 June 2010. "At every gestational age, elective abortion is safer for the mother than carrying a pregnancy to term."
          103. **^** Pittman, Genevra (23 January 2012). "Abortion safer than giving birth: study". Reuters. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2012.
          104. **^** "Gallup: Abortion". Gallup poll.
          105. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Murray, Mark (January 21, 2013). "NBC/WSJ poll: Majority, for first time, want abortion to be legal". NBC News. Retrieved 2013-08-08.
          106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Roe v. Wade at 40: Most Oppose Overturning Abortion Decision". January 16, 2013.
          107. **^** Saad, Lydia (May 14, 2010). "The New Normal on Abortion: Americans More "Pro-Life"". Gallup. Retrieved 2013-08-08.
          108. **^** "Committed to Availability, Conflicted about Morality: What the Millennial Generation Tells Us about the Future of the Abortion Debate and the Culture Wars". Public Religion Research Institute. June 9, 2011.
          109. **^** "Abortion views table 2008 - 2012". Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. April 25, 2012. Retrieved  2013-08-08.
          110. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Poll: Strong Support For Abortion Rights" (January 22, 2003). _CBS News_. Retrieved January 11, 2007.
          111. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _The Polling Report._ (2008). Retrieved 2008-09-10.
          112. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ "Abortion". _Gallup Poll_. Gallup.com. p. 2. Archived from the original on 13 May 2010. Retrieved 2010-05-13.
          113. **^** See Saad, "Americans Walk the Middle Road on Abortion", The Gallup Poll Monthly (April 2000); "Gallup Poll Topics". Archived from the original on June 3, 2008. Retrieved August 25, 2016. from Florida Right to Life. Retrieved 2007-01-12.
          114. **^** "Abortion". Gallup.com. Retrieved  2013-08-08.
          115. **^** Rubin, Allisa J. (June 18, 2000). "Americans Narrowing Support for Abortion." _Los Angeles Times_. Retrieved January 11, 2007.
          116. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Public Agenda Online. (2006). Men and women hold similar views on the legality of abortion
          117. **^** FOX News/Opinion Dynamics Poll. April 25–26, 2005: "Do you think a female under age 18 should be required by state law to notify at least one parent or guardian before having an abortion?" 78% yes, 17% no. "Do you think a female under age 18 should be required by state law to get permission or consent from at least one parent or guardian before having an abortion?" 72% yes, 22% no.
          118. **^** Harris Interactive, (2006-05-04). "Support for Roe vs. Wade Declines to Lowest Level Ever." Retrieved 2007-01-04. Pro-life activists have disputed whether the Harris poll question is a valid measure of public opinion about Roe's overall decision, because the question focuses only on the first three months of pregnancy. See Franz, Wanda. "The Continuing Confusion About Roe v. Wade" Archived May 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, _NRL News_ (June 2007). Also see Adamek, Raymond. "Abortion Polls", _Public Opinion Quarterly_ , Vol. 42, No. 3 (Autumn, 1978), pp. 411-413.
          119. **^** CNN Opinion Research Poll, (2007-05-09). Retrieved 2007-05-27.
          120. **^** "Abortion" _The Gallup Poll_ (5/21/2007) Retrieved 2007-05-28.
          121. **^** "Moving Beyond "Pro-Choice" and "Pro-Life" - PRRI". Retrieved  25 January 2017.
          122. **^** Most Who Know of Decision Agree With Supreme Court on Partial Birth Abortion _Rasmussen Reports_. April 22, 2007. Retrieved on April 26, 2007
          123. **^** "The Hyde Amendment" (PDF). National Committee for a Human Life Amendment. April 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-11-16. Retrieved 2009-01-23. text and history
          124. **^** Francis Roberta W. "Frequently Asked Questions". _Equal Rights Amendment_. Alice Paul Institute. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. Retrieved  2009-09-13.
          125. **^** "Women's Health Policy Facts" (PDF). The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-02-25. Retrieved 2009-01-02.
          126. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Archived June 3, 2008, at the Wayback Machine (archived from the original on 2008-06-03)
          127. **^** "The New York Times/CBS News Poll 2004 Republican National Delegate Survey (Q29)" (PDF). _The New York Times_.
          128. **^** "New National Abortion Poll Shows Majority of Americans are Pro-Life". _Zogby International_. 16 January 2004. Archived from the original on 2004-12-05. Retrieved  2011-06-29.
          129. **^** "The New York Times/CBS News Poll 2004 Democratic National Delegate Survey (Q29)" (PDF). _The New York Times_.
          130. **^** National Platform of the Libertarian Party, 1.4 Abortion, adopted in Convention, May 2012.
          131. **^** Gilbert, Kathleen (2009-01-20). "Obama to Immediately Abolish Mexico City Policy, Likely Fund Embryo Research, Aides Confirm". Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 2009-01-21.
          132. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Coble, Yank D. (1992). "Induced Termination of Pregnancy Before and After Roe v Wade: Trends in the Mortality and Morbidity of Women". _JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association_. **268** (22): 3231. doi:10.1001/jama.1992.03490220075032.
          133. **^** Strauss, Lilo T.; Herndon, Joy; Chang, Jeani; Parker, Wilda Y.; Bowens, Sonya V.; Zane, Suzanne B.; Berg, Cynthia J.; Berg, CJ (2004). "Abortion surveillance--United States, 2001". _Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report_. **53** (9): 1–32. PMID 15562258.
          134. **^** "Mississippi 'Personhood' Amendment Vote Fails". _Huffington Post_. November 8, 2011.
          135. **^** Phillips, Rich. "Judge lets Mississippi's only abortion clinic stay open -- for now". CNN.
          136. **^** "Termination of Pregnancy for Fetal Abnormality" (PDF). _Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists_ : 30. May 2010. Retrieved 26 October 2015. " Live birth following medical termination of pregnancy before 21+6 weeks of gestation is very uncommon. Nevertheless, women and their partners should be counselled about this unlikely possibility and staff should be trained to deal with this eventuality. Instances of recorded live birth and survival increase as gestation at birth extends from 22 weeks. In accordance with prior RCOG guidance, feticide should be routinely offered from 21+6 weeks of gestation.Where the fetal abnormality is not compatible with survival, termination of pregnancy without prior feticide may be preferred by some women. In such cases, delivery management should be discussed and planned with the parents and all health professionals involved and a written care plan agreed before termination takes place. Where the fetal abnormality is not lethal and termination of pregnancy is being undertaken after 22 weeks of gestation, failure to perform feticide could result in live birth and survival, an outcome that contradicts the intention of the abortion. In such situations, the child should receive the neonatal support and intensive care that is in the child's best interest and its condition managed within published guidance for neonatal practice."
          137. **^** Hollander, D. (May 2004). "For Second-Trimester Abortion, Women Given Misoprostol Vaginally Report the Greatest Satisfaction". _Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, A Publication of the Guttmacher Institute: Digests_. **36** (3): 133. doi:10.1111/j.1931-2393.2004.tb00203.x. Retrieved  26 October 2015. "...Additionally, a significantly higher proportion of women in the vaginal misoprostol group, and a marginally higher proportion of those in the oral misoprostol group, than of those in the intra-amniotic prostaglandin group had a live birth (20%, 15% and 5%, respectively)...."
          138. **^** Hopper, Tristin (1 February 2013). "Birth of a legal quandry[sic]: Live-birth abortions a perilous grey zone in Canada's criminal code". _National Post_. Retrieved  26 October 2015.
          139. **^** Vellacott, Maurice (23 January 2013). "Letter to RCMP Commissioner Rob Paulson". _www.straight.com_. Archived from the original (Letter) on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2015.
          140. **^** The Associated Press (7 February 2009). "Doctor loses license over live-birth abortion". _New York Daily News_. Retrieved  26 October 2015.
          141. **^** Jeffries, Liz (2 August 1981). "Abortion". _The Philadelphia Inquirer_. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 September 1981. Retrieved 26 October 2015.
          142. **^** Wyldes (May 2007). "Termination of pregnancy for fetal anomaly: a population-based study 1995 to 2004". _BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology_. **114** (5): 639–642. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.2007.01279.x. PMID 17355269.
          143. **^** Stroh, G. (1 September 1976). "Reported live births following induced abortion: two and one-half years' experience in Upstate New York". _American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **126** (1): 83–90. doi:10.1016/0002-9378(76)90469-5. PMID 961751.
          144. **^** "House Report 107-186 - BORN-ALIVE INFANTS PROTECTION ACT OF 2001". Retrieved  25 January 2017.
          145. **^** Pear, Robert (23 April 2005). "New Attention for 2002 Law on Survivors of Abortion". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  26 October 2015.
          146. **^** Diedrich, J.; Drey, E. (January 2010). "Clinical Guidelines: Induction of fetal demise before abortion" (PDF). _Contraception: A Publication of Society of Family Planning_. **81** (6): 462–73. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2010.01.018. PMID 20472112. Retrieved  26 October 2015.
          147. **^** Jansen, Robert (1990). "Unfinished Feticide". _Journal of Medical Ethics_. **16** (2): 61–65. doi:10.1136/jme.16.2.61. PMC 1375929. PMID 2195170. Retrieved  26 October 2015.
          148. **^** Sfakianaki, Anna K. (1 February 2014). "Potassium Chloride-Induced Fetal Demise: A Retrospective Cohort Study of Efficacy and Safety". _Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine_. **33** (2): 337–341. doi:10.7863/ultra.33.2.337. PMID 24449738. Archived from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved  26 October 2015.
        

## Further reading[edit]

        
                  * Reagan, Leslie J. (1997). _When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the United States, 1867–1973_. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-08848-4.
          * Rowland, Debran (2004). _The Boundaries of Her Body: The Troubling History of Women's Rights in America_. Naperville, Ill.: Sphinx Publishing. ISBN 1-57248-368-7.
          * Shimabukuro, Jon O. (December 7, 2018). "Abortion: Judicial History and Legislative Response" (PDF). Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.
          * Weingarten, Karen (2014). _Abortion in the American Imagination: Before Life and Choice, 1880–1940_. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-6530-9.
        

## External links[edit]

        
                  * Full Text of _Roe v. Wade_ Decision
          * Interactive maps comparing U.S. abortion restrictions by state
          * Number of Abortions - Abortion Counters
          * For Many Women, The Nearest Abortion Provider Is Hundreds Of Miles Away - Includes map showing distance to nearest abortion clinic
          * Towards a compromise solution brief essay
        

Abortion in the United States by state

* * *

States|

        
                  * Alabama
          * Alaska
          * Arizona
          * Arkansas
          * California
          * Colorado
          * Connecticut
          * Delaware
          * Florida
          * Georgia
          * Hawaii
          * Idaho
          * Illinois
          * Indiana
          * Iowa
          * Kansas
          * Kentucky
          * Louisiana
          * Maine
          * Maryland
          * Massachusetts
          * Michigan
          * Minnesota
          * Mississippi
          * Missouri
          * Montana
          * Nebraska
          * Nevada
          * New Hampshire
          * New Jersey
          * New Mexico
          * New York
          * North Carolina
          * North Dakota
          * Ohio
          * Oklahoma
          * Oregon
          * Pennsylvania
          * Rhode Island
          * South Carolina
          * South Dakota
          * Tennessee
          * Texas
          * Utah
          * Vermont
          * Virginia
          * Washington
          * West Virginia
          * Wisconsin
          * Wyoming
        

|

![Blank-USA+PRVI-CSS

map.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/Blank-USA%2BPRVI-

CSS_map.svg/80px-Blank-USA%2BPRVI-CSS_map.svg.png)

Federal district|

Washington, D.C.

Insular areas|

        
                  * American Samoa
          * Guam
          * Northern Mariana Islands
          * Puerto Rico 
          * U.S. Virgin Islands
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Social policy in the United States

* * *
        
                  * Abortion
          * Affirmative action
          * Alcohol
          * Drug policy
            * Cannabis
          * Death penalty
          * Gambling
          * Gun policy
          * LGBT rights
            * Same-sex marriage
          * Prostitution
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

United States articles

* * *

History|

| By event|

        
                  * Pre-Columbian era
          * Colonial era
            * Thirteen Colonies
            * military history
            * Continental Congress
          * Declaration of Independence
          * American Revolution
            * War
          * American frontier
          * Confederation Period
          * Drafting and ratification of Constitution
            * Bill of Rights
          * Federalist Era
          * War of 1812
          * Territorial acquisitions
          * Territorial evolution
          * Mexican–American War
          * Civil War
          * Reconstruction era
          * Indian Wars
          * Gilded Age
          * Progressive Era
          * Civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968
          * Spanish–American War
          * Imperialism
          * World War I
          * Roaring Twenties
          * Great Depression
          * World War II
            * home front
            * Nazism in the United States
          * American Century
          * Cold War
          * Korean War
          * Space Race
          * Feminist Movement
          * Vietnam War
          * Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
          * War on Terror
            * War in Afghanistan
            * Iraq War
          * Recent events (2008–present)
        

---|---  
By topic|

        
                  * Outline of U.S. history
          * Demographic
          * Discoveries
          * Economic
            * debt ceiling
          * Inventions
            * before 1890
            * 1890–1945
            * 1946–1991
            * after 1991
          * Military
          * Postal
          * Technological and industrial
        

Geography|

|

        
                  * Territory
            * counties
            * federal district
            * federal enclaves
            * Indian reservations
            * insular zones
            * minor outlying islands
            * populated places
            * states
          * Earthquakes
          * Extreme points
          * Islands
          * Mountains
            * peaks
            * ranges
            * Appalachian
            * Rocky
          * National Park Service
            * National Parks
          * Regions
            * East Coast
            * West Coast
            * Great Plains
            * Gulf
            * Mid-Atlantic
            * Midwestern
            * New England
            * Pacific
            * Central
            * Eastern
            * Northern
            * Northeastern
            * Northwestern
            * Southern
            * Southeastern
            * Southwestern
            * Western
          * Longest rivers
            * Arkansas
            * Colorado
            * Columbia
            * Mississippi
            * Missouri
            * Red (South)
            * Rio Grande
            * Yukon
          * Time
          * Water supply and sanitation
          * World Heritage Sites
        

* * *

Politics|

|

| Federal|

| Executive|

        
                  * Cabinet
          * Civil service
          * Executive departments
          * Executive Office
          * Independent agencies
          * Law enforcement
          * President of the United States
            * Powers
          * Public policy
        

---|---  
Legislative|

        
                  * House of Representatives
            * current members
            * Speaker
          * Senate
            * current members
            * President pro tempore
            * Vice President
        

Judicial|

        
                  * Courts of appeals
          * District courts
          * Supreme Court
        

Law|

        
                  * Bill of Rights
            * civil liberties
          * Code of Federal Regulations
          * Constitution
            * federalism
            * preemption
            * separation of powers
            * civil rights
          * Federal Reporter
          * United States Code
          * United States Reports
        

Intelligence|

        
                  * Central Intelligence Agency
          * Defense Intelligence Agency
          * Federal Bureau of Investigation
          * National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
          * National Reconnaissance Office
          * National Security Agency
          * Office of the Director of National Intelligence
        

Uniformed|

        
                  * Armed Forces
            * Army
            * Marine Corps
            * Navy
            * Air Force
            * Coast Guard
          * National Guard
          * NOAA Corps
          * Public Health Service Corps
        
          * 51st state
            * political status of Puerto Rico
            * District of Columbia statehood movement
          * Elections
            * Electoral College
          * Foreign relations
            * Foreign policy
          * Hawaiian sovereignty movement
          * Ideologies
            * anti-Americanism
            * exceptionalism
            * nationalism
          * Local government
          * Parties
            * Democratic
            * Republican
            * Third parties
          * Red states and blue states
            * Purple America
          * Scandals
          * State government
            * governor
            * state legislature
            * state court
          * Uncle Sam
          * Corruption
        

Economy|

|

        
                  * By sector
            * Agriculture
            * Banking
            * Communications
            * Energy
            * Insurance
            * Manufacturing
            * Mining
            * Science and technology
            * Tourism
            * Trade
            * Transportation
            * by state
          * Currency
          * Exports
          * Federal budget
          * Federal Reserve System
          * Financial position
          * Labor unions
          * Public debt
          * Social welfare programs
          * Taxation
          * Unemployment
          * Wall Street
        

* * *

Society|

|

| Culture|

        
                  * Americana
          * Architecture
          * Cinema
          * Cuisine
          * Dance
          * Demography
          * Education
          * Family structure
          * Fashion
          * Flag
          * Folklore
          * Languages
            * American English
            * Indigenous languages
            * ASL
              * Black American Sign Language
            * HSL
            * Plains Sign Talk
            * Arabic
            * Chinese
            * French
            * German
            * Italian
            * Russian
            * Spanish
          * Literature
          * Media
            * Journalism
            * Internet
            * Newspapers
            * Radio
            * Television
          * Music
          * Names
          * National symbols
          * People
          * Philosophy
          * Public holidays
          * Religion
          * Sexuality / Adolescent Sexuality
          * Sports
          * Theater
          * Video games
          * Visual art
        

---|---  
Social class|

        
                  * Affluence
          * American Dream
          * Educational attainment
          * Homelessness
          * Home-ownership
          * Household income
          * Income inequality
          * Middle class
          * Personal income
          * Poverty
          * Professional and working class conflict
          * Standard of living
        

Issues|

        
                  * Ages of consent
          * Capital punishment
          * Crime
            * incarceration
          * Criticism of government
          * Discrimination
            * affirmative action
            * antisemitism
            * intersex rights
            * Islamophobia
            * LGBT rights
            * racism
            * same-sex marriage
          * Drug policy
          * Energy policy
          * Environmental movement
          * Gun politics
          * Health care
            * abortion
            * health insurance
            * hunger
            * obesity
            * smoking
          * Human rights
          * Immigration
            * illegal
          * International rankings
          * National security
            * Mass surveillance
            * Terrorism
          * Separation of church and state
        
          * Outline
          * Index
        
          * Book
          * Category
          * Portal
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Abortion in North America

* * *

Sovereign states|

        
                  * Antigua and Barbuda
          * Bahamas
          * Barbados
          * Belize
          * Canada
          * Costa Rica
          * Cuba
          * Dominica
          * Dominican Republic
          * El Salvador
          * Grenada
          * Guatemala
          * Haiti
          * Honduras
          * Jamaica
          * Mexico
          * Nicaragua
          * Panama
          * Saint Kitts and Nevis
          * Saint Lucia
          * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
          * Trinidad and Tobago
          * United States
        

Dependencies and  
other territories

|

        
                  * Anguilla
          * Aruba
          * Bermuda
          * Bonaire
          * British Virgin Islands
          * Cayman Islands
          * Curaçao
          * Greenland
          * Guadeloupe
          * Martinique
          * Montserrat
          * Puerto Rico
          * Saint Barthélemy
          * Saint Martin
          * Saint Pierre and Miquelon
          * Saba
          * Sint Eustatius
          * Sint Maarten
          * Turks and Caicos Islands
          * United States Virgin Islands
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

        
                  * History of abortion
          * Methods of abortion
          * Abortion debate
          * Abortion law
        

Movements|

        
                  * Abortion-rights movements
          * Anti-abortion movements
        

Issues|

        
                  * Abortion and mental health
          * Beginning of human personhood
          * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
          * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
          * Anti-abortion violence
          * Abortion under communism
          * Birth control
          * Crisis pregnancy center
          * Ethical aspects of abortion
          * Eugenics
          * Fetal rights
          * Forced abortion
          * Genetics and abortion
          * Late-term abortion
          * Legalized abortion and crime effect
          * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
          * Limit of viability
          * Men's rights
          * Minors and abortion
          * One-child policy
          * Paternal rights and abortion
          * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
          * Prenatal development
          * Reproductive rights
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Sex-selective abortion
          * Sidewalk counseling
          * Societal attitudes towards abortion
          * Toxic abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
          * Women's rights
        

By country|

| Africa|

        
                  * Algeria
          * Angola
          * Benin
          * Botswana
          * Burkina Faso
          * Burundi
          * Cameroon
          * Cape Verde
          * Central African Republic
          * Chad
          * Egypt
          * Ghana
          * Namibia
          * Nigeria
          * South Africa
          * Uganda
          * Zimbabwe
        

---|---  
Asia|

        
                  * Afghanistan
          * Armenia
          * Azerbaijan
          * Bahrain
          * Bangladesh
          * Bhutan
          * Brunei
          * Cambodia
          * China
          * Cyprus
          * Georgia
          * East Timor
          * India
          * Iran
          * Israel
          * Japan
          * Kazakhstan
          * Northern Cyprus
          * South Korea
          * Philippines
          * Qatar
          * Saudi Arabia
          * Turkey
        

Europe|

        
                  * Albania
          * Andorra
          * Austria
          * Belarus
          * Belgium
          * Bosnia and Herzegovina
          * Bulgaria
          * Croatia
          * Czech Republic
          * Denmark
          * Estonia
          * Finland
          * France
          * Germany
          * Greece
          * Hungary
          * Iceland
          * Ireland
          * Italy
          * Kazakhstan
          * Latvia
          * Liechtenstein
          * Lithuania
          * Luxembourg
          * Malta
          * Moldova
          * Monaco
          * Montenegro
          * Netherlands
          * North Macedonia
          * Norway
          * Poland
          * Portugal
          * Romania
          * Russia
          * San Marino
          * Serbia
          * Slovakia
          * Slovenia
          * Spain
          * Sweden
          * Switzerland
          * Ukraine
          * United Kingdom
        

North America|

        
                  * Belize
          * Canada
          * Costa Rica
          * Cuba
          * Dominican Republic
          * El Salvador
          * Guatemala
          * Mexico
          * Nicaragua
          * Panama
          * Trinidad and Tobago
          * United States
        

Oceania|

        
                  * Australia
          * Micronesia
          * Fiji
          * Kiribati
          * Marshall Islands
          * New Zealand
          * Papua New Guinea
          * Samoa
          * Solomon Islands
          * Tonga
          * Tuvalu
          * Vanuatu
        

South America|

        
                  * Argentina
          * Bolivia
          * Brazil
          * Chile
          * Colombia
          * Ecuador
          * Guyana
          * Paraguay
          * Peru
          * Suriname
          * Uruguay
          * Venezuela
        

Law|

        
                  * Case law
          * Constitutional law
          * History of abortion law
          * Laws by country
          * Buffer zones
          * Conscientious objection
          * Fetal protection
          * Heartbeat bills
          * Informed consent
          * Late-term restrictions
          * Parental involvement
          * Spousal consent
        

Methods|

        
                  * Vacuum aspiration
          * Dilation and evacuation
          * Dilation and curettage
          * Intact D&X
          * Hysterotomy
          * Instillation
          * Menstrual extraction
          * Abortifacient drugs
            * Methotrexate
            * Mifepristone
            * Misoprostol
            * Oxytocin
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
        

Religion|

        
                  * Buddhism
          * Christianity
            * Catholicism
          * Hinduism
          * Islam
          * Judaism
          * Scientology
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abortion_in_the_United_States&oldid=899995624"

Categories:

        
                  * Abortion in the United States
          * United States law
          * Human rights in the United States
          * Reproductive rights in the United States
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
          * Webarchive template wayback links
          * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
          * All articles with dead external links
          * Articles with dead external links from November 2016
          * Articles with permanently dead external links
          * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
          * Articles with short description
          * All articles with unsourced statements
          * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015
          * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019
          * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015
          * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006
          * All articles containing potentially dated statements
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Español
          * فارسی
          * Français
          * Русский
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 19:18 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

