

  * Billionaires 

    * All Billionaires 
    * World's Billionaires 
    * Forbes 400 
    * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
    * China's Richest 
    * India's Richest 
    * Indonesia's Richest 
    * Korea's Richest 
    * Thailand's Richest 
    * Japan's Richest 
    * Australia's Richest 
    * Taiwan's Richest 
    * Singapore's Richest 
    * Philippines' Richest 
    * Hong Kong's Richest 
    * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation 

    * All Innovation 

    * AI & Big Data 
    * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
    * Cloud 100 2018 
    * Consumer Tech 
    * Cybersecurity 
    * Enterprise & Cloud 
    * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
    * Games 
    * Green Tech 
    * Healthcare 
    * Oracle BrandVoice 
    * SAP BrandVoice 
    * Science 
    * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
    * Sharing Economy 
    * Social Media 
    * T-Mobile 
    * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership 

    * All Leadership 

    * Careers 
    * CMO Network 
    * Crowe BrandVoice 
    * Deloitte BrandVoice 
    * Diversity & Inclusion 
    * Education 
    * Entrepreneurs 
    * ForbesWomen 
    * Franchises 
    * Leadership Strategy 
    * Small Business 
    * Under 30 
    * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money 

    * All Money 

    * Banking & Insurance 
    * Crypto & Blockchain 
    * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
    * Fintech 
    * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
    * Investing 
    * Markets 
    * Personal Finance 
    * Retirement 
    * Taxes 
    * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
    * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer 

    * All Consumer 

    * Food & Drink 
    * Hollywood & Entertainment 
    * Media 
    * Real Estate 
    * Retail 
    * SportsMoney 
    * Industry 

    * All Industry 

    * Aerospace & Defense 
    * Energy 
    * Flexport BrandVoice 
    * Manufacturing 
    * Policy 
    * Transportation 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle 

    * All Lifestyle 

    * Arts 
    * Boats & Planes 
    * Capital One BrandVoice 
    * Cars & Bikes 
    * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
    * Dining & Drinking 
    * Forbes Travel Guide 
    * ForbesLife 
    * Watches & Jewelry 
    * Travel 
    * Vices 
    * BrandVoice 

    * AppDynamics 

    * Capital One 
    * Cole Haan 
    * Crowe 
    * Deloitte 
    * ExtraHop 
    * Flexport 
    * Impact Partners 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
    * Oracle 
    * SAP 
    * ServiceNow 
    * T-Mobile 
    * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor 

    * All Advisor 

    * Credit Cards 
    * Personal Loans 
    * Brokerage 
    * Checking Accounts 
    * Savings Accounts 
    * Featured 

    * 30 Under 30 2019 

    * Daily Dozen Briefing 
    * Forbes8 
    * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
    * Forbes Editors' Picks 
    * Forbes Finds 
    * Forbes Insights: AI 
    * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
    * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
    * Forbes Video 
    * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
    * Newsletters 
    * PMI BrandVoice: 3 Ways To Future-Proof Your Business 
    * Tech MD 
    * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work 

# Science Tells Us Marijuana Doesn't Kill Cancer, So Does Real Life

![Mike

Adams](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/762f18667f20236270e0cd0698e15d20?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Mike Adams

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

Vices I cover various facets of the cannabis culture.

  * Share to facebook __
  * Share to twitter __
  * Share to linkedin __

Breast cancer cells. Getty Images

October is breast cancer awareness month. This tidbit of information may have
already been readily apparent by the droves of people dressed in bright pink
and neon green shirts racing for the cure down your streets a couple of
weekends ago. The Susan G Komen foundation has organized this legion of
charitable runners now for the past twenty years, raising hundreds of millions
of dollars for cancer research. And yet, try as they might, more than 8
million people from around the globe continue to drop dead each year from this
dreaded disease because, well, science has yet to discover an actual cure.

In some circles, it is not uncommon to hear conspiracy theory chatter
suggesting that a cure for cancer was actually discovered many years ago. But
this life-saving solution, plant or magic ball –whatever the holy grail of
grandma killer cures is supposed to be – was ultimately shut down by the U.S
government and is now being kept in a super, secret vault in the basement of
the Pentagon.

But why?

To hear some people tell it, because the pharmaceutical companies, that’s why!
The American healthcare industry is a $3 trillion market. Chemo treatments,
cancer drugs, all of the innovative methods concocted to help increase a
person’s chances for survival cost out the ears. But to cure cancer, well,
that’s just bad for business. So “they,” Big Pharma, focus on selling
expensive treatments rather than offering a cure.

Now that I got some of you thinking, “Is the government really sandbagging us
on a cancer cure?” here’s something else to consider: Some of the same people
who believe the government wants to keep Americans sick and on the verge of
death are mostly convinced that the be-all-end-all remedy for cancer is
cannabis.

There has been a lot of discussion about marijuana and cancer over the years,
so much that it has inspired scientific minds to dig deeper into the subject.
But the results have been a mixed bag of noise. Some say the herb shows
promise, while others argue there is nothing to it but hype and wishful
thinking.

Stories claiming “The U.S. Government’s Department of Health Finally Admits
That Marijuana Kills Cancer” are definitely part of the confusion. Politicus
USA published this misleader in 2015. It was a hot article when it first
started making its rounds. It was so widely popular, in fact, that it, and
other reports based on its general premise, still pop up from time to time on
social media feeds.

And at first glance, it seems legit enough.

The story indicates that although the government has spent decades demonizing
marijuana, maintaining that it has “no known medicinal value,” the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) has quietly acknowledged on its website
(Cancer.gov) that marijuana kills cancer.

However, it was later determined by the fact-checking website Snopes that the
story was largely exaggerated.

“Because the article making the claim that the NCI “admitted” that “cannabis
kills cancer”uses information from a document that has no legal bearing on
federal drug policy, and because that information does not in any way “prove”
that cannabis could be a viable treatment for cancer, we rank this claim as
false.”

Photo courtesy of Mark Chavarria

Photo courtesy of Mark Chavarria

Around the same time, another story emerged entitled “Hollywood Stuntman
Claims Cannabis Oil Cured His Stage 4 Cancer.” This one, in particular,
asserted that an established Hollywood stuntman by the name of Mark Chavarria
– who worked on hundreds of big-budget film and television productions from
‘Iron Man’ to ‘Sons of Anarchy’ – won his battle with the evil C-word through
the use of cannabis oil.

In the article, Mark said, “It’s kind of gross, but I literally felt like I
was pooping the [tumors] out every time I went to the restroom. What I believe
happens with the oil is it makes like a shellac on the tumors, and it doesn’t
let it grow; doesn’t let it breathe; doesn’t let it eat… nothing. I think it
was slowly, but surely, peeling away at the tumors like an onion.”

And, just like that, he was cancer free.

Now, here’s the thing about the Chavarria story: It was not fake news. How do
I know? Because I am the journalist who conducted the interview and had it
published with High Times. I spent a great deal of time on the phone with Mark
discussing this supposed miracle brought on through the use of cannabis, and
by the time I submitted the article to my editor, I was convinced that
marijuana could cure cancer.

After the piece was published, the madness began. I began receiving countless
emails from the husbands and wives of cancer patients from all over the world,
many of which were at the end of their rope, telling me that they had seen
Mark’s story and were hoping for some guidance so that they, too, could be
cancer free.

“I’m just a writer,” I would respond. “Mark is the man you need to talk to.” I
later asked Mark for permission to send the messages his way. I mean, who
better? Of course, he was just that good of a dude – a really down to earth,
kind-hearted guy -- so he was happy to help point folks in the right
direction.

But cannabis did not cure Mark. Sadly, he died in 2017 -- two years after we
told the world that marijuana healed him of Stage-4 colorectal cancer.

Sometimes I’m riddled with guilt because I fear that, while it was
unintentional, I may have given dozens of families false hope – convincing
them that cannabis was the key to a long, cancer-free life. I still don’t feel
right about that. Mark's wife, Alyssa, later told me that the High Times story
changed their lives. So, it wasn't for nothing.

And who knows, maybe some of the others who contacted me during that time got
lucky and made it out alive. But I never received any follow-up messages or
details of their success, so I’m assuming the worst.

Unfortunately, there is no evidence that marijuana cures cancer. Science tells
us this.

“Claims that there is solid “proof” that cannabis or cannabinoids can cure
cancer is highly misleading to patients and their families, and builds a false
picture of the state of progress in this area, according to Cancer Research
UK.

Sure, it is true that some studies have shown that cannabis can assist in
killing certain types of cancer cells when used in conjunction with
chemotherapy. But this research has a long way to go before it is
substantiated.

On the other hand, cannabis has been used for decades to help ease the many
symptoms associated with cancer. Science supports this, as well.

“Nausea and vomiting, appetite issues, fatigue, anxiety, insomnia -- those
sorts of things that are associated either with cancer or chemotherapy, those
things are very well treated with cannabis,” Dr. Jordan Tishler told WBUR
earlier this year in a “This Moment in Cancer” segment.

In addition, a study published last year by the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, which consists of some of the country’s
top scientific minds, provided a detailed analysis entitled “The Health
Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids,” showing definitive evidence that
marijuana is an effective treatment for pain, nausea, spasms and insomnia. But
researchers found no proof that the herb could cure cancer.

Cannabis is a lot of things to a lot of people, but without more research, we
cannot be certain it possesses the power to provide cancer patients with
anything more than some relief from the worst of the symptoms.

Maybe one day that will change.

**_Mike Adams is a contributing writer for Forbes, Cannabis Now and BroBible.
His work has also appeared in High Times. Follow him on Facebook, Twitter and
Instagram._**

![Mike

Adams](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/762f18667f20236270e0cd0698e15d20?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Mike Adams

Contributor

I am a freelance writer hailing from the darkest depths of the armpit of
America. That’s Southern Indiana, just in case you were wondering. When I’m
not carving out a ju...

Read More

  * Print
  * Site Feedback
  * Tips
  * Corrections
  * Reprints & Permissions
  * Terms
  * Privacy

  * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.

  * AdChoices

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

