

For full functionality, it is necessary to enable JavaScript. Here are
instructions how to enable JavaScript in your web browser.

##### Welcome to Medical News Today

Healthline Media, Inc. would like to process and share personal data (e.g.,
mobile ad id) and data about your use of our site (e.g., content interests)
with our third party partners (see a current list) using cookies and similar
automatic collection tools in order to a) personalize content and/or offers on
our site or other sites, b) communicate with you upon request, and/or c) for
additional reasons upon notice and, when applicable, with your consent.

Healthline Media, Inc. is based in and operates this site from the United
States. Any data you provide will be primarily stored and processed in the
United States, pursuant to the laws of the United States, which may provide
lesser privacy protections than European Economic Area countries.

By clicking “accept” below, you acknowledge and grant your consent for these
activities unless and until you withdraw your consent using our rights request
form. Learn more in our Privacy Policy.

  *     * Top categories
    * Blood / Hematology
    * Bones / Orthopedics
    * Breast Cancer
    * Colorectal Cancer
    * Depression
    * GastroIntestinal
    * Hypertension
    * Lymphoma
    * Men's Health
    * Neurology / Neuroscience
    * Nutrition / Diet
    * Pain / Anesthetics
    * Prostate / Prostate Cancer
    * Psoriasis
    * Respiratory
    * Sexual Health / STDs
    * Stroke
    * Tuberculosis
    * Urology / Nephrology
    * Women's Health
    * All categories
    * A - B
    * C - D
    * E - G
    * H - L
    * M - O
    * P - R
    * S - Z
    * All Topics

More

    
    
    * Sign up for our newsletter
    * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)Discover in-depth, condition specific articles written by our in-house team.
    

  * Newsletter

![MNT

home](https://cdn1.medicalnewstoday.com/structure/images/logo/logo-2017-640-60.png)

MNT - Hourly Medical News Since 2003

Search Go

  *   *     * Top categories
    * Blood / Hematology
    * Bones / Orthopedics
    * Breast Cancer
    * Colorectal Cancer
    * Depression
    * GastroIntestinal
    * Hypertension
    * Lymphoma
    * Men's Health
    * Neurology / Neuroscience
    * Nutrition / Diet
    * Pain / Anesthetics
    * Prostate / Prostate Cancer
    * Psoriasis
    * Respiratory
    * Sexual Health / STDs
    * Stroke
    * Tuberculosis
    * Urology / Nephrology
    * Women's Health
    * All categories
    * A - B
    * C - D
    * E - G
    * H - L
    * M - O
    * P - R
    * S - Z
    * All Topics

More

    
    
    * Sign up for our newsletter
    * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)Discover in-depth, condition specific articles written by our in-house team.
    

  * Newsletter

![MNT

home](https://cdn1.medicalnewstoday.com/structure/images/logo/logo-2017-640-60.png)

MNT - Hourly Medical News Since 2003

Search Go

  * 

__ Loading...

![]()

##### Please accept our privacy terms

We use cookies and similar technologies to improve your browsing experience,
personalize content and offers, show targeted ads, analyze traffic, and better
understand you. We may share your information with third-party partners for
marketing purposes. To learn more and make choices about data use, visit our
Advertising Policy and Privacy Policy. By clicking “Accept and Continue”
below, (1) you consent to these activities unless and until you withdraw your
consent using our rights request form, and (2) you consent to allow your data
to be transferred, processed, and stored in the United States.

ACCEPT AND CONTINUE TO SITE Deny permission

Scroll to Accept

#### Get the MNT newsletter

Enter your email address to subscribe to our most top categories

Your privacy is important to us.

FINISH

### Email an article

You have chosen to share the following article:

**How elderberries can help you fight the flu**

To proceed, simply complete the form below, and a link to the article will be
sent by email on your behalf.  
**Note:** Please don't include any URLs in your comments, as they will be
removed upon submission.

We do not store details you enter into this form. Please see our privacy
policy for more information.

_*_ Your Name (max. 30 chars) The field 'Your Name' is required.

_*_ Email Address This is not a valid email address.

_*_ Friend's Name (max. 30 chars) The field 'Friend's Name' is required.

_*_ Friend's Email Address The field 'Friend's Email Address' is required.

Optional Comments (max. 100 chars)

Send securely

## Message sent successfully

**The details of this article have been emailed on your behalf.**

Click here to return to the Medical News Today home page.

* * *

![Thank you for supporting Medical News

Today](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

# Alcohol 'more damaging to brain health than marijuana'

Published Monday 12 February 2018 Published Mon 12 Feb 2018

By Honor Whiteman

Fact checked by Jasmin Collier

With marijuana legalization on the rise, an increasing number of studies are
exploring the drug's potential harms and benefits. However, a new study
suggests that when it comes to brain health, alcohol is more damaging.

![The human brain and a glass of

whiskey](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)  
_Researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana
does._

Scientists at the University of Colorado Boulder conducted a review of
existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana, or
cannabis, on the brain.

Their findings linked alcohol consumption with long-term changes to the
structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain.

The use of marijuana, however, seemed to have no significant long-term effects
on brain structure.

Study leader Rachel Thayer, of the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience
at the University of Colorado Boulder, and colleagues recently reported their
results in the journal _Addiction_.

It is estimated that around 22.2 million people in the United States have used
marijuana in the past month, making it "the most commonly used illicit drug"
in the country.

Across the U.S., however, it is increasingly becoming legalized for both
medicinal and recreational purposes. As a result of this changing legislation,
researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit
health, as well as the damage that it could cause.

Last year, for example, _Medical News Today_ reported on a study linking
marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers, while another study
claimed that the drug is "worse than cigarettes" for cardiovascular health.

On the other side of the coin, researchers have found that cannabinoids —
which are the active compounds in marijuana — could help to prevent migraine,
and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive.

![Thank you for supporting Medical News

Today](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

## Marijuana vs. alcohol: Which is worse?

For this latest study, Thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how
marijuana use affects the brain.

Study co-author Kent Hutchison, also of the Department of Psychology and
Neuroscience, notes that to date, studies that have investigated this
association have produced mixed results.

"When you look at these studies going back years," he explains, "you see that
one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the
volume of the hippocampus. The next study then comes around, and they say that
marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum [...]."

![Teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later

on](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

Teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on

Researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of
bipolar symptoms.

Read now

"The point is that there's no consistency across all of these studies in terms
of the actual brain structures."

With the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency, the researchers
conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data. They looked at how
marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain, and how its
effects compare with another "drug" that we have become so accustomed to:
alcohol.

Gray matter is the tissue on the brain's surface that primarily consists of
nerve cell bodies. White matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains
myelinated nerve fibers, which are branches protruding from nerve cells that
transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues.

The team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a
loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning.

"With alcohol, we've known it's bad for the brain for decades," notes
Hutchison. "But for cannabis, we know so little."

## Marijuana use had no impact

The study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and
55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18. All participants
varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana.

The researchers found that alcohol use — particularly in adults who had been
drinking for many years — was associated with a reduction in gray matter
volume, as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter.

**Marijuana use, however, appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray
or white matter in either teenagers or adults.**

Based on these findings, the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is
likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana.

> "[...] while marijuana may also have some negative consequences, it
definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol."

>

> Kent Hutchison

When it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use, however, Thayer and
her team note that the jury is still out, and further research is needed to
reach some conclusions.

## Related coverage

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

How binge drinking alters brain activity For the first time, researchers
measure binge drinking-related changes in brain activity during rest. They
mirror those seen in chronic alcoholics' brains. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

How to boost your brain Are you looking for ways to improve your mind and
boost brain power in 2018? Look no further; we have compiled the best brain
enhancing methods to try. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Adult brains undergo structural changes earlier than we thought Contrary to
common belief, the human brain undergoes structural changes during early to
mid-adulthood, according to an analysis of scans of white matter. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Schizophrenia affects whole-brain connectivity, major study finds The largest
ever big data study of schizophrenia finds that the entire communication
system in the brain's white matter is disrupted in the disease. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

How childhood trauma affects the brain Researchers shed fresh light on how a
history of abuse in childhood disrupts brain connectivity, leading to negative
mental health outcomes. Read now

email email

print

share share

Alcohol / Addiction / Illegal Drugs

Neurology / Neuroscience Public Health

## Recommended related news

![MNT Knowledge

Center](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

## Latest news

  * ![Common acne drug could prevent artery hardening](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Common acne drug could prevent artery hardening

Scientists have identified the mechanism that causes artery hardening and have
shown that the antibiotic minocycline can prevent the process in rats.

  * ![Human brains have evolved to 'prefer' music and speech](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Human brains have evolved to 'prefer' music and speech

New evidence suggests that human brains, unlike those of monkeys, may have
evolved to 'listen' for pitch, which characterizes music and speech.

  * ![Heart disease death: 'White coat hypertension' may double risk](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Heart disease death: 'White coat hypertension' may double risk

New research examines the correlations between untreated 'white coat
hypertension,' treated 'white coat effect,' heart disease, and heart disease
death.

  * ![Undetected diabetes may double risk of heart attack, periodontitis](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Undetected diabetes may double risk of heart attack, periodontitis

New research finds a link between undetected blood sugar disorders and a
heightened risk of myocardial infarction — or heart attack — and
periodontitis.

  * ![3 interventions could prevent millions of cardiovascular deaths](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

3 interventions could prevent millions of cardiovascular deaths

A new Harvard study argues that implementing three heart health interventions
at a global level could save millions of lives in the next couple of decades.

![MNT Knowledge

Center](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

## Popular in: Alcohol / Addiction / Illegal Drugs

  * How long can you detect marijuana in the body? 
  * Home remedies to ease a hangover 
  * What to know about urine drug screening 
  * Is amyl nitrite safe? 
  * What to know about marijuana withdrawal 

![](https://d.turn.com/r/dd/id/L21rdC84MTYvY2lkLzE3NDc2NjAwNjEvdC8y/kv/CampaignID=MedicalNewsToday,Content=marijuanause)

Scroll to top

![MNT

home](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

* * *

  * Popular news
  * Editorial articles
  * All news topics
  * Knowledge center
  * Newsletters
  * Share our content
  * About us
  * Our editorial team
  * Contact us
  * Advertise with MNT

### get our newsletter

Health tips, wellness advice and more.

Subscribe

Your privacy is important to us.

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK.

(C) 2004-2019 All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of
Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is not
intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take
any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.

Privacy | Terms | Ad policy | Careers

![TRUSTe](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

This page was printed from:
**https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320895.php**

Visit **www.medicalnewstoday.com** for medical news and health news headlines
posted throughout the day, every day.

* * *

2019 Healthline Media UK Ltd. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade
mark of Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is
not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not
take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.

![Quantcast](https://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-test123.gif)

![](https://analytics.twitter.com/i/adsct?txn_id=l4bfr&p_id=Twitter)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

