

Skip to main content

\+ copy+Line Copy 7

University of California San Francisco

Give to UCSF

![Home](/themes/custom/ucsf/logo.svg)

Search

search

## Main navigation

  * About
    * Overview
    * Mission & Values
    * Our Impact
    * Achievements
    * Economic Impact
    * UCSF in the Community

Give to UCSF

    
    
    * History
    * Facts & Figures
      * Budget
      * Inventions & Entrepreneurship
      * UCSF Fact Sheet
    

Give to UCSF

    
    
    * Administration
      * Campus Leaders
      * Campus Organizational Chart
      * Chancellor
      * Controller's Office
      * Diversity & Outreach
      * Executive Vice Chancellor & Provost
      * University Development & Alumni Relations
      * University Relations
    

Give to UCSF

    
    
    * Locations
    

Give to UCSF

  * Patient Care
    * Overview
    * UCSF Medical Center
    * UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals
    * Oakland
    * San Francisco

Give to UCSF

    
    
    * UCSF Dental Center
    * Langley Porter Psychiatric Hospital and Clinics
    * Specialty Clinics
    * Clinical Trials
    

Give to UCSF

  * Research
    * Overview
    * Partnerships
    * Office of Research
    * Innovation Ventures
    * Postdoctoral Scholars

Give to UCSF

  * Education
    * Overview
    * Admissions
    * Schools & Programs
    * School of Dentistry
    * School of Medicine
    * School of Pharmacy
    * School of Nursing
    * Graduate Division
    * Global Health Sciences

Give to UCSF

    
    
    * Resources for Students
      * Academic Calendar
      * Career Center
      * Financial Aid
      * Library
      * Registrar
      * Student Success Guide
    

Give to UCSF

Give to UCSF

  * News & Media
    * UCSF News Center
    * Campus News
    * Media Coverage
    * Resources for Journalists

Give to UCSF

  * Search

Give to UCSF

## Main navigation - Desktop

  * About

Close menu

About

    
    
    * Overview
    * Mission & Values
    * Our Impact __
    

Close menu

Our Impact

    
    
      * Achievements
      * Economic Impact
      * UCSF in the Community
    
    * History
    * Facts & Figures __
    

Close menu

Facts & Figures

    
    
      * Budget
      * Inventions & Entrepreneurship
      * UCSF Fact Sheet
    
    * Administration __
    

Close menu

Administration

    
    
      * Campus Leaders
      * Campus Organizational Chart
      * Chancellor
      * Controller's Office
      * Diversity & Outreach
      * Executive Vice Chancellor & Provost
      * University Development & Alumni Relations
      * University Relations
    
    * Locations
    

  * Patient Care

Close menu

Patient Care

    
    
    * Overview
    * UCSF Medical Center
    * UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals __
    

Close menu

UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals

    
    
      * Oakland
      * San Francisco
    
    * UCSF Dental Center
    * Langley Porter Psychiatric Hospital and Clinics
    * Specialty Clinics
    * Clinical Trials
    

  * Research

Close menu

Research

    
    
    * Overview
    * Partnerships
    * Office of Research
    * Innovation Ventures
    * Postdoctoral Scholars
    

  * Education

Close menu

Education

    
    
    * Overview
    * Admissions
    * Schools & Programs __
    

Close menu

Schools & Programs

    
    
      * School of Dentistry
      * School of Medicine
      * School of Pharmacy
      * School of Nursing
      * Graduate Division
      * Global Health Sciences
    
    * Resources for Students __
    

Close menu

Resources for Students

    
    
      * Academic Calendar
      * Career Center
      * Financial Aid
      * Library
      * Registrar
      * Student Success Guide
    

  * News & Media

Close menu

News & Media

    
    
    * UCSF News Center
    * Campus News
    * Media Coverage
    * Resources for Journalists
    

  * Search

search

  * Research

  * January 10, 2012

# Marijuana Shown to Be Less Damaging to Lungs Than Tobacco

UCSF-Led Study Compares Effects on Pulmonary Function

By Leland Kim

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Reddit
  * Email
  * Print

A large-scale national study suggests low to moderate use of marijuana is less
harmful to users’ lungs than exposure to tobacco, even though the two
substances contain many of the same components.

This comprehensive study, led by UCSF and University of Alabama at Birmingham,
collected data from more than 5,000 U.S. adults for more than 20 years.

Smoking cigarettes can cause significant lung damage, including respiratory
symptoms, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer. It accounts
for an estimated 443,000 deaths, or nearly one in every five deaths, each year
in the United States, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Data for the long-term effects of marijuana use on the
pulmonary system has been scarce until now.

![Mark Pletcher, MD,

MPH](/sites/default/files/legacy_files/pletcher_mark_j_2.jpg)Mark Pletcher,
MD, MPH

“We found exactly what we thought we would find in relation to tobacco
exposure: a consistent loss of lung function with increasing exposure,” said
the paper’s lead author, Mark Pletcher, MD, MPH, associate professor in the
Division of Clinical Epidemiology at UCSF. “We were, however, surprised that
we found such a different pattern of association with marijuana exposure.”

In a paper published today in _the Journal of American Medical Association
(JAMA)_ , researchers analyzed the relationship between current and lifetime
exposure to marijuana and pulmonary function. The Coronary Artery Risk
Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) study collected medical data from 5,115
men and women in four U.S. cities from 1985 to 2006.

They measured air flow rate – the speed in which a person can blow out air –
and lung volume, which is the amount of air a person is capable of holding,
typically about six liters of air for an adult male. Lung function was
measured using a common medical device called a spirometer that measures air
flow when the participant breathes in and out.

“Essentially with tobacco, the more you use, the more loss you have with both
of the indicators, air flow rate and lung volume,” said the paper’s last
author Stefan Kertesz, MD, MSc, associate professor in the Division of
Preventive Medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine and the Birmingham VA Medical Center. “There’s a straight-line
relationship: the more you use, the more you lose.”

The same was not true with marijuana use. Air flow rate increased rather than
decreased with increased exposure to marijuana up to a certain level.

“An important factor that helps explain the difference in effects from these
two substances is the amount of each that is typically smoked,” Pletcher said.
“Tobacco users typically smoke ten to 20 cigarettes/day, and some smoke much
more than that. Marijuana users, on average, smoke only two to three times a
month, so the typical exposure to marijuana is much lower than for tobacco.”

“And marijuana is one where a lot of people dabble with it in their late teens
and 20s, and some people continue with relatively low levels for a long period
of time,” Kertesz added.

## Heavy Marijuana Use May Take Toll

Although there was a suggestion that very heavy use of marijuana might be
taking a toll on the lungs, the researchers could not get reliable estimates
of the effects of very heavy marijuana exposure, as such smokers were
relatively rare in the study population.

All participants in the study began as young, healthy adults 18 to 30 years
old from four communities: Oakland, Chicago, Minneapolis and Birmingham. They
volunteered to be part of this long-term medical research study, agreeing that
their data could be used to explore questions, including about tobacco and
marijuana use.

Researchers believe the results can supplement the growing body of knowledge
about beneficial aspects of low to moderate marijuana use in controlling pain,
stimulating appetite, elevating mood and managing other chronic symptoms.

“Our findings suggest that occasional use of marijuana for these or other
purposes may not be associated with adverse consequences on pulmonary
function,” Pletcher said. “On the other hand, our findings do suggest an
accelerated decline in pulmonary function with heavier use – either very
frequent use or frequent use over many years – and a resulting need for
caution and moderation when marijuana use is considered.”

Pletcher is the lead author of the paper; co-authors are Eric Vittinghoff,
PhD, and Feng Lin, MS; of the UCSF Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics; Ravi Kalhan, MD, MS, of the Divison of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine; Stephen
Sidney, MD, MPH, of Kaiser Permanente of Northern California, Oakland; Joshua
Richman, MD, PhD, Monika Safford, MD, and Stefan Kertesz, MD, of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham and Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

The study was supported by funds from the National Heart Lung Blood Institute.

UCSF is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through
advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences
and health professions, and excellence in patient care.

## Related Links

  * UCSF Study Finds Medical Marijuana Could Help Patients Reduce Pain with Opiates
  * Time Article
  * NPR Shots
  * Washington Post Article
  * Reuters Article
  * CNN Article
  * Bloomberg Article

  * MSNBC Vitals Article

  * ABC News Article
  * Los Angeles Times Article
  * U.S. News & World Report Article
  * USA Today Article
  * WebMD Article

### Topics

  * Drugs and Alcohol
  * Epidemiology
  * Smoking and Tobacco
  * Marijuana and Cannabis

## Recommended Reading

![Person with interlocked fingers talking.

](/sites/default/files/styles/news_card__image/public/2019-06/talk_therapy_counseling_psychiatrist.jpg?itok=63u4lQmR)

  * Patient Care

  * Jun. 11, 2019

## ‘Motivational Interview’ May Lessen Problem Drinking in People with HIV

![Marijuana buds spilling out of plastic bag.

](/sites/default/files/styles/news_card__image/public/2019-05/marijuana-plant-

banner.jpg?itok=eXnRKT6h)

  * Research

  * May. 15, 2019

## Legal Marijuana Reduces Chronic Pain, But Increases Injuries and Car

Accidents

![hands breaking a

cigarette](/sites/default/files/styles/news_card__image/public/field/image/landing-

page-two-columns/hands-breaking-cigarette-smoking.jpg?itok=oBNM3h01)

  * Patient Care

  * Apr. 12, 2019

## Medicaid Could Save $2.6 Billion Within a Year if Just 1 Percent of

Recipients Quit Smoking

## Are you a member of the news media?

Visit the Media Center

## Stay in touch with the latest updates.

Subscribe to UCSF News

![UCSF Footer Logo](/themes/custom/ucsf/images/footer-logo.svg)

## Follow Us:

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube
  * Instagram

## Get Involved

  * Become a UCSF Advocate
  * Volunteer at UCSF Medical Center
  * Start a Fundraiser
  * Subscribe to UCSF News

## Resources

  * A to Z Website List
  * Administrative Policies
  * Brand Guidelines
  * Campus Maps
  * Careers at UCSF
  * Chancellor
  * Diversity & Outreach
  * Emergency Management
  * Human Resources
  * Library
  * People Directory
  * Police
  * Shuttle Schedule
  * UCSF Profiles

© 2019 The Regents of The University of California

  * Site Map
  * Terms of Use
  * Report an issue with UCSF.edu website

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

