

![Wikileaf Logo Black](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/wikileaf_logo.svg)

![](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/themes/mh_purity/images/logo_small.svg)

  * Dispensaries
  * Strains
  * Brands
  * News

  * The Stash

  * Cannabis News
  * Growing
  * Learn
  * Industry
  * Lifestyle
  * Products
  * Health
  * Strains
  * Dispensaries

# Fact-Check: Has Crime Risen in States that Legalized Cannabis?

## No, no it has not.

by Kate Francis- December 14, 2018

News

![crime rates in legal states](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/iStock-958062674-e1544830638722.jpg)

__Share 75

__Tweet

__Reddit

75 Shares

Across the board, Americans are safer than they have ever been. There are
fewer criminals, and they are committing fewer crimes. So why does the myth of
skyrocketing crime rates persist? In 2017, then-Attorney General Jeff
Sessions, a notorious anti-legalization (and pro-mass-incarceration)
Republican with a long history of using the moral panic surrounding cannabis
to drum up votes, claimed that there was a link between THC levels in
marijuana and violent crime.

## Using Logic To Debunk The Crime Myth

Before getting into the claims made by anti-cannabis activist groups, it's
helpful to apply some simple logic. In states that passed recreational
legalization, something that used to be illegal is now legal. On Monday
cannabis users were lumped in with heroin users, on Tuesday they're beer
drinkers. It's doubtful there were too many first-time users walking through
the door the day rec dispensaries opened for business, so the marijuana-
consuming population remains the same cross-section of society it always was.
Crime rates, in general, have been dropping for the past twenty-five years.
Property crimes like burglary are often linked in the public imagination to
rates of drug use, but while cannabis consumption has risen, the FBI says
property crimes have fallen a staggering 48% since 1993, while the Bureau of
Justice Statistics reports an even more optimistic 66%.

![the FBI's property crime stats from

2013-2017](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-

load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![the FBI's property crime stats from

2013-2017](https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-

the-u.s.-2017/figures/property-crime.gif)

In September 2018, the FBI released the five-year trend of property crimes in
The United States. Source: Fbi.gov

"I don't think America is going to be a better place when people of all ages,
and particularly young people, are smoking pot," Sessions said to reporters
Monday at the Department of Justice. "I believe it's an unhealthy practice,
and current levels of THC in marijuana are very high compared to what they
were a few years ago, and we're seeing real violence around that."

Sessions said he had a meeting on Monday with the attorney general of
Nebraska, who is very concerned about marijuana flowing in from Colorado,
which legalized weed in 2012. "Experts are telling me there's more violence
around marijuana than one would think and there's big money involved," he
said. [â€¦]

"You can't sue somebody for drug debt; the only way to get your money is
through strong-arm tactics, and violence tends to follow that," Sessions said.

Anyone familiar with cannabis dispensaries will spot a flaw in his logic right
away. It's hard to go into "drug debt" in a cash-only business. The persistent
characterization of cannabis users as drug-crazed maniacs putting their lives
into hock for one more puff of that devil weed has old and deeply racist
roots, due in part to the 20th-century association of cannabis with jazz
musicians.

## The Difference Between Correlation and Causation

Now, Sessions' supporters didn't reason their way into racism and they can't
be reasoned out of it. There will always be a contingent of the country who
are willing to believe any negative thing they hear about people and
activities they disapprove of. But it's more disheartening to hear government
officials with better access to facts repeat the same misinformation. Colorado
Governor John Hickenlooper has a front-row seat to his state's experiment with
cannabis legalization, a measure he opposed but relented to at the will of
Colorado voters. Now that legalization has passed and the state is reaping the
benefits in rising tax income and falling opioid use, he's testing the waters
for a reversal, making claims about rising crime rates to justify repealing
legalization. He cites reports showing a five-percent spike in crime, with a
twelve-percent increase in violent crime statewide, but police in Denver,
Colorado's destination city and a burgh that now boasts over 170 recreational
dispensaries, don't think correlation necessarily indicates causation.

"[Property crime is] the biggest driver of our [overall] crime, and of our
increases. So, can you attribute that to marijuana? I don't think you can,"
said Denver Police Commander James Henning. "The data isn't there."

## There's Actually Been A Decrease in Crime Since Legalization

The data isn't even consistent in pointing towards a trend in one direction or
another. The Colorado Department of Public Safety reports a six percent
decrease in violent crime statewide, and Colorado showed a 2.2% drop in
violence during the first year of recreational legalization alone.

![](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-

load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/iStock-952389966-1-e1547054854336.jpg)

GOLDEN, COLORADO--OCTOBER 2017: A Jefferson County police car blends in with
the traffic in Golden, Colorado.

"The Denver, Aurora and Edgewater police departments have not shown any link
between violent crime and marijuana," said Kristi Kelly, executive director of
the Marijuana Industry Group.

"In fact, the statistics trend in the opposite direction." Kelly is one of the
leading advocates for the cannabis industry in Colorado, so she's especially
alert to the rumblings of the Justice Department about a nationwide crackdown.

"We have a sensitivity to the concerns that are being expressed at the federal
level, and we want to do what we can to mitigate those concerns. We have
members in an industry who are thoughtful and pragmatic and sophisticated.
This is not a fly-by-night kind of deal. People are putting a lot of resources
into this industry and really want to see a successful model."

## Biased Data Interpretation

Part of the challenge with getting an accurate answer about the possible
connection between cannabis legalization and changes in crime rates, positive
or negative, is how many reporting agencies have institutional reasons to
highlight data that suggests a particular reading. True studies into crime
causation, not just correlated statistics, are rare. Spurious correlations are
easy to generate for just about any set of data. Ever since the "War on Drugs"
began in the 1980s, the United States Justice Department has been heavily
invested in the business of prosecuting and incarcerating drug users. Data
that makes it look like drugs cause drug-users to break more laws than just
the ones against using drugs help sell the idea that the War on Drugs is a
noble cause worth earmarking a sizable chunk of the federal budget to.

For a more even-handed stance, it's better to go to academia for statistics.
The scientific journal PLOS-ONE published a study examining the link between
medical marijuana laws and crime statistics in multiple states. In the
researchers' own words, "These findings run counter to arguments suggesting
the legalization of marijuana for medical purposes poses a danger to public
health in terms of exposure to violent crime and property crimes."

Not only did their research not show that marijuana consumption exacerbated
crime statistics, but they found a possible link between medical marijuana and
a drop in homicide and assault rates. More research is needed and will
continue, but one might speculate that cannabis use is replacing at least some
alcohol consumption, a drug for which the link between consumption and
violence is much less spurious.

Fact-Check: Has Crime Risen in States that Legalized Cannabis? was last
modified: January 9th, 2019 by Kate Francis

__Share 75

__Tweet

__Reddit

75 Shares

__crime

__Previous article

Next article __

![Kate Francis](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-

load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Kate

Francis](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/Headshot-2018-150x150.jpeg)

##### About Kate Francis

Kate Francis is a journalist specializing in business reporting and politics.
She lives in Los Angeles, where she divides her time between Lakers games,
yoga, and avocado toast

#### Recent Posts

  * ![How To Roll A Blunt](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![How To Roll A Blunt](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![How To Roll A Blunt](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/weed-blunt-closeup-two-buds-of-marijuana-lying-on-a-cigarette-sheet-picture-id860116958-150x150.jpg)How To Roll A Blunt (5 Easy Steps)

June 11, 2019

  * ![Google play](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Google play](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Google play](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/google-play-150x150.jpg)Google Bans Marijuana Sales Through The Play Store

June 11, 2019

  * ![Oregon Capitol Building](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Oregon Capitol Building](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Oregon Capitol Building](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/front-of-white-stone-capitol-building-in-salem-oregon-picture-id119083564-150x150.jpg)Oregon Is Halting Any New Cannabis Production

June 10, 2019

  * ![can pregnant women smoke weed](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![can pregnant women smoke weed](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![can pregnant women smoke weed](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/young-pregnant-woman-150x150.jpg)Is It Okay To Smoke Cannabis While Pregnant?

June 10, 2019

  * !["San Francisco, USA - May 27, 2011: Ben + Jerry's ice-cream shop in the famous Haight-Ashbury district in San Francisco during daytime. No people present in the photo"](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)!["San Francisco, USA - May 27, 2011: Ben + Jerry's ice-cream shop in the famous Haight-Ashbury district in San Francisco during daytime. No people present in the photo"](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)!["San Francisco, USA - May 27, 2011: Ben + Jerry's ice-cream shop in the famous Haight-Ashbury district in San Francisco during daytime. No people present in the photo"](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/ben-jerrys-e1560150546322-150x150.jpg)Ben and Jerry's Teases New CBD Ice Cream

June 8, 2019

#### Trending Articles

  * ![Uganda](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Uganda](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![Uganda](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/gray-morning-fog-over-tea-plantations-bwindi-picture-id530577284-150x150.jpg)Uganda to Export Cannabis to Canada and Germany

May 17, 2019

  * ![weed etiquette](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![weed etiquette](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![weed etiquette](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/gang-of-young-people-taking-drugs-picture-id494768215-150x150.jpg)A Simple Guide to Proper Weed Etiquette

May 17, 2019

  * ![medical marijuana](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![medical marijuana](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![medical marijuana](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cannabis-plant-leaf-hlding-in-hand-commercial-growing-facility-picture-id1089974754-150x150.jpg)The Fight For Medical Marijuana Doesn't End With Legalization

May 16, 2019

  * ![cannabis marijuana American flag](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![cannabis marijuana American flag](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![cannabis marijuana American flag](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/iStock-OlegMalyshev2-e1557953654633-150x150.jpg)All Recreationally Legal States And Their Laws

May 15, 2019

  * ![second amendment protection act](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![second amendment protection act](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![second amendment protection act](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/news-second-amend-150x150.jpg)The Second Amendment Protection Act

May 10, 2019

#### Re-Up on Cannabis News with The Stash

Leave this field empty if you're human:

![footer logo](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/themes/mh_purity/images/logo.svg)

Wikileaf is your best source for cannabis brands, prices, strain information,
and dispensaries near you.

Â© 2019 Wikileaf All Rights Reserved.

"There's a Strain For That." Registered Trademark.

###### Quick Links

  * Locations
  * Dispensaries
  * Strains
  * Brands
  * News

###### Wikileaf

  * Mobile Apps
  * Contact Us
  * About Us
  * Careers
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms and Conditions

###### Dispensaries

  * Signup / Login

* * *

![wikileaf on apple store](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![wikileaf on

apple store](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/themes/mh_purity/images/app-store-badge.svg)

![wikileaf on google play store](//www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/plugins/a3-lazy-load/assets/images/lazy_placeholder.gif)![wikileaf on

google play store](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/themes/mh_purity/images/google-play-badge.svg)

![footer logo](https://www.wikileaf.com/thestash/wp-

content/themes/mh_purity/images/logo.svg)

Wikileaf is your best source for cannabis brands, prices, strain information,
and dispensaries near you.

Â© 2019 Wikileaf All Rights Reserved.

"There's a Strain For That." Registered Trademark.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

