

##### SoundQs

![Orange creamsicle, a type of marijuana sold at Have a Heart marijuana

retailer in Greenwood, a neighborhood in north Seattle. ](https://kuow-

prod.imgix.net/store/2fd72af5d2d4bcec8f3ff8954bb27bef.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&crop=faces&fit=crop&h=634&w=924)

![Enlarge Icon](/assets/icons/Media/Max-

small-766acb771b234960dd68fb94cd3c462d923848626b8be30d2d520fa234639e37.svg)

Orange creamsicle, a type of marijuana sold at Have a Heart marijuana retailer
in Greenwood, a neighborhood in north Seattle.

Credit: File: KUOW Photo/Isolde Raftery

# Where is all the marijuana tax money going?

By

  * ![](https://kuow-prod.imgix.net/store/089e9b81c43efa246c323005a8a72fb5.jpeg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&crop=faces&fit=crop&h=42&w=42)

Anna Boiko-Weyrauch

Dec 27, 2018 **at** 1:35 pm

Listeners wrote in, asking where the state’s weed money goes. Reporter Anna
Boiko-Weyrauch of our SoundQs team explains.

We start with $360 million. That’s how much the state expects to get this
fiscal year from taxes and fees from marijuana sales.

**64 percent:** The biggest portion goes to health care costs for low-income
people.

This money goes to Medicaid and community clinics — for doctor’s appointments,
kids dental care, hospital visits, medication.

**33 percent:** This goes into the state’s general fund. This is the state’s
all-purpose bank account and most of it pays for education — kindergarten
through college. The general fund is a grab bag, though, from nursing homes,
to habitat conservation to buying computers for government agencies.

**8 percent:** This goes to prevent drug and alcohol addiction.

**4 percent:** Towns that have marijuana businesses in them.

**3 percent:** The state's Liquor and Cannabis Board and Department of Health,
respectively, get three percent.

A lot of money, right? Well, guess what fraction of the whole state budget
marijuana takes up? What percent of EVERYTHING?

Two percent.

Steve Lerch, chief economist of Washington state's Economic and Revenue
Forecast Council, said when pot became legal, there was a spike in marijuana
sales, more and more every month.

"In July of 2014, you had just a handful of retail stores," Lerch said. "There
literally were a lot of places in Washington state where getting recreational
marijuana would've been a long drive. By now we have on the order of about 400
retail stores all over the state."

More stores means more legal weed sales, and more legal weed sales means more
taxes for Washington state.

The money from the pot industry grows still, but at a mellower pace – about 3
percent a year. That’s about the same as the taxes we get from cigarettes or
liquor.

marijuana **113** government **+999**

#### Tell Us What You Think

We'd love to hear your thoughts

#### SoundQs

##### Previous Episode

### Does this photo make you nervous? You wouldn't be alone

##### Next Episode

### A mysterious dot on an old map, and a Washington man’s quest to find it

Become a KUOW Sponsor »

#### Related Stories

  * ![<em>Cannabis: The Illegalization of Weed in America</em>, by Box Brown](https://kuow-prod.imgix.net/store/60faed7fae99974d70d81067ccb8324a.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&crop=faces&fit=crop&h=218&w=328)

### Beyond 'Reefer Madness': Box Brown's Graphic History Tells Story Of A

Maligned Plant

  * ![The first rendering from hemp plants extracted from a super critical CO2 extraction device on its' way to becoming fully refined CBD oil spurts into a large beaker at New Earth Biosciences in Salem, Oregon. ](https://kuow-prod.imgix.net/store/d298a554d19863f95799a357561dc02b.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&crop=faces&fit=crop&h=218&w=328)

### Hemp steals the show at CannaCon in Seattle

  * ![File photo.](https://kuow-prod.imgix.net/store/a4d2139c71f4910015472542475e88fb.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&crop=faces&fit=crop&h=218&w=328)

### Marijuana: Legal In Alaska, But Still Subject To Debate

#### Connect With Us

Stay connected with everything KUOW by signing up for our free newsletter.

#### What are you curious about?

Help guide our reporting by submitting a topic, question, or one of your
stories to our team.

  * When is Seattle going to get an earthquake warning system?
  * Are Seattle drivers really so terrible?
  * Where are we getting all the construction workers from?

Share your idea or story

#### Upcoming Events

View All

  * _Jun_ **15** 10:30 am

##### Ask a Transgender Person

  * _Jun_ **20** 7:30 pm

##### Ask Me Another

  * _Jun_ **22** 2:00 pm

##### Front Row Center: Summer of 69

![KUOW App on iPhone](/assets/content/Download_Mockup-

dfb235359bed19315c096de87057fd186446da81e0e8c3e9f925d9511584627f.png)

#### Listen to the stories you care about in our mobile app

![Apple App Store Download

Icon](/assets/icons/Misc/Apple-0baedfa3c11837fc3dc4fe1da8a42f8be4453761f2e04af5c0770f4009613b7b.svg)
_Download from_ **App Store** ![Google Play

Icon](/assets/icons/Misc/Google_Play-0ef8e21e79ea1b02328c1888eb871e5b4a6975d0c1467a0603fe9d8a05d66945.svg)
_Get it on_ **Play Store**

![KUOW Logo](/assets/content/KUOW-

outlined-e43025810fc1c0dca8127305d3339cf29c4bdf265f057e9db3740248b9cf2b07.svg)
![NPR Logo](/assets/content/NPR-

inverted-9157e4b3789a2165dd5e0d60487624160c77819f9fa4802627d3ad480b162f1c.svg)

KUOW is the Puget Sound region’s #1 radio station for news. Our independent,
nonprofit newsroom produces award-winning stories, podcasts and events.

  * About
  * Staff
  * Events

  * KUOW on Facebook

  * KUOW on Instagram
  * KUOW on Twitter

##### Inside KUOW

  * Contact Us / Feedback
  * Secure Drop
  * Careers
  * Nonprofit Partnerships
  * Annual Report
  * Press
  * Schedule (PDF)

##### Support

  * Donate / Become a Member
  * Wills and Estate Planning
  * Donate Your Car
  * Gift of Securities
  * Business Sponsorship

(C) 2019 KUOW News and Information v1.15.2

  * Corrections
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use
  * FCC/CPB

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

