

Skip to content

Topics

xml:space="preserve">

  * Subscriber Services

    * Manage Subscription
    * Newsletters
    * EZ Pay
    * Vacation Stop
    * Delivery Issue
    * Subscriber Terms
  * E-NEWSPAPER

  * Obituaries
  * Breaking News
  * Sports

    * Sports Yard Goats
    * Golf
    * Connecticut Sun
    * UConn Men
    * UConn Women
    * UConn Football
    * High School
    * College Sports
    * UConn Huskies
    * Football
    * Basketball
    * Hockey
  * CTNow

    * Submit Events
  * Hartford Magazine

  * Community

    * Hartford
    * West Hartford
    * Glastonbury
    * Farmington
    * Manchester
    * New Britain
    * Bristol
    * Southington
    * Enfield
    * East Hartford
    * South Windsor
    * Wethersfield
    * Middletown
    * New Haven
    * Mansfield
    * Colchester
    * Putnam
    * Stafford
    * Ellington
    * Hebron
    * Suffield
    * Killingly
    * Bridgeport
    * Danbury
    * Waterbury
  * Politics

    * Capitol Watch
    * Elections
  * Business

    * Top Workplaces
  * Opinion

  * Nation World
  * Branded Content

    * Paid Partner Content
    * Paid Content by Brandpoint
  * Classified

    * Classified Automotive
    * Classified Jobs
  * Real Estate

  * Travel Offers
  * Travel
  * Health
  * Prime Living
  * Newsletters
  * Place An Ad
  * Archives
  * TAG

* * *

Search

xml:space="preserve">

![The Hartford Courant Logo](/pb/resources/images/hartarc_icons/app-bar-

logo.svg?v=151)

  * Politics
  * Opinion
  * Sports
  * CTNow
  * Community
  * Best Reviews

Advertisement

Advertisement

  * Politics 

# How much money would recreational marijuana really generate in Connecticut?

![Daniela Altimari](/pb/resources/images/tinygif.gif)

By Daniela Altimari

| Hartford Courant |

Jan 17, 2019 | 12:26 PM

![How much money would recreational marijuana really generate in

Connecticut?](https://www.courant.com/resizer/bgFPrKGfajBfk-3TWBu-

ipgHCVU=/415x276/top/arc-anglerfish-arc2-prod-

tronc.s3.amazonaws.com/public/YKGE4UDO4FFRFHL5XI2XKKBILE.jpg)

Northampton, Ma. - 11/20/2018 - Hundreds of customers, some of whom arrived as
early as 3am, waited for hours on line in the snow and rain to purchase adult-
use marijuana at New England Treatment Access in Northampton on the first day
of legal sales. Photograph by Mark Mirko | mmirko@courant.com (Mark Mirko /
Hartford Courant)

How much tax revenue will legalizing marijuana generate for cash-starved
Connecticut?

That depends on who you ask.

Advertisement

Kebra Smith-Bolden, a registered nurse from New Haven who owns a cannabis
business, sees a potential boon to fund schools and programs for seniors and
help rebuild urban communities that have been hurt by the historic inequities
of the war on drugs.

"The revenue that cannabis legalization can bring in is substantial and
there’s enough to go around,'' Smith-Bolden said. “We can do a lot of things
with that revenue.”

**[Politics] UConn faces $19.6M deficit, driven largely by unfunded pensions
»**

Senate President Pro Tem Martin Looney, a New Haven Democrat and a strong
supporter of taxing and regulating pot, agrees: “It would be a significant new
revenue source for the state of Connecticut at a time when there is general
reluctance to raise taxes.”

Smith-Bolden and other legalization advocates say the retail sale of marijuana
could generate as much as $180 million annually in new tax dollars, though
Looney said “The exact amount we’ll take in is going to be determined by the
tax structure that we chose.”

Paul Kirchberg, executive director of Connecticut NORML, which supports ending
prohibition on marijuana, said policy makers tend to underestimate the tax
benefits of legalization.

"If all the people in favor of legalization went out and bought $1,000 in
cannabis products a year, we would reach that $180 million number fairly
quickly,'' he said. “It’s very easy to spend $1,000 a year--a single joint
offering can cost $30.”

While $180 million sounds like a big number, it’s far less than the sum
generated by the cigarette tax, which raised $32,653,033 in the month of
December alone, according to the Department of Revenue Services.

**[Politics] Connecticut will review juvenile justice polices »**

And the marijuana tax receipts would hardly dent the state’s $1.7 billion
deficit in the 2019-20 fiscal year, a gap that’s projected to grow to $2.3
billion in 2020-21.

Critics of legalization say the sunny tax projections put forth by cannabis
supporters don’t add up. "This is not a money-maker by any means,'' said Kevin
A. Sabet, president of Smart Approaches to Marijuana, a national group opposed
to legalizing marijuana for recreational use. “Anyone looking for a big
windfall is going to be very disappointed.”

![In 2018, Vermont Gov. Phil Scott privately signed the state's marijuana bill

into law, making the Vermont the first in the country to authorize the

recreational use of the substance by an act of a state legislature. The law,

which went into effect July 1, allows adults to possess up to 1 ounce of

marijuana, two mature and four immature

plants.](/pb/resources/images/tinygif.gif)

In 2018, Vermont Gov. Phil Scott privately signed the state's marijuana bill
into law, making the Vermont the first in the country to authorize the
recreational use of the substance by an act of a state legislature. The law,
which went into effect July 1, allows adults to possess up to 1 ounce of
marijuana, two mature and four immature plants. (Robert F. Bukaty / AP)

Just look at other states that have already legalized marijuana, Sabet said.
"In state after state, marijuana legalization is not worth the cost,'' he
said. "Revenues account less than 1 percent of any state budget.''

Advertisement

While the federal ban on marijuana remains in effect, a patchwork of policies
have sprung up in states. The District of Columbia and 10 states – Alaska,
California, Colorado, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Nevada, Oregon, Vermont
and Washington – have legalized cannabis for recreational use by adults.

Those states have established various tax structures and one of them, Vermont,
doesn’t permit the commercial sale of cannabis products. (Vermont allows those
over 21 to possess up to 1 ounce of marijuana, as well as two mature marijuana
plants and four immature plants, but it has no mechanism for the retail sale
of marijuana. The state is currently reviewing a regulatory structure for
commercial sales and is considering a 26 percent tax rate.)

**[Politics] Sen. Fasano to Gov. Lamont: Show us the savings »**

In Massachusetts, where voters approved the sale of recreational marijuana in
a 2016 referendum, $2.2 million worth of gummies, vape cartridges and other
cannabis product were sold in the first five days of legalization in November,
generating $376,995 in state sales taxes, according to the Cannabis Control
Commission. The towns of Leicester and Northampton, home to the state’s first
two dispensaries, earned another $66,528 in local taxes.

Colorado, the first state to legalize marijuana for no-questions asked
recreational use, is often held up as a case study on the enormous revenue
potential of pot. In 2014, the state netted $67,594,323 in marijuana-related
taxes, licenses and fees, according to the Colorado Department of Revenue.

By 2018, the number had grown to $266,529,637. Over the five years that taxes
have been collected, Colorado has raised more than $900 million. The state is
home to about 5.6 million people, about 2 million more than Connecticut.

In Washington state, which followed Colorado in allowing adult recreational
use, consumers are assessed a 37 percent tax on retail marijuana sales. The
state netted $315 million in marijuana tax revenue in the fiscal year ended on
June 30, 2017.

It would be a significant new revenue source for the state of Connecticut at a
time when there is general reluctance to raise taxes.

Senate President Pro Tem Martin Looney

* * *

Share quote & link

Looney said he would like to see Connecticut follow the Colorado model, which
assess a 15 percent excise tax on the average market rate of retail marijuana.
"Colorado has the most aggressive tax structure and that’s the one I’d like to
see us follow,'' he said. “New York will be in the market very soon so we have
to look at what level of taxation there is on our borders.”

**[Politics] Q Poll: Biden, five other Democrats top Trump in hypothetical
2020 matchups »**

Kirchberg of NORML said taxing marijuana at 6.35 percent--the same rate as
other retail products--would generate $100 million annually for the state.

The legislature’s non-partisan fiscal office in 2017 offered a more sober
assessment, projecting that legalizing and taxing marijuana would bring in
more than $30 million in tax dollars in the first full year.

Critics such as Saban say any tax boon would be offset by the cost of
establishing a regulatory system to oversee the marijuana industry.

He also predicted home growers and the black market of illegal sales will
continue to thrive, as consumers seek a tax-free alternative to retail shops.

"In legal states like California, the market is bigger than ever,'' Saban
said. “Anyone who thinks all those drug dealers are going to become dentists
will be sorely disappointed.”

**[Politics] Connecticut, New York in court battle over dumping in Long Island
Sound »**

And, critics say, the revenue-boosting opportunities of legalizing marijuana
will be diluted as more states jump into the market. One state on
Connecticut’s border--Massachusetts--has already jumped into the market and
two others--New York and Rhode Island--are widely expected to do so soon. (A
study by the Tax Foundation estimated that tax collections from marijuana
could generate $5.3 billion annually if all states taxed the drug at a rate of
15 percent.)

Rhode Island Gov. Gina Raimondo included a proposal to legalize recreational
marijuana in her budget. The Democrat estimates the state could net $6.5
million in revenue in the 2019-20 fiscal year, with the first shops opening as
soon as next January. Citing health and safety concerns, Raimondo’s plan would
ban home-growing, closing off a lower-cost and tax-free way to access the
drug.

Despite the appeal of marijuana as a source of revenue, some policy analysts
advise caution. A study released in July by The Pew Charitable Trusts found
various factors, from the difficulty of setting a tax rate to the instability
of the market, contribute to that volatility.

"All of these variables make the long-term outlook for marijuana tax revenue
hazy at best,'' the study concluded. “The growth of the industry and what that
path might look like are challenging to predict.”

But supporters of legalization say the tax benefit is not only one reason to
support the retail sale of marijuana.

Advertisement

"The ban has proved to be futile,'' Looney said. “People are able to get
marijuana if they want it. Prohibition is not sustainable.”

_Daniela Altimari can be reached at dnaltimari@courant.com._

Advertisement

Most Read • Politics

Return Home

Gov. Lamont, who pledged to watch United Technologies ‘like a hawk,’
discovered he had little ability to...

![](https://www.courant.com/resizer/pR5Q43csGagIWH7qAKhNo9zIoe8=/90x90/top/arc-

anglerfish-arc2-prod-

tronc.s3.amazonaws.com/public/3WTE3WM4GRAV3GCIUO6EKPHM7M.jpg)

Advertisement

Advertisement

![](https://www.courant.com/pb/resources/images/hartarc_icons/144-iTunesArtwork.png?v=137)
Most Read • Politics

  * 1\. 

Gov. Lamont, who pledged to watch United Technologies ‘like a hawk,’
discovered he had little ability to keep the headquarters from moving to
Boston

![Gov. Lamont, who pledged to watch United Technologies ‘like a hawk,’

discovered he had little ability to keep the headquarters from moving to

Boston](/pb/resources/images/tinygif.gif)

  * 2\. 

Q Poll: Biden, five other Democrats top Trump in hypothetical 2020 matchups

![Q Poll: Biden, five other Democrats top Trump in hypothetical 2020

matchups](/pb/resources/images/tinygif.gif)

Advertisement

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

