

Skip to main content

National Institutes of Health DrugAbuse.gov Get Email Updates Contact Us

![NIDA for Teens: The Science Behind Drug

Abuse](/sites/all/themes/teens/logo.png)

Have a drug problem—need help?

__ Search

__ Search

## close

  * Teens
  * Teachers
  * Parents
  * Drugs & Health Blog
  * National Drug & Alcohol Facts Week®

Enter Search Term(s):

__

Teens / Drugs & Health Blog / Fewer Teens Are Smoking and Drinking

Drugs & Health Blog

# Fewer Teens Are Smoking and Drinking

Print __

Drug Facts

![Teen Drug Use: Monitoring the Future

2016](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/medium/public/blog/nida_mtfinfographic_final_panel1.png?itok=rMGJJpn3)

The NIDA Blog Team

December 28, 2016

The percentage of teens who are smoking and drinking is dropping, and that’s
great news for teens’ health!

This year’s Monitoring the Future (MTF) survey results, which were released
Dec. 13, show that teens today are less likely than they were in years past to
use alcohol and tobacco. For example, only 4.8 percent of high school seniors
this year said that they smoked tobacco on a daily basis. That’s way down from
1996, when _22.2 percent_ of high school seniors said they smoked every day!
Since tobacco is the leading preventable cause of disease, this downward trend
is great news for teens’ health today and in the future.

![MTF 2016 Survey about Teen Cigarette

Use](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/nida_mtfinfographic_final_panel4.jpg)

Use of e-cigarettes is also down, with close to 13 percent of teens using them
in the past month, compared to more than 16 percent last year. On the other
hand, many teens say they aren’t sure what’s in the liquid they’re vaping. (As
we’ve noted before, that liquid may contain chemicals that are toxic.)

![MTF 2016 Survey About Teen Cigarette and e-Cigarette

Use](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/nida_mtfinfographic_final_panel5.jpg)

Teens now are also less likely to drink alcohol. About a third of high school
seniors said they’d used alcohol in the past month. That number is still
higher than we’d like—alcohol increases the risk of car crashes and injuries,
and underage drinking is especially dangerous because teens’ brains are still
developing—but it’s better than 20 years ago, when about half of seniors said
they had used alcohol in the past month.

![MTF 2016 Survey About Alcohol

Consumption](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/nida_mtfinfographic_final_panel3.jpg)

For the 2016 MTF survey, funded by NIDA, researchers surveyed 45,473 students
from 372 schools. The survey has happened every year since 1975, so it’s a
great way for researchers to understand how teen substance use has changed
over time.

Thank you to the MTF participants for helping us to learn these facts! You can
check out the main NIDA website for the rest of the survey’s findings; they’re
described in videos and in more infographics like the ones above.

* * *

Follow Us on Twitter

Follow Us on Facebook

Subscribe to RSS Feed

## Find Help Near You

Use the SAMHSA Treatment Locator to find substance use or other mental health
services in your area. If you are in an emergency situation, this toll-free,
24-hour hotline can help you get through this difficult time: call
1-800-273-TALK, or visit the Suicide Prevention Lifeline. We also have step by
step guides on what to do to help yourself, a friend or a family member.

_**Teachers:** For ideas on how to use this blog in the classroom, visit the
Drugs  & Health Blog Teacher's Guide._

**_What would you like us to write about on the Drugs & Health Blog?_** _Tell
us in a comment below._

Tags:

AlcoholE-CigarettesTobaccoMonitoring the Future

Comments posted to the Drugs & Health Blog are from the general public and may
contain inaccurate information. They do not represent the views of NIDA or any
other federal government entity.

## Comments

Submitted by Ryan M. on December 28, 2016

How's marijuana use?

  * reply

Submitted by NIDAMinds on December 29, 2016

Lower than 2015 among 8th graders; about the same for 10th and 12th graders.
You can see more stats here: https://www.drugabuse.gov/news-events/news-
releases/2016/12/teen-substan...

  * reply

Submitted by Aaliyah on May 12, 2017

To drink or smoke or it is used for medication

  * reply

Submitted by Rico Gz on January 10, 2017

how were teens able to get cigarettes

  * reply

Submitted by Adam on January 12, 2017

Please put more stuff of smoking.

  * reply

Submitted by Gustavo Woltmann on January 22, 2017

Thank you for sharing some informative information to everyone. We all know
that all over the world, teens become more aggressive in the way that they are
using drugs and then marijuana and with the age of 14 they are starting to
have some cigarette. Hope every people especially teens will see your blog.

  * reply

Submitted by Jahara on March 27, 2017

What are the reasons for the droppings?

  * reply

Submitted by NIDAMinds on May 04, 2017

That is an excellent question. Researchers are trying to determine that now.
Here are some possible ideas: With the internet, teens can research the real
effects of drugs. But there is a flip side to that: there is also a lot of
incorrect information about drugs on the Internet. Another theory: Instead of
judging teens, organizations like NIDA have been working very hard in recent
years to give teens information on drugs that are based on scientific facts,
and we think teens appreciate that. Also, teens are busy with their cell
phones and video games and might be less interested in using drugs for
entertainment. We will let you know what we find out. It is important to note
that while teens are smarter about drugs now, the rates are still high among
adults. So once teens leave their homes, they seem to be more interested in
drugs. What are your theories?

  * reply

Submitted by James on March 28, 2017

To hear that kids are drinking less is a good thing. I grew up in the 80s &
90s and in a heavy drinking culture in the UK. It was normal to drink heavily.
I've since given up drinking, and stopped 10 years ago. I've got kids now, and
I hope they don't feel the same pressures I did at 16. I wrote a blog about
the 5 steps I found helped me give up drinking, and it also helped to keep me
going when doubts and insecurities might have once tripped me up.

  * reply

Submitted by Aaliyah on May 12, 2017

Why did they start smoking or drinking alcohol in the first place?

  * reply

Submitted by NIDAMinds on June 08, 2017

Good question! The specific answer may differ from person to person. Some
common reasons are that people think they will feel good, forget their
problems, perform better, or fit in. Learn more:
https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/real-teens-ask-why-take-drugs and
https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/expectations-and-alcohol

  * reply

Submitted by Aric M :) on December 07, 2017

That's great I think this is caused for the information out there for teen's
and that's why the numbers have dropped please keep doing this education :)

  * reply

Submitted by Aiden D :) on December 07, 2017

I think it is good that people are not smoking and drinking as much.

  * reply

## Add new comment

Comment *

Your name

Current state: Approved

CAPTCHA

This question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to
prevent automated spam submissions.

Leave this field blank

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

The National Institute on Drug Abuse Blog Team. (2016, December 28). Fewer
Teens Are Smoking and Drinking. Retrieved from
https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/fewer-teens-are-smoking-and-drinking on

The National Institute on Drug Abuse Blog Team. "Fewer Teens Are Smoking and
Drinking." _Drugs & Health Blog_, 28 Dec. 2016, National Institute on Drug
Abuse, https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/fewer-teens-are-smoking-and-
drinking.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse Blog Team. Fewer Teens Are Smoking and
Drinking. National Institute on Drug Abuse for Teens website.
https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/fewer-teens-are-smoking-and-drinking.
December 28, 2016. Accessed

press ctrl+c to copy

![Drugs and Health Blog Logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/new-blog-

logo.png)

Receive Blog Posts in your Inbox!

**What are you interested in?**

  * Articles for Parents
  * Articles for Educators
  * Drug Information
  * Prescription Drug Abuse
  * Interactive Materials and Videos
  * Stats and Infographics
  * **_National Drug & Alcohol Facts Week_®**
  * Common Drug Questions

## Categories

  * About Drugs and Health Blog (5)
  * Brain Science (81)
  * Celebrities and Drug Use (46)
  * Drug Facts for Teens (109)
  * Guest Blogger (60)
  * Healthy Minds and Bodies (125)
  * Marijuana (51)
  * National Drug and Alcohol Facts Week (47)
  * NIDA News & Events for Teens (121)
  * Prescription Drug Use (47)
  * Real Teens Ask About Drugs (37)
  * Real-Life Drug Use Stories (14)
  * Tell Us What You Think (35)
  * Word of the Day (27)

  * Privacy Policy

  * Comment Policy

## Our Blog Teaching Guide

![Teaching Guide](/sites/default/files/images/blog_icon.png)

Supplement your drug abuse prevention curriculum with blog posts and
discussion questions.

## Current Posts

  * ![Illustration of NDAFW CSI activity: CSI: The Experience Web Adventures Case One: Case Two: Case Three: ](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/CSIWebAdventures_Crop%26Outline.jpg?itok=iBvAPkh-)

Plan Your Activity for National Drug and Alcohol Facts Week®: Become a CSI
Agent!

06.10.2019

  * ![A patient lies on a stretcher with emergency medical professionals surrounding her to help. ](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/image_patient_on_stretcher_med_professionals%20optimized.jpg?itok=Y9tinwl8)

Treating Opioid Use Disorder in the Emergency Room

06.03.2019

  * ![Tobacco wrinkles, bad breath, yellow teeth, wheezing, stinky clothes. Addiction skin damage cataracts wrinkles mouth cancer throat cancer heart disease lung disease image of young man](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/Graphic%20You%20Said%20It%20Quit%20Smoking%20Screengrab%20optimized.jpg?itok=okMJgqTV)

You Said It: “I Know Someone Who Started Smoking and Wishes They Could Quit”

05.20.2019

## Related Posts

  * ![Photo of a boyfriend and girlfriend.](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/bf_gf.jpg?itok=4mNpiuSQ)

Dating is hard enough already--why make it harder?

  * ![Two teens sitting on a desk at school](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/rta_types_image1.jpg?itok=8KNLAD73)

Real Teens Ask: What Types of Drugs Are High School Students Using?

  * ![group of teens sitting around](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/rta_drugs_image-300x200.jpg?itok=51YxTvnO)

Real Teens Ask: Do Many Kids in High School Do Drugs?

  * ![Young man asking a question](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/nn_college-journalists-roundtable1.jpg?itok=yILAMJtC)

Covering Addiction: How Common is Drug Use in College?

  * ![three teen boys](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/rta_age_image-300x199.jpg?itok=EWri760U)

Real Teens Ask: How Old Are Kids Who Start Using Drugs?

  * About Us
  * Accessibility
  * FOIA
  * NIH Home
  * Privacy Policy
  * Site Map
  * Contact Us

![NIH Logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/nih-logo-footer.png)

Find NIDA for Teens on:

* * *

Site last updated June 11, 2019

NOTE: PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the
free Adobe Flash Player.

**_National Drug and Alcohol Facts Week_** ® and the **_National Drug and
Alcohol Facts Week_** ® logo design are registered marks of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. **_SHATTER THE MYTHS_** ® is a
trademark and service mark of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. **_SHATTER THE MYTHS_** ® is a registered trademark of the U.S.
Department of Health  & Human Services (HHS).

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

![NIH logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/footer-logo-nih.png) ![HHS

logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/footer-logo-hhs.png) ![USA.gov

logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/footer-logo-usa.png)

__ close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

