

![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-masthead-

logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWto get home delivery

  * ![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
  * News
  * Sports
  * Life
  * Money
  * Tech
  * Travel
  * Opinion
  * Weather

Icon

    
    
    * Humidity
    * Precip.
    * Winds
    

Open settings

Settings

Enter City Name

Cancel

Set

Close settings

Full Forecast

  * Crosswords
  * Investigations
  * Newsletters
  * Humankind
  * Apps
  * Best-Selling Books
  * Cartoons
  * Classifieds
  * Corrections
  * Interactives
  * Job Network
  * Moonlighting
  * Newsstand
  * News tips
  * Photo galleries
  * Podcasts
  * Policing the USA
  * Scores
  * Storytellers Project
  * Thanksgiving
  * Washington
  * Video
  * VRtually There
  * More

    * News
    * Sports
    * Life
    * Money
    * Tech
    * Travel
    * Opinion
    * Weather
    * Crosswords
    * Investigations
    * Newsletters
    * Humankind
    * Apps
    * Best-Selling Books
    * Cartoons
    * Classifieds
    * Corrections
    * Interactives
    * Job Network
    * Moonlighting
    * Newsstand
    * News tips
    * Photo galleries
    * Podcasts
    * Policing the USA
    * Scores
    * Storytellers Project
    * Thanksgiving
    * Washington
    * Video
    * VRtually There
  * search

  *     * Subscribe
  * salutation

    * Manage Account
    * Access e-Edition
    * Newsletters
    * Pay Bill
    * Report Delivery Issues
    * Pause Delivery
    * Help Center
    * Sign Out

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### Baltimore police stopped noticing crime after Freddie Gray's death. A

wave of killings followed.

Baltimore's murder rate reached an all-time high last year. Before that
happened, police there suddenly stopped noticing crime.

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

Baltimore police stopped noticing crime after Freddie Gray's death. A wave of
killings followed. Baltimore's murder rate reached an all-time high last year.
Before that happened, police there suddenly stopped noticing crime. Check out
this story on USATODAY.com: https://usat.ly/2uelbUW

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Nation's Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

# Baltimore police stopped noticing crime after Freddie Gray's death. A wave

of killings followed.

Brad Heath, USA TODAY Published 5:49 a.m. ET July 12, 2018 | Updated 7:34 p.m.
ET July 12, 2018

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

![XXX TDL 024 BALTIMORE POLICE STORY FOR BRAD HEATH.JPG SPORTS

MD](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/6b666d8cd654dde58a0769cf681c0cea89eee624/c=830-0-7892-5310/local/-/media/2018/06/29/USATODAY/USATODAY/636658299165063406-XXX-

tdl-024-BAltimore-police-story-for-Brad-

Heath-100113589.jpg?width=534&height=401&fit=crop)

A police officer responds to a call in the Penn-North section of
Baltimore.(Photo: Doug Kapustin, for USA TODAY)

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

BALTIMORE – Just before a wave of violence turned Baltimore into the nation’s
deadliest big city, a curious thing happened to its police force: officers
suddenly seemed to stop noticing crime.

Police officers reported seeing fewer drug dealers on street corners. They
encountered fewer people who had open arrest warrants.

Police questioned fewer people on the street. They stopped fewer cars.

In the space of just a few days in spring 2015 – as Baltimore faced a wave of
rioting after Freddie Gray, a black man, died from injuries he suffered in the
back of a police van – officers in nearly every part of the city appeared to
turn a blind eye to everyday violations. They still answered calls for help.
But the number of potential violations they reported seeing themselves dropped
by nearly half. It has largely stayed that way ever since.

“What officers are doing is they’re just driving looking forward. They’ve got
horse blinders on,” says Kevin Forrester, a retired Baltimore detective.

The surge of shootings and killings that followed has left Baltimore easily
the deadliest large city in the United States. Its murder rate reached an all-
time high last year; 342 people were killed. The number of shootings in some
neighborhoods has more than tripled. One man was shot to death steps from a
police station. Another was killed driving in a funeral procession.

"In all candor, officers are not as aggressive as they once were, pre-2015.
It’s just that fact."

Gary Tuggle, interim Police Commissioner of Baltimore

What's happening in Baltimore offers a view of the possible costs of a
remarkable national reckoning over how police officers have treated
minorities.

Starting in 2014, a series of racially charged encounters in Ferguson,
Missouri; Chicago; Baltimore; and elsewhere cast an unflattering spotlight on
aggressive police tactics toward black people. Since then, cities have been
under pressure to crack down on abuses by law enforcement.

So has the U.S. Justice Department. During the Obama administration, the
department launched wide-ranging civil rights investigations of troubled
police forces, then took them to court to compel reforms. Under President
Donald Trump, Washington has largely given up that effort. "If you want crime
to go up, let the ACLU run the police department," Attorney General Jeff
Sessions said at a gathering of police officials in May.

Whether that scrutiny would cause policing to suffer – or crime to rise – has
largely remained an open question.

In Baltimore, at least, the effect on the city's police force was swift and
substantial.

NEWSLETTERS

Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox

We're sorry, but something went wrong

Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001.

Delivery:

Invalid email address

Thank you! You're almost signed up for

Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration.

More newsletters![](https://staticassets.gannettdigital.com/gci-static-

assets/assets/global/static-web/right-arrow@2x.png)

Police typically learn about crime in one of two ways: either someone calls
for help, or an officer sees a crime himself and stops to do something. The
second category, known among police as an “on-view,” offers a sense of how
aggressively officers are doing their job. Car stops are a good example: Few
people call 911 to report someone speeding – instead, officers see it and
choose to pull someone over. Or choose not to.

**POLICING THE USA:** A look at race, justice, media

Millions of police records show officers in Baltimore respond to calls as
quickly as ever. But they now begin far fewer encounters themselves. From 2014
to 2017, dispatch records show the number of suspected narcotics offenses
police reported themselves dropped 30 percent; the number of people they
reported seeing with outstanding warrants dropped by half. The number of field
interviews – instances in which the police approach someone for questioning –
dropped 70 percent.

![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/experiments/usatoday/gifs/tool/36-Baltimore-

Mobile-V2.gif)

“Immediately upon the riot, policing changed in Baltimore, and it changed very
dramatically,” says Donald Norris, an emeritus professor at the University of
Maryland Baltimore County, who reviewed USA TODAY's analysis. “The outcome of
that change in policing has been a lot more crime in Baltimore, especially
murders, and people are getting away with those murders.”

Police officials acknowledge the change. "In all candor, officers are not as
aggressive as they once were, pre-2015. It’s just that fact," says acting
Police Commissioner Gary Tuggle, who took command of Baltimore's police force
in May.

Tuggle blames a shortage of patrol officers and the fallout from a blistering
2016 Justice Department investigation that found the city's police regularly
violated residents' constitutional rights and prompted new limits on how
officers there carry out what had once been routine parts of their job. At the
same time, he says, police have focused more of their energy on gun crime and
less on smaller infractions.

"We don’t want officers going out, grabbing people out of corners, beating
them up and putting them in jail," Tuggle says. "We want officers engaging
folks at every level. And if somebody needs to be arrested, arrest them. But
we also want officers to be smart about how they do that."

The change has left a perception among some police officers that people in the
city are free to do as they please. And among criminals, says Mahogany Gaines,
whose brother, Dontais, was found shot to death inside his apartment in
October.

“These people don’t realize that you’re leaving people fatherless and
motherless,” Gaines says. “I feel like they think they’re untouchable.”

### A wave of violence

On a sticky morning in May, the Rev. Rodney Hudson slips on a black
“Sermonator” T-shirt and walks down the street from his west Baltimore church,
a gray stone edifice two blocks from where police arrested Gray. A few days
earlier, a drug crew from another neighborhood set up camp on the corner
across the street. Hudson says the dealers nearly got into a gunfight with the
crew that usually works across from the elementary school down the block.

Since Gray’s death, at least 41 people have been shot within a short walk of
Hudson’s church.

“Drug dealers are taking control of the corners and the police’s hands are
tied,” Hudson says. “We have a community that is afraid.”

![Rev. Rodney Hudson, the pastor of AMES United Methodist Church in West

Baltimore, conducts a Bible study on the sidewalk in front of his

church.](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/bfd6ae58985fc5d5fea055969b5d4b682fe118a4/c=534-0-7697-5386/local/-/media/2018/06/29/USATODAY/USATODAY/636658296059870150-XXX-

tdl-021-BAltimore-police-story-for-Brad-

Heath.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

Rev. Rodney Hudson, the pastor of AMES United Methodist Church in West
Baltimore, conducts a Bible study on the sidewalk in front of his church.
(Photo: Doug Kapustin, for USA TODAY)

Two blocks away, Mayor Catherine Pugh and a knot of city officials are under a
tent on an empty lot to break ground for a group of new townhouses. Police
officers linger on the streets, and a helicopter swirls overhead. But three
blocks down Pennsylvania Avenue, drug crews still appear to be at work. Shouts
of “hard body” – one of the drug cocktails on offer – ring clearly. Another
man shouts a warning as Hudson and a reporter approach.

Drug dealers have worked Baltimore’s street corners for decades. But Hudson
says it has been years since he has seen so many young men selling so brazenly
in so many places. Dealers, he says, “are taking advantage” of a newly timid
police force.

At least 150 people have been killed in Baltimore this year.

Ebony Owens’ son, Decorey Horne, 20, was shot to death in 2016 in a parked car
along the narrow street behind his aunt’s house. Another man who was with him
was shot but survived. Eleven months later, the father of Owens' youngest son,
Sherman Carrothers, was found dead outside his house with a gunshot wound. He
was one of four people shot in the city that night.

Owens grew up in Baltimore and knew the city could be dangerous. But this, she
says, is different:

“I don’t remember it being like this.”

### 'These guys aren't stupid'

By almost any measure, this has been a troubled time for Baltimore’s police
force.

It began in April 2015, when officers in west Baltimore chased Gray, arrested
him for possession of what they said was an illegal switchblade and loaded him
into the back of a police van, handcuffed but without a seatbelt. By the time
Gray left the van, he was in a coma. He died a week later. Protests followed,
then riots. Prosecutors charged six police officers for Gray’s death but
abandoned the case after three were acquitted.

The next year, the Justice Department’s civil rights arm accused Baltimore’s
police of arresting thousands of people without a valid legal basis, using
unjustified force and targeting black neighborhoods for unconstitutional
stops. Investigators quoted a detective who said he saw officers plant drugs
on a suspect, and a patrol officer who said his job was to “be the baddest
(expletive) out there.”

This year, eight officers in an elite anti-gun unit were convicted in a
corruption scandal that included robbing drug dealers and carrying out illegal
stops and searches. One officer testified that a supervisor told them to carry
replica guns they could plant on suspects. Another officer was indicted in
January after footage from his body camera showed him acting out finding drugs
in an alley. The city’s new police commissioner, Darryl De Sousa, resigned in
May after federal prosecutors charged him with failing to pay his income
taxes.

For civil rights lawyers and federal investigators, those episodes offer
evidence of a police force in trouble and too often willing to trample the
rights of minorities.

But some officers drew a different lesson: “Officers no longer put themselves
on the firing line,” says Victor Gearhart, a retired lieutenant who supervised
the overnight shift in Baltimore’s southern district before he was pushed out
of the department for referring to Black Lives Matter activists as “thugs” in
an email.

“These guys aren’t stupid. They realize that if they do something wrong,
they’re going to get their head bit off. There’s no feeling that anybody’s
behind them anymore, and they’re not going to do it,” he says. “Nobody wants
to put their head in the pizza oven when the pizza oven is on.”

![Former Baltimore Police Lt. Vic Gearhart, pictured](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/bf37f819482b283b6704661da3441ab487768c17/c=1025-0-7841-5125/local/-/media/2018/06/29/USATODAY/USATODAY/636658296084869190-XXX-

tdl-006-BAltimore-police-story-for-Brad-

Heath.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

Former Baltimore Police Lt. Vic Gearhart, pictured at his Baltimore County,
Md. home, says "officers no longer put themselves on the firing line." (Photo:
Doug Kapustin, for USA TODAY)

Gearhart and other officers say no one ordered them to make fewer stops or
take fewer risks. "We didn't have to tell them," he says. "We just said these
are the facts, this is the situation, and if you want to risk your career,
have at it."

That reaction fits a wider pattern. Nearly three-quarters of police officers
who responded to a Pew Research Center survey last year said high-profile
incidents had left them less willing to stop and question people who seem
suspicious. Even more said the incidents had made their jobs harder.

It has also drawn scorn from civil rights advocates, who scoff at the idea
that police can’t protect both the city and the rights of its residents.

“What it says is that if you complain about the way the police do our job,
maybe we’ll just lay back and not do it as hard,” says Jeffery Robinson, a
deputy legal director for the American Civil Liberties Union, which had
advocated for an overhaul of police agencies in Baltimore and elsewhere. “If
it’s true, if that’s what officers are doing, they should be fired.”

### A sudden change

To track the change in Baltimore, USA TODAY examined 5.1 million police
dispatches from 2013 to 2017.

They show that even before Gray died, the number of encounters Baltimore
officers initiated on their own was dropping.

But in the weeks after the 25-year-old’s death – after protests erupted into
riots, and the National Guard came and left – the number of incidents police
reported themselves plummeted.

Where once it was common for officers to conduct hundreds of car stops, drug
stops and street encounters every day, on May 4, 2015, three days after city
prosecutors announced that they had filed charges against six officers over
Gray’s death, the number fell to just 79. The average number of incidents
police reported themselves dropped from an average of 460 a day in March to
225 a day in June of that year, even though summer weather typically brings
higher crime. By the end of last year, it was lower still.

![Hundreds of demonstrators march toward the  Baltimore](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/2811de55de77c31730f13b936adcb7f246dea305/c=147-0-2807-2000/local/-/media/2018/03/17/USATODAY/USATODAY/636568425559280766-GTY-470733980.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

Hundreds of demonstrators march toward the Baltimore Police Western District
station during a protest against police brutality and the death of Freddie
Gray in 2015. (Photo: Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images)

At the same time, violence in the city leapt to historic highs. Police
recorded more than 200 murders and assaults involving guns in May 2015, triple
the number in March.

Criminologists who reviewed the records say it’s impossible to determine
whether that rapid change played a role in the city’s rising crime, but some
found the pattern troubling.

“The cops are being less proactive at the same time violence is going up,”
says Peter Moskos, a John Jay College of Criminal Justice professor and former
Baltimore officer who reviewed USA TODAY’s data and analysis. “Cops are doing
as requested: lessening racial disparity, lessening complaints, lessening
police-involved shootings. All those numbers are just great right now, and if
those are your metrics of success, we’re winning. The message has clearly
gotten out to not commit unnecessary policing.”

Neither the mayor nor Kevin Davis, the city’s police commissioner until
January, responded to questions about the changes.

Anthony Barksdale, a retired Baltimore police commander, says the message to
officers was unmistakable.

“These guys have family members who tell them 'Don’t go to work and chase
people for a city that doesn’t care about you,'” he says. “If I’m riding down
the street and I see an incident, I see it, but you know what? It’s not worth
it. That’s what these cops are thinking.”

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2uelbUW

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

