

  * Skip to primary navigation
  * Skip to content

The Clean Slate Addiction Site

Addiction is not a disease, it is a choice.

  * About
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Myths
  * Blog
  * Media Appearances

You are here: Home / Addiction Myths and Facts / Addiction is NOT a Brain
Disease, It is a Choice

# Addiction is NOT a Brain Disease, It is a Choice

![](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Ted-Talk-

Addiction.jpg)Click the photo for video of my TED Talk on addiction.

They're screaming it from the rooftops: "addiction is a disease, and you can't
stop it without medical treatment"! But why are they screaming it so loud, why
are they browbeating us about it, why is it always mentioned with a qualifier?
You don't hear people constantly referring to cancer as "the disease of
cancer" - it's just "cancer", because it's obvious that cancer is a disease,
it's been conclusively proven that the symptoms of cancer can't be directly
stopped with mere choices - therefore no qualifier is needed. On the other
hand, addiction to drugs and alcohol is not obviously a disease, and to call
it such we must either overlook the major gaps in the disease argument, or we
must completely redefine the term "disease." Here we will analyze a few key
points and show that what we call addiction doesn't pass muster as a real
disease.

# Real Diseases versus The Disease Concept or Theory of Drug Addiction

In a true disease, some part of the body is in a state of abnormal
physiological functioning, and this causes the undesirable symptoms. In the
case of cancer, it would be mutated cells which we point to as evidence of a
physiological abnormality, in diabetes we can point to low insulin production
or cells which fail to use insulin properly as the physiological abnormality
which create the harmful symptoms. If a person has either of these diseases,
they cannot directly choose to stop their symptoms or directly choose to stop
the abnormal physiological functioning which creates the symptoms. They can
only choose to stop the physiological abnormality indirectly, by the
application of medical treatment, and in the case of diabetes, dietetic
measures may also indirectly halt the symptoms as well (but such measures are
not a cure so much as a lifestyle adjustment necessitated by permanent
physiological malfunction).

![Volkow NIDA Brain Scan](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/09/brain-scan-cropped-300x202.jpg)In addiction, there is
no such physiological malfunction. The best physical evidence put forward by
the disease proponents falls totally flat on the measure of representing a
physiological malfunction. This evidence is the much touted brain scan[1]. The
organization responsible for putting forth these brain scans, the National
Institute on Drug Abuse and Addiction (NIDA), defines addiction in this way:

> Addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is
characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful
consequences. It is considered a brain disease because drugs change the brain
– they change it’s structure and how it works. These brain changes can be long
lasting, and can lead to the harmful behaviors seen in people who abuse drugs.

The NIDA is stating outright that the reason addiction is considered a disease
is because of the brain changes evidenced by the brain scans they show us, and
that these changes cause the behavior known as addiction, which they
characterize as "compulsive drug seeking and use". There are three major ways
in which this case for the disease model falls apart:

  * the changes in the brain which they show us are not abnormal at all
  * people change their behavior IN SPITE OF the fact that their brain has changed in response to repeated substance use _jump to section_
  * there is no evidence that the behavior of addicts is compulsive (compulsive meaning involuntary) (point two addresses this, as well as some other research that will be presented) _jump to section_

This all applies equally to "alcoholism" as well. If you're looking for
information on alcoholism, the same theories and logic discussed here are
applicable; wherever you see the term addiction used on this site, it includes
alcoholism.

## Brain Changes In Addicts Are Not Abnormal, and Do Not Prove The Brain

Disease Theory

On the first count - the changes in the brain evidenced by brain scans of
heavy substance users ("addicts") do not represent a malfunctioning brain.
They are quite normal, as research into neuroplasticity has shown us. Whenever
we practice doing or thinking anything enough, the brain changes - different
regions and neuronal pathways are grown or strengthened, and new connections
are made; various areas of the brain become more or less active depending upon
how much you use them, and this becomes the norm in your brain - but it
changes again as you adjust how much you use those brain regions depending on
what you choose to think and do. This is a process which continues throughout
life, _ **there is nothing abnormal about it.** _ Here, Sharon Begley
describes neuroplasticity: [2]

> The term refers to the brain's recently discovered ability to change its
structure and function, in particular by expanding or strengthening circuits
that are used and by shrinking or weakening those that are rarely engaged. In
its short history, the science of neuroplasticity has mostly documented brain
changes that reflect physical experience and input from the outside world.

So, when the NIDA's Nora Volkow and others show us changes in the brain of a
substance user as compared to a non-substance user, _this difference is not as
novel as they make it out to be_. They are showing us _routine_ neuroplastic
changes which every healthily functioning person 's brain goes through
naturally. The phenomenon of brain changes isn't isolated to "addicts" or
anyone else with a so-called brain disease - non-addicted and non-depressed
and non-[insert brain disease of the week here] people experience neural
adaptations too. One poignant example was found in the brains of London taxi
drivers, as Begley and Jeffrey Schwartz pointed out in _The Mind and The
Brain_. [4]

### Is Being A Good Taxi Driver A Disease?

A specific area of the brain’s hippocampus is associated with creating
directional memories and a mental map of the environment. A team of
researchers scanned the brains of London taxi drivers and compared their
brains to non-taxi drivers. There was a very noticeable difference, not only
between the drivers and non-drivers, but also between the more experienced and
less experienced drivers:

> There it was: the more years a man had been a taxi driver, the smaller the
front of his hippocampus and the larger the posterior. “Length of time spent
as a taxi driver correlated positively with volume in…the right posterior
hippocampus,” found the scientists. Acquiring navigational skills causes a
“redistribution of gray matter in the hippocampus” as a driver’s mental map of
London grows larger and more detailed with experience. [4]

![An abridged earlier version of this article appears in the 2014 edition of

reference/textbook "Addiction: Opposing Viewpoints" from Cengage

Learning/Greenhaven Press](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/09/addiction-opposing-viewpoints--e1406390932802.jpg)An
abridged earlier version of this article appears in the 2014 edition of
reference/textbook "Addiction: Opposing Viewpoints" from Cengage
Learning/Greenhaven Press

So, the longer you drive a cab in London (that is, the longer you exert the
mental and physical effort to quickly find your way around one of the world's
toughest to navigate cities), the more your brain physically changes. And the
longer you use drugs, the more your brain changes. And indeed, the longer and
more intensely you apply yourself to any skill, thought, or activity - the
more it will change your brain, and the more visible will be the differences
between your brain and that of someone who hasn’t been focused on that
particular skill. So, if we follow the logic of the NIDA, then London's taxi
drivers have a disease, which we'll call taxi-ism, that **_forces them to
drive taxis._** But the new diseases wouldn 't stop there.

Learning to play the piano well will change your brain - and if you were to
compare brain scans of a piano player to a non-piano player, you would find
significant differences. Does this mean that piano playing is a disease called
Pianoism? Learning a new language changes your brain, are bilingual people
diseased? Athletes' brains will change as a result of intensive practice - is
playing tennis a disease? Are soccer players unable to walk into a sporting
goods store without kicking every ball in sight? We could go on and on with
examples, but the point is this - when you practice something, you get better
at doing it, because your brain changes physiologically - and this is a normal
process. If someone dedicated a large portion of their life to seeking and
using drugs, and their brain didn't change - then that would be a true
abnormality. Something would be seriously wrong with their brain.

Its not just physical activity that changes our brains, thoughts alone can
have a huge effect. What's more, whether the brain changes or not, there is
much research which shows that the brain is slave to the mind. As Begley
points out elsewhere, thoughts alone can create the same brain activity that
would come about by doing things[2]:

> Using the brain scan called functional magnetic resonance imaging, the
scientists pinpointed regions that were active during compassion meditation.
In almost every case, the enhanced activity was greater in the monks' brains
than the novices'. Activity in the left prefrontal cortex (the seat of
positive emotions such as happiness) swamped activity in the right prefrontal
(site of negative emotions and anxiety), something never before seen from
purely mental activity. A sprawling circuit that switches on at the sight of
suffering also showed greater activity in the monks. So did regions
responsible for planned movement, as if the monks' brains were itching to go
to the aid of those in distress.

So by simply practicing thinking about compassion, these monks made lasting
changes in their brain activity. Purely mental activity can change the brain
in physiologically significant ways. And to back up this fact we look again to
the work of Dr Jeffrey Schwartz[3], who has taught OCD patients techniques to
think their way out of obsessive thoughts. After exercising these thought
practices, research showed that the brains of OCD patients looked no different
than the brains of those who'd never had OCD. If you change your thoughts, you
change your brain physically - and this is voluntary. This is outside the
realm of disease, this shows a brain which changes as a matter of normality,
and can change again, depending on what we practice _choosing to think_. There
is nothing abnormal about a changing brain, and the type of changes we 're
discussing aren't necessarily permanent, as they are characterized to be in
the brain disease model of addiction.

These brain change don't need to be brought on by exposure to chemicals.
Thoughts alone, are enough to rewire the very circuits of the human brain
responsible for reward and other positive emotions that substance use and
other supposedly "addictive" behaviors ("process addictions" such as sex,
gambling, and shopping, etc.) are connected with.

### The Stolen Concept of Neuroplasticity in the Brain Disease Model of

Addiction

Those who claim that addiction is a brain disease readily admit that the brain
changes in evidence are arrived at through repeated choices to use substances
and focus on using substances. In this way, they are saying the disease is a
product of routine neuroplastic processes. Then they go on to claim that such
brain changes either can't be remedied, or can only be remedied by outside
means (medical treatment). When we break this down and look at it step by
step, we see that the brain disease model rests on an argument similar to the
"stolen concept". A stolen concept argument is one in which the argument
denies a fact on which it simultaneously rests. For example, the philosophical
assertion that "reality is unknowable" rests on, or presumes that the speaker
could know a fact of reality, it presumes that one could know that reality is
unknowable - which of course one couldn't, if reality truly was unknowable -
so the statement "reality is unknowable" invalidates itself. Likewise, the
brain disease proponents are essentially saying "neuroplastic processes create
a state called addiction which cannot be changed by thoughts and choices" -
this however is to some degree self-invalidating, because it depends on
neuroplasticity while seeking to invalidate it. If neuroplasticity is
involved, and is a valid explanation for how to become addicted, then we can't
act is if the same process doesn't exist when it's time to focus on getting
un-addicted. That is, if the brain can be changed into the addicted state by
thoughts and choices, then it can be further changed or changed back by
thoughts and choices. Conditions which can be remedied by freely chosen
thoughts and behaviors, don't fit into the general understanding of disease.
Ultimately, if addiction is a disease, then it's a disease so fundamentally
different than any other that it should probably have a completely different
name that doesn't imply all the things contained in the term "disease" - such
as the idea that the "will" of the afflicted is irrelevant to whether the
condition continues.

## People change their addictive behavior in spite of the fact that their

brain is changed - and they do so without medication or surgery (added
4/18/14)

In the discussion above, we looked at some analogous cases of brain changes to
see just how routine and normal (i.e. not a physiological malfunction) such
changes are. Now we're going to look directly at the most popular
neuroscientific research which purports to prove that these brain changes
actually cause "uncontrolled" substance use ("addiction").

![This supposedly explains why drug use becomes

compulsive.](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Meth-

addicted.jpg)This supposedly explains why drug use becomes compulsive.

The most popular research is Nora Volkow's brain scans of "meth addicts"
presented by the NIDA. The logic is simple. We're presented with the brain
scan of a meth addict alongside the brain scan of a non-user, and we're told
that the decreased activity in the brain of the meth user (the _lack of red_
in the "Drug Abuser" brain scan presented) is the cause of their "compulsive"
methamphetamine use. Here's how the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
explains the significance of these images in their booklet - Drugs, Brains,
and Behavior: The Science of Addiction :

> Just as we turn down the volume on a radio that is too loud, the brain
adjusts to the overwhelming surges in dopamine (and other neurotransmitters)
by producing less dopamine or by reducing the number of receptors that can
receive signals. As a result, dopamine’s impact on the reward circuit of a
drug abuser’s brain can become abnormally low, and the ability to experience
any pleasure is reduced. This is why the abuser eventually feels flat,
lifeless, and depressed, and is unable to enjoy things that previously brought
them pleasure. **Now, they _need_ to take drugs just to try and bring their
dopamine function back up to normal.**

>

> [emphasis added]

They go on that these same sorts of brain changes:

> ..may also lead to addiction, which can _drive an abuser to seek out and
take drugs **compulsively**_. Drug addiction erodes a person’s self-control
and ability to make sound decisions, while sending intense impulses to take
drugs.

>

> [emphasis added]

That image is shown when NIDA is vaguely explaining how brain changes are
responsible for "addiction." But later on, when they try to make a case for
treating addiction as a brain disease, they show the following image, which
tells a far different story if you understand more of the context than they
choose to mention:

![brain scan prolonged abstinence](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/09/brain-scan-prolonged-abstinence.jpg)

Again, this graphic is used to support the idea that we should treat addiction
as a brain disease. However, the authors mistakenly let a big cat out of the
bag with this one - because the brain wasn't treated at all. Notice how the
third image shows a brain in which the red level of activity has returned
almost to normal after 14 months of abstinence. That's wonderful - but it also
means that the NIDA's assertions that "Addiction means _being unable to quit,_
even in the face of negative consequences"(LINK) and "It is considered a brain
disease because drugs change the brain… These brain changes… can _lead to the
harmful behaviors_ seen in people who abuse drugs " are _**dead wrong**_.

When these studies were done, **nobody was directly treating the brain of
methamphetamine addicts.** They were not giving them medication for it (there
is no equivalent of methadone for speed users), and they weren 't sticking
scalpels into the brains of these meth addicts, nor were they giving them
shock treatment. So what did they do?

These methamphetamine addicts were court ordered into a treatment program
(whose methodology wasn't disclosed in the research) which likely consisted of
a general mixture of group and individual counseling with 12-step meeting
attendance. I can't stress the significance of this enough: their brains were
not medically treated. They talked to counselors. They faced a choice between
jail and abstinence. _**They CHOSE abstinence (for at least 14 months!) - even
while their brains had been changed in a way that we're told robs them of the
ability to choose to quit "even in the face of negative consequences."**_ [5]

_Even with changed brains_ , people are capable of choosing to change their
substance use habits. They choose to stop using drugs, and as the brain scans
above demonstrate - their brain activity follows this choice. If the brain
changes caused the substance using behavior, i.e. if it was the other way
around, then a true medical intervention should have been needed - the brain
would've needed to have changed first via external force (medicine or surgery)
before abstinence was initiated. They literally wouldn't have been able to
stop for 14 months without a real physical/biological medical intervention.
But they did…

## Substance Use Is Not Compulsive, It Is A Choice

In his classic book Addiction & Opiates, Alfred R Lindesmith PhD explained the
requirements of reliable scientific theories explaining the causes of things
such as heroin addiction:

> …a genuine theory that proposes to explain a given phenomenon by relating it
to another phenomenon must, in the first place, have clear empirical
implications which, if not fulfilled, negate the theory.

If the theory is that neural adaptations alone cause uncontrolled behavior,
then this proposition can easily be shown to be false. I demonstrated above
that in the midst of having fully "changed" or "addicted" brains, people do
indeed stop using substances, so essentially, it is case closed. But the
depths to which the brain disease theory of addiction can be negated go even
further, because the basic theory of addiction as representing uncontrolled
substance use has never been explained. Explanation of the mechanism by which
substance use happens without the individual's consent is conspicuously
missing - yet such explanation is a necessary part of such a theory, as
Lindesmith writes (again in Addiction & Opiates):

> …besides identifying the two types of phenomenon that are allegedly
interrelated, there must be a description of the processes or events that link
them. In other words, besides affirming that something causes something else,
it is necessary to indicate how the cause operates to produce the alleged
effect.

![The brain disease model of addiction is a bogeyman. "Here Comes the Bogey-

Man" by Goya, circa 1799 ](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/09/Goya-Bogeyman-.jpeg)The brain disease model of
addiction is a bogeyman.  
"Here Comes the Bogey-Man" by Goya, circa 1799

There doesn't seem to be any explanation or evidence that substance use is
involuntary. In fact, the evidence, such as that presented above, shows the
opposite. Nevertheless, when the case for the disease is presented, the idea
that drug use is involuntary is taken for granted as true. No evidence is ever
actually presented to support this premise, so there isn't much to be knocked
down here, except to make the point I made above - is a piano player
fundamentally incapable of resisting playing the piano? They may love to play
the piano, and want to do it often, they may even be obsessive about it, but
it would be hard to say that at the sight of a piano they are involuntarily
driven by their brain to push aside whatever else they need to do in order to
play that piano.

There is another approach to the second claim though. We can look at the
people who have subjectively claimed that their substance use is involuntary,
and see if the offer of incentives results in changed behavior. Gene Heyman
covered this in his landmark book, Addiction: A Disorder of Choice[3]. He
recounts studies in which cocaine abusers were given traditional addiction
counseling, and also offered vouchers which they could trade in for modest
rewards such as movie tickets or sports equipment - if they proved through
urine tests that they were abstaining from drug use. In the early stages of
the study, 70% of those in the voucher program remained abstinent, while only
20% stayed abstinent in the control group which didn't receive the incentive
of the vouchers. This demonstrates that substance use is not in fact
compulsive or involuntary, but that it is a matter of choice, because these
"addicts" when presented with a clear and immediately rewarding alternative to
substance use and incentive not to use, chose it. Furthermore, follow up
studies showed that this led to long term changes. A full year after the
program, the voucher group had double the success rate of those who received
only counseling (80% to 40%, respectively). This ties back in to our first
point that what you practice, you become good at. The cocaine abusers in the
voucher group practiced replacing substance use with other activities, such as
using the sports equipment or movie passes they gained as a direct consequence
of abstaining from drug use - thus they made it a habit to find other ways of
amusing themselves, this probably led to brain changes, and the new habits
became the norm.

Long story short, there is no evidence presented to prove that substance use
is compulsive. The only thing ever offered is subjective reports from drug
users themselves that they "can't stop", and proclamations from treatment
professionals that the behavior is compulsive due to brain changes. But if the
promise of a ticket to the movies is enough to double the success rate of
conventional addiction counseling, then it's hard to say that substance users
can't control themselves. The reality is that they can control themselves, but
they just happen to see substance use as the best option for happiness
available to them at the times when they're abusing substances. When they can
see other options for happiness as more attractive (i.e. as promising a
greater reward than substance use), attainable to them, and as taking an
amount of effort they're willing to expend - then they will absolutely choose
those options instead of substance use, and will not struggle to "stay sober",
prevent relapse, practice self-control or self-regulation, or any other
colloquialism for making a different choice. They will simply choose
differently.

But wait… there's more! (Added 4/21/14) Contrary to the claims that alcoholics
and drug addicts literally lose control of their substance use, a great number
of experiments have found that they are really in full control of themselves.
Priming dose experiments have found that alcoholics are not triggered into
uncontrollable craving after taking a drink. Here's a link to the evidence and
a deeper discussion of these findings: Do Addicts and Alcoholics Lose Control?
Priming dose experiments of cocaine, crack, and methamphetamine users found
that after being given a hit of their drug of choice (primed with a dose) they
are capable of choosing a delayed reward rather than another hit of the drug.

### Three Most Relevant Reasons Addiction Is Not A Disease

So to sum up, there are at least two significant reasons why the current brain
disease theory of addiction is false.

  * A disease involves physiological malfunction, the "proof" of brain changes shows no malfunction of the brain. These changes are indeed a normal part of how the brain works - not only in substance use, but in anything that we practice doing or thinking intensively. Brain changes occur as a matter of everyday life; the brain can be changed by the choice to think or behave differently; and the type of changes we're talking about are not permanent.
  * The very evidence used to demonstrate that addicts' behavior is caused by brain changes also demonstrates that they change their behavior while their brain is changed, without a real medical intervention such as medication targeting the brain or surgical intervention in the brain - and that their brain changes back to normal AFTER they VOLITIONALLY change their behavior for a prolonged period of time
  * Drug use in "addicts" is not compulsive. If it was truly compulsive, then offering a drug user tickets to the movies would not make a difference in whether they use or not - because this is an offer of a choice. Research shows that the offer of this choice leads to cessation of substance abuse. Furthermore, to clarify the point, if you offered a cancer patient movie tickets as a reward for ceasing to have a tumor - it would make no difference, it would not change his probability of recovery.

Addiction is NOT a disease, and it matters. This has huge implications for
anyone struggling with a substance use habit.

References:

  * 1) NIDA, Drugs Brains and Behavior: The Science of Addiction, sciofaddiction.pdf
  * 2) Sharon Begley, Scans of Monks' Brains Show Meditation Alters Structure, Functioning, Wall Street Journal, November 5, 2004; Page B1, http://psyphz.psych.wisc.edu/web/News/Meditation_Alters_Brain_WSJ_11-04.htm
  * 3) Gene Heyman, Addiction: A Disorder of Choice, Harvard University Press, 2009
  * 4) Sharon Begley and Jeffrey Schwartz, The Mind And The Brain, Harper Collins, 2002
  * 5) Links to the 2 methamphetamine abuser studies by Nora Volkow:  
http://www.jneurosci.org/cgi/content/full/21/23/9414  
http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/reprint/158/3/377

### **Important Notes from the author to readers and especially commenters:**

#### On "badness" or immorality:

Please do not attribute to me the idea that heavy substance users must be
"bad" or "immoral" if they are in fact in control of and choosing their
behavior. I do not think this. I think that at the time they're using, it is
what they prefer, given what life options they believe are available to them -
and I don't think it's my job to decide what other people should prefer for
themselves, and then declare them bad if they don't live up to my vision of a
"good" life. That's what the disease recovery culture does, _de facto, when
they present the false dichotomy of 'diseased or bad'_. To say that addiction
is chosen behavior is simply to make a statement about whether the behavior is
within the control of the individual - it is not a judgment of the morality of
the behavior or the individual choosing it.

#### On willpower:

Please do not attribute to me the suggestion to "use willpower." I have not
said that people should use willpower, nor do I think it's a coherent or
relevant concept in any way, nor do I think "addicts lack willpower" or that
those who recover have more willpower, nor, and this is important, do I
believe that a choice model of addiction necessarily implies willpower as the
solution.

"Addicts" do not need extra willpower, strength, or support, to change their
heavy substance use habits if that is what they want to do. They need to
change their preference for heavy substance use, rather than trying to fight
that preference with supposed "willpower."

#### On compassion:

Please don't accuse me of not having compassion for people who have substance
use problems. You do not know that, and if you attack my motives in this way
it just shows your own intellectual impotence and sleaze. I have a great deal
of compassion for people with these problems - I was once one such person. I
am trying to get at the truth of the nature of addiction, so that the most
people can be helped in the most effective way possible. I don't doubt the
compassion of those who believe addiction is a disease, and I hope you'll give
me the same benefit of the doubt. I assure you I care and want the best for
people - and I don't need to see them as diseased to do so. When you see
someone who's gotten themselves into a mess, don't you want to help, even if
it's of their own making? Why should we need to believe they have a disease to
help them if the mess is substance use related? I don't get that requirement.

### Some Agreement I've Found From Addiction Researchers (added 6/10/14)

I began working out my understanding of the brain disease model back in 2005
as I started working on a book about addiction; published this article in
2010; and was happy to find in 2011 when I went back to work with Baldwin
Research that they had arrived at a similar conclusion. The way they stated it
amounted to "either everything is addiction, or nothing is" - referring to the
fact that the brain changes presented as proof of addiction being a brain
disease are so routine as to indicate that all behavior must be classified as
addiction if we follow the logic.

I was also gratified to have found a neuroscientist who arrived at the same
conclusions. I think Marc Lewis PhD and I may disagree on a few things, but it
seems we may see eye to eye on the logic I presented above about such brain
changes being routine, and thus not indicative of disease. Check what he wrote
in 2012 for the PLOS Blog, Mind The Brain:

> _every_ experience that has potent emotional content changes the NAC and its
uptake of dopamine. Yet we wouldn’t want to call the excitement you get from
the love of your life, or your fifth visit to Paris, a disease. The NAC is
highly plastic. It has to be, so that we can pursue different rewards as we
develop, right through childhood to the rest of the lifespan. In fact, each
highly rewarding experience builds its own network of synapses in and around
the NAC, and that network sends a signal to the midbrain: I’m anticipating x,
so send up some dopamine, right now! That’s the case with romantic love,
Paris, and heroin. During and after each of these experiences, that network of
synapses gets strengthened: so the “specialization” of dopamine uptake is
further increased. London just doesn’t do it for you anymore. It’s got to be
Paris. Pot, wine, music…they don’t turn your crank so much; but cocaine sure
does. Physical changes in the brain are its only way to learn, to remember,
and to develop. But we wouldn’t want to call learning a disease.

>

> ….

>

> In my view, addiction (whether to drugs, food, gambling, or whatever)
doesn’t fit a specific physiological category. Rather, I see addiction as an
extreme form of normality, if one can say such a thing. Perhaps more
precisely: an extreme form of learning. No doubt addiction is a frightening,
often horrible, state to endure, whether in oneself or in one’s loved ones.
But that doesn’t make it a disease.

I think that quote is very important, because it highlights neuronal changes
that occur in the same region implicated in addiction (whereas the examples I
presented earlier in the article represented some other regions).

In a brilliant paper titled "The naked empress: Modern neuro science and the
concept of addiction", Peter Cohen of The Centre for Drug Research at
University of Amsterdam, states that:

> The notions of addiction transformed into the language of neurology as
performed by authors like Volkov, Berridge, Gessa or De Vries are completely
tautological.

He essentially argues that Volkow et al take for granted that heavy drug and
alcohol use is uncontrolled, identify neural correlates, and present them as
evidence of uncontrollability. Yet they don't do so with other behaviors, and
he provides plenty of examples. He notes that they start with assumptions that
certain patterns of behavior (e.g. heavy drug use) are uncontrolled, and
others are controlled - based purely on cultural prejudices. He accurately
identifies addiction as a learned behavior, or as routine bonding to a thing,
and then expresses something very close to my thesis presented above (that all
learned/intensely repeated behaviors result in "brain changes").

> The problem of course is that probably all learning produces temporary or
lasting ‘change in neural systems’. Also, continuation of learned behavior may
be functional in the eyes and experience of the person but less so in the eyes
of the outsider. Who is right? We know of people remaining married in spite
of-in the eyes of a beholder- a very bad marriage. Who speaks of lasting
‘neural change’ as the basis of the continued marriage? But, even when a
person herself sees some behavior as counter functional, it is not necessarily
seen as addiction. It may be seen as impotence, ingrained habit or unhappy
adaptation. It all depends on which behavior we discuss, not on the brain.

The great points contained in this article would be done an injustice if I
tried to sum them up here, so check it out for yourself at The Center for Drug
Research University of Amsterdam. As with Marc Lewis, I suspect that Peter
Cohen and I might have some substantial disagreements about the full nature of
addiction and human behavior in general, but I think we at least agree that
the changes in the brain of an "addict" do not necessarily represent disease,
and more likely represent a routine process.

Writing in 2013 for the journal Frontiers In Psychiatry, esteemed behavioral
and addiction researcher Gene Heyman pointed out something so painfully
obvious that we don't even take notice - _no causal link has ever been found
between the neural adaptations caused by excessive substance use and continued
heavy use_. That is, **correlation is not causation** :

> With the exception of alcohol, addictive drugs produce their biological and
psychological changes by binding to specific receptor sites throughout the
body. As self-administered drug doses greatly exceed the circulating levels of
their natural analogs, persistent heavy drug use leads to structural and
functional changes in the nervous system. It is widely – if not universally –
**_assumed_** that these neural adaptations play a causal role in addiction.
In support of this interpretation brain imaging studies often reveal
differences between the brains of addicts and comparison groups (e.g., Volkow
et al., 1997; Martin-Soelch et al., 2001) However, these studies are cross-
sectional and the results are correlations. **There are no published studies
that establish a causal link between drug-induced neural adaptations and
compulsive drug use or even a correlation between drug-induced neural changes
and an increase in preference for an addictive drug.**

Did you get that? Let me repeat the words of this experienced researcher, PhD,
and lecturer/professor from Boston College and Harvard who, in addition to
publishing scores of papers in peer reviewed medical journals has also had an
entire book debunking the disease model of addiction by Harvard University
press (I say all of this about his credentials so that I can hopefully STOP
getting commenters who say "but you're not a doctor, and what are your
credentials wah, wah, wah,……" here's a "credentialed" expert who essentially
agrees with most of what I've written in this article - so please, for the
love of god, save your fallacious ad hominems and appeals to authority for
another day!)- he (Gene Heyman PhD) said this, as of 2013:

> There are no published studies that establish a causal link between drug-
induced neural adaptations and compulsive drug use or even a correlation
between drug-induced neural changes and an increase in preference for an
addictive drug.

And this was in a recently published paper in a section headed "But Drugs
Change the Brain", in which he continued to debunk the "brain changes cause
addiction" argument by saying:

> There are no published studies that establish a causal link between drug-
induced neural adaptations and compulsive drug use or even a correlation
between drug-induced neural changes and an increase in preference for an
addictive drug. For example, in a frequently referred to animal study,
Robinson et al. (2001) found dendritic changes in the striatum and the
prefrontal cortex of rats who had self-administered cocaine. They concluded
that this was a “recipe for addiction.” However, they did not evaluate whether
their findings with rodents applied to humans, nor did they even test if the
dendritic modifications had anything to do with changes in preference for
cocaine in their rats. In principle then it is possible that the drug-induced
neural changes play little or no role in the persistence of drug use. This is
a testable hypothesis.

>

> First, most addicts quit. Thus, drug-induced neural plasticity does not
prevent quitting. Second, in follow-up studies, which tested Robinson et al.’s
claims, there were no increases in preference for cocaine. For instance in a
preference test that provided both cocaine and saccharin, rats preferred
saccharin (Lenoir et al., 2007) even after they had consumed about three to
four times more cocaine than the rats in the Robinson et al study, and even
though the cocaine had induced motoric changes which have been interpreted as
signs of the neural underpinnings of addiction (e.g., Robinson and Berridge,
2003). Third [an analysis of epidemiological studies] shows that the
likelihood of remission was constant over time since the onset of dependence.
Although this is a surprising result, it is not without precedent. In a
longitudinal study of heroin addicts, Vaillant (1973) reports that the
likelihood of going off drugs neither increased nor decreased over time
(1973), and in a study with rats, Serge Ahmed and his colleagues (Cantin et
al., 2010) report that the probability of switching from cocaine to saccharin
(which was about 0.85) was independent of past cocaine consumption. Since
drugs change the brain, these results suggest that the changes do not prevent
quitting, and the slope of [an analysis of epidemiological studies] implies
that drug-induced neural changes do not even decrease the likelihood of
quitting drugs once dependence is in place.

Read the full paper here - it's an amazingly concise summary of the truths
about addiction that contradict many of the accepted opinions pushed by the
recovery culture - Heyman, G. M. (2013). Addiction and Choice: Theory and New
Data. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 4. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00031

## Why Does It Matter Whether or Not Addiction Is A Brain Disease?

When we accept the unproven view that addiction and alcoholism are brain
diseases, then it will lead us down a long, painful, costly, and pointless
road of cycling in and out of ineffective treatment programs and 12 step
meetings. You will waste a lot of time without finding a permanent solution.
When we examine the evidence, throw out the false disease concepts, and think
rationally about the problem we can see that addiction is really just a matter
of choice. Knowing this, we can bypass the rehabs, and find the true solution
within ourselves. You can choose to end your addiction. You can choose to
improv your life. You can choose to stop the endless cycle of "recovery" and
start living. You don't need to be a victim of the self-fulfilling prophecy
that is the brain disease model of addiction. There are alternative views and
methods of change which I hope you'll take the time to learn about on The
Clean Slate Addiction Site.

There are many different ways to argue against the brain disease model of
addiction. I have only presented 3 basic arguments here. But beyond just
addiction, many modern claims of "brain disease" are fatally flawed, in that
they are founded on the logically impossible philosophical stance of
psychological determinism. From this standpoint, any evidence of any brain
activity is immediately interpreted as a "cause" of a particular mind state or
behavior - with no regard for free will/the ability to choose one's thoughts
and thus behaviors. If you understand the impossibility of psychological
determinism (or "epiphenomenalism") then you'll take all such claims with a
grain of salt. For a detailed examination of this issue, see the following
article: The Philosophical Problem with the Brain Disease Model of Addiction:
Epiphenomenalism

## How To End Addiction, Substance Dependence, Substance Abuse, Alcoholism,

and General Drug and Alcohol Problems (updated 11/4/2015)

Due to the fact that most conventional rehab and addiction treatment programs
follow the false belief that addiction is a disease, they are generally not
effective at dealing with these problems - so I really can't ethically
recommend any "treatment" programs other than a run of the mill detoxification
procedure if you feel you may be experiencing physical withdrawal symptoms -
you can find that through your local hospital or emergency room; by asking
your primary care doctor; or by calling 911 if you feel your life is in danger
due to withdrawal (beware that withdrawal from alcohol and some prescription
drugs such as the class known as benzodiazepines can lead to fatal seizures).
But what comes after detoxification is simply personal choices, and treatment
programs actually discourage productive personal choices by attempting to
control people and feeding them nonsense such as the disease theory and idea
of powerlessness.

_**If you want to end or alter your own substance use habits you need to make
the choice to do so.**_ Many readers will object to this answer as flippant,
cruel, out of touch, et cetera. I realize this, but I chose to change, and in
reality everyone who moves beyond problematic substance use chooses to change
as well.

There is too much to unpack within what people believe is contained in the
statement "choose to change." I have tried to address some of that here in the
past, but I realize this article is not the place to do that. This article's
scope needs to remain limited to the question of whether or not addiction is a
disease.

My conclusion is that addiction is freely chosen behavior, and that the person
who continues heavy substance use despite mounting costs still sees heavy
substance use as their best viable option at the time they're doing it - even
though they recognize many costs and downsides. Choosing to change then,
really means that they rethink whether heavy substance use is their best
viable option. The only way I know to come to new conclusions is to re-examine
the issues methodically, and this may often mean gathering new information and
perspectives. Thus, **the help that can be given to troubled heavy substance
users is information. Helpers can provide accurate information that troubled
people can use to change their perspective and come to believe they have
better viable options than continued heavy problematic substance use.**

I endeavor to give accurate information here that will help people to
understand that change is possible, and that they are not doomed to a lifetime
of addiction. Hopefully, this helps them on their way to believing in better
viable options.

#### About this article:

I originally published this article on September 25, 2010. I have since added
some significant supporting work I was able to find over the years, and those
additions are noted. Some other minor edits from the original article are not
noted.

#### Author

Hi, I'm, Steven Slate, the author of this post and of all content on this
website. Yes, I was what you would call an "addict." If you want to know more
about me, go to the About page. If you want quotes from PhDs and such (as if I
haven't given enough here already) go to my Quotes From Experts About
Addiction page. Please be civil in your comments, and many of your angry
comments may already be answered on my FAQs page, so maybe check that out
before you scream at me.

## Reader Interactions

### Comments

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4c4e41cf60aeedc82ef7b6a46862dfd?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Cappie says

July 27, 2018 at 10:19 AM

Who are we going to believe? A faggot social justice warrior? Or a doctor with
a college degree?

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

July 29, 2018 at 6:32 PM

I am _very gay_ , but I'm not a social justice warrior, as I understand the
term. But let's assume I am an SJW. Here's the good news: you can believe BOTH
a FSJW and doctors with college degrees! If you read this article with a 7th
grade level of comprehension, you will see that I quoted many doctors with
college degrees (PhD's) who agree with me, the FSJW!

Years ago, when I found agreement from PhD's, I added their quotes to this
article. Specifically, I added quotes from Gene Heyman PhD (a doctor with a
college degree who even teaches at colleges such as Boston College and
Harvard), Peter Cohen PhD (a doctor with a college degree who was the Director
of the Centre for Drug Research (CEDRO) at the University of Amsterdam - A
COLLEGE!), and Marc Lewis PhD (a doctor and neuroscientist with a college
degree who even debated Nora Volkow [also a doctor with a college degree with
the opposing opinion who is head of NIDA] with the exact same arguments I have
made here!).

LOTS OF DOCTORS WITH DEGREES!!! YOU CAN BELIEVE BOTH THEM AND FSJWs LIKE ME!
YOU DON'T HAVE TO CHOOSE! HUZZAH!!!!

Sincerely,

Steven Slate FSJW, author of this article

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1001143a893e809a751094f45d49c4c1?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)V Powell says
    

February 18, 2019 at 3:29 PM

How about a 30 year long wife of an addict who has told me many times he does
drugs because he is bored. Just because it's not the answer you want, doesn't
make it wrong. In fact, my life experience says the writer is absolutely
right. And I know many addicts and try to talk to them personally about what
they are doing. The ones repeating the "disease" model just use it as a reason
they CAN'T help themselves. And it is complete BS. My husband died of an
apparent overdose three weeks ago. Told me upon his release from the hospital
three weeks earlier that he thought this was his last chance. It was. But he
absolutely DID choose to do it, knowing it would kill him. You say the dire
consequences proves compulsion or disease. I say it proves a complete and
utter inability to accept reality for what it is and accept responsibility for
oneself. That's what it is - plain and simple.

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/2143a3d6576f5c1e3e2cb236199eec6a?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Moxie says

August 2, 2018 at 9:44 AM

I want to say, that this is one of the most comprehensive articles I've read
on the subject of addiction as a choice instead of a disease. Having been an
addict myself and recently losing one of my best friends to a heroin
addiction, I never believed that it was a disease. It started out as my choice
and then quickly turned pathological.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

August 23, 2018 at 6:34 PM

It never occurred to you that saturating your brain with narcotics took away
what was once a freely made choice? Note that alcohol is a narcotic, a mood
altering substance, but in the addiction world a different definition is used,
an illicit mood altering substance; NA is not for alcoholics. See NA Bulletin

# 13.

Is there a really difference between an involuntary act or lacking the will
power to just say no?

Has it ever occurred to you that narcotic addiction causes the brain to
malfunction, thus constituting a "disease?"

Reply

    
    
      * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1001143a893e809a751094f45d49c4c1?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)V Powell says
    

February 18, 2019 at 3:31 PM

Surely it has since everyone is claiming it to be so. I say the substance
alters the brain by its interaction with the brain. It does not malfunction,
it adapts the best it can under the circumstances. However, if you don't have
any respect for yourself or your body, you will not understand the
responsibility you have to yourself and you certainly will not accept that
responsibility as yours to own. The fact that introducing a chemical into your
body alters your nervous system does not make it a disease. A condition??
Maybe. But not a disease.

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says

August 3, 2018 at 11:09 AM

Your theory that substance addiction is not a disease is not supported by the
definition of disease: “a condition of the living animal or plant body or of
one of its parts that impairs normal functioning and is typically manifested
by distinguishing signs and symptoms.” Meriam Webster’s online dictionary.

Further, you your theory that the there is no disease because there is no
bodily malfunction is fatally flawed, the brain was never intended be
constantly or near constantly be subjected to narcotics, mood altering
substances that include alcohol. Strangely nicotine and caffeine have some
mood altering effects, but they are not classified as narcotics. The fact that
one gets high or drunk is a brain malfunction or at least changes the brain’s
normal functioning. While there are changes in the brain’s functioning while
under the influence, whether there are lasting physiological effects on the
brain or not, there are behavioral changes that occur over time.

Your words: “Its [sic] not just physical activity that changes our brains,
thoughts alone can have a huge effect. What’s more, whether the brain changes
or not, there is much research which shows that the brain is slave to the
mind.”

As far as powerlessness goes, you’re right, the brain doesn’t involuntarily
make me mechanically grasp a beer bottle, raise it to my lips, and force me to
swallow; the same applies to the introduction of any narcotic into the body.
Can we feel so compelled to use or drink that it mimics or approaches true
powerlessness? Yes. Arguably true powerlessness is a metaphor here or
understand that psychological powerlessness is physiologically different from
physical powerlessness but no less powerful and having the same end effect.

Your words: “The only thing ever offered is subjective reports from drug users
themselves that they “can’t stop.” How about the compulsion is so strong, the
habit so ingrained, that they “feel” or “believe” they can’t stop?

“When a man or a woman has a spiritual awakening, the most important meaning
of it is that he has now become able to do, feel, and believe that which he
could not do before on his unaided strength and resources alone.” 12&12, pgs.
106-107.

Don’t 12-step programs rely on one’s ability to voluntarily stop? Of course
they do! Otherwise 12-step programs wouldn’t work. Through various tools and
emotional support from fellow sufferers one finds the strength or willpower to
voluntarily quit. “There was, they said, no such thing as the personal
conquest of this compulsion by the unaided will.” 12&12, pg. 22. “His lone
courage and unaided will cannot do it. Surely he must now depend upon Somebody
or Something else.” 12&12, pg. 39.

Your words: “These brain change [sic] don’t need to be brought on by exposure
to chemicals. Thoughts alone, are enough to rewire the very circuits of the
human brain responsible for reward and other positive emotions that substance
use and other supposedly “addictive” behaviors (“process addictions” such as
sex, gambling, and shopping, etc.) are connected with."

It is quite true that it takes one to know one here. Those who are afflicted
understand the concept of powerlessness whether it meets medical science’s
strict definition or not.

Returning to knowing one, that is why 12-step groups work, the newcomer no
longer feels alone or ashamed or that they are unique. Somebody understands
me.

“He cannot picture life without alcohol. Some day he will be unable to imagine
life either with alcohol or without it. Then he will know loneliness such as
few do. He will be at the jumping-off place. He will wish for the end.”
Alcoholics Anonymous, pg. 152.

Walk a mile in an addict or alcoholic’s shoes: “The admonition to walk a mile
in someone else’s shoes means before judging someone, you must understand his
experiences, challenges, thought processes, etc.” It takes one to know one…..

It seems that you take a naïve or overly simplistic position here.

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5d3cf8d4436cf57b8232b465eafc39a6?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Dianna M Powell says

August 6, 2018 at 2:35 AM

I share any articals I can find that show addictions as habits because that is
what they are. They are choices. Very bad ones. We can choose to keep making
these bad choices and destroy our lives or start making good choices.

Reply

  1. ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/3ad35362d3226991fd5bc61f8d382c07?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Jim says

August 31, 2018 at 7:52 AM

Thank you sir for a great insightful article. I've never yet walked down the
aisle of a store and had Jack (Daniels) jump off the shelf, gently land in my
basket, wheel his way to the checkout, pay for himself, sack himself, walk
himself to my car, jump from the car into the house, unscrew his lid, pour
himself in a glass and make me drink him. The AVRT (Addictive Voice
Recognition Technique) was my 1st glance at seeing this and understanding that
it's my choice. And in the throes of "addiction," I finally decided enough is
enough and went through a lot of discomfort letting my body recover to some
degree of normality. I've sensed discovered that waves of "clean and sober"
bliss are far more rewarding than whatever high I might have had with Jack and
Mary.

Reply

  1. ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4e917c7f154e1c722b40c510eed438f7?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Paul says

September 3, 2018 at 10:10 PM

I have to agree with the gay guy. Ever since I heard addiction being referred
to as disease, I thought bullshit! I started questioning the possible motives
for such an opinion. I believe it to be just one of many areas in society that
people who are considered "Experts" in a field are writing their own meal
tickets. These "Experts know that the average man (or woman) depend on their
advise. Unlike a mechanic or building contractor taking advantage of unwitting
individual; groups like attorneys, politicians, and psychologists are just
short of conspiring when they set their professional standards to benefit them
before the client. Complicated laws have required attorneys to specialize to
the point that you need one for anything you do or plan to do. The US Congress
mandate laws and restrictions on states and individuals that don't apply to
themselves. Rehab has become big business in the last 30 years and has
expanded the field of psychology. They have created their own niche. Who can
argue with them? They are the experts.

Reply

  1. ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6bfd3bf13cb5acf0d10c2c0d0c5927cf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Kristina Marie Spaulding says

September 10, 2018 at 3:11 PM

Using this for a school paper. Does anyone know when this was published?

Reply

  1. ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/440b1af197ee6f4c0d16c46ae2ec83f2?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Keisha says

September 29, 2018 at 4:58 AM

THANK YOU!!!! I for one thought that I was the only person that disagreed with
the "addiction is a disease" model, but apparently, I'm not! I personally find
this slogan to be offensive to myself and others who actually suffer from
LEGITIMATE diseases.

My argument is this: a disease is something that you are either born with
(like sickle cell), can contract (like AIDS), or develop (like cancer) and
needs to be MEDICALLY discovered and attended to. It unfortunately is NOT
something that can be wished or willed away. If every disease out there could
be cured by a twice a week, 1 hour group session in a church basement, we
wouldn't need doctors OR hospitals. (This is almost the equivalent of "pray
away the gay", but that's another story.) A disease is something that can be
pinpointed under a microscope and studied.

I truly hate it, hate, hate, HATE IT, when some drug user is wailing louder
than an ambulance to their guy or gal "I can't help it! / I'm sick! / It's not
my fault! / It's a disease!" (Cry me a river.) No one is born an addict. When
first presented with the drug, it is the persons CHOICE to either say no or
say yes and use it. If they like it, they do it again. And again. And again.
This can be said for ANYTHING that we like. If we like a show, we watch all
episodes. If we like roller coasters, we ride each one. if we like Chinese
food, we order it for dinner every Friday night. If we LIKE something, WE
REPEAT THE BEHAVIOR. If you like how cocaine makes you feel, chances are
you'll use it again if given the chance. When using that drug is all you can
think about and is all you do, then of course you'll be branded as an addict,
or as some put it, "recreational user". This also confirms what you said about
repeated practiced behavior becoming the new norm. So after CHOOSING to
continue 'using' and they run out of cash, they CHOOSE to find a way to attain
their drug. They CHOOSE to steal from others. They CHOOSE to exchange those
goods for cash and CHOOSE to use that cash to buy their drugs. Then CHOOSE to
'use' again. They also CHOOSE to exchange sexual favors for their drugs.

Since they claim that it is a compulsory thing that "can't be helped", then I
believe stress eating should also be labeled as a disease. If someone is super
upset and turns to food to 'eat their feelings' (which I'm sure at least 90%
of us do), this could be likened to drug use. When they get that 'urge to use'
(ie. become depressed), they turn to their drug of choice, FOOD (ie. "the
needle"). (This is also the beginning of my argument of how "obesity is NOT a
disease", but a RESULT of bad CHOICES.)

I could go on forever with more examples and arguments. Please respond or
email me as I would love to continue this argument with you! Possibly we could
write a game changing book!

Reply

  1. ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4de667be7e9ce0c35e823ed889fb7909?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Silbert says

October 10, 2018 at 9:43 AM

It's hard convincing some people of this simple truth. I have always felt the
use of drugs/alcohol to be a choice, like everything else in life. You choose
to pick up the drink, the needle or pills. But you don't choose diseases like
cancer, arthritis, sickle cell etc. It's not like you can run to the corner
for the disease of your "choice". Everything in life is a choice.

Reply

  1. ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/99586b138969b8d1b24fd5567749be56?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Js says

October 15, 2018 at 8:18 PM

Addition is not solely a choice nor a disease. For some, it might be a choice
if they knew they where taking a dangerous drug and proceeded to take it, then
it is mostly a choice. If however, the drug was given to them without them
knowing the consquence of taking such a drug like certian opioides, then it
was not a choice. They became physically depend before they were aware of it's
harmful consequences. Also, we cannot pretend as though genetics don't play a
key role. Lets say Mary and Mara are both hard partiers and take drugs on a
regular bases. One becomes addicted while the other does not.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/440b1af197ee6f4c0d16c46ae2ec83f2?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Keisha says
    

October 26, 2018 at 4:17 PM

Sorry in advance, I'm about to rip apart your entire argument.

1\. I believe you meant to say 'addiction' not 'addition'.

2\. It is a CHOICE. If someone spikes your drink, or you're in the hospital
and a nurse comes in and puts something in your IV, or if a relative gives
their kid a 'vitamin' or a 'special drink' THEN you can say that person didn't
KNOW what they were taking or given.

3\. If a teen is with their friends and someone passes them a pill and the kid
doesn't know what the pill is, what it does or what it will do, and they
CHOOSE TO TAKE IT, they have CHOSEN to take that pill, regardless of whether
they knew what the pill was or what consequences they might face from taking
it. The point is that they CHOSE to take it. If afterwards that kid wanted to
experience that 'high' again, they CHOOSE to continue taking that pill and get
hooked. (Ever heard of "Chasing the Dragon"? It means they're constantly
looking for that ultimate high they first experienced.)

4\. If both Mary and Mara are 'hard partiers' and both take drugs, one has the
ability to say 'I LOVE how that drug makes me feel. I'm not partying right
now, BUT I will not get high right now because I'm making soup.' While the
other says 'I LOVE how that drug makes me feel. I'm not partying right now,
BUT I'm going to take the drug ANYWAY because I WANT TO.'  
If they both continue to take drugs, they're both considered 'drug users'.
They'll become an 'addict' when they become DEPENDENT on the drug in order to
function.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

October 26, 2018 at 5:28 PM

Wow! Such anger and contempt!

"Before you judge a man, walk a mile in his shoes." This so true and so
forgotten! It's the keystone of every 12-step program, an addict of the same
kind can best understand another, that is why there isn't just one 12-step
program.

If addictive behavior is a choice, then there must be a psychological aspect
to it because no sane person, no person in their right mind, would engage in
the self-destructive behavior that addiction brings. I don't agree with it,
but some believe that addiction is genetic or a disease.

Regarding your earlier post, it was AA that put forth the disease theory of
addiction. Consistent with the definition of disease, the brain does in fact
malfunction in the presence of mood altering substances. Alcohol can damage
the brain or cause brain, heart, liver, and kidney disease. Certain narcotics
when taken before the brain fully matures in the early twenties causes
permanent changes in the brain or brain disease from which the addict never
fully recovers.

Rip away, but you only show your ignorance!

Reply

    
    
        * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/440b1af197ee6f4c0d16c46ae2ec83f2?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Keisha says
    

October 26, 2018 at 6:14 PM

I'm displaying common-sense and education. You're confusing it for anger and
ignorance because you do not understand the conversation being spoken.  
No thanks, I would rather not walk in the shoes of an addict. We're all
addicted to something, like cookies, certain cakes, driving, smoking (any
form), TV, etc. We ALL have an addiction to something. Some people just choose
to use drugs.  
The argument here is about ADDICTION and CHOICES, not AA or those in recovery.  
EVERYTHING is psychological. Would you put your hand on a hot stove? Probably
not since psychologically you know the consequence of doing it. Would you
inject yourself with a needle filled with drugs? If asked, people will tell
you no, but some do.  
Your argument is that sane people don't do drugs. "What sane person would do
THAT?" could be said for ANYTHING. What sane person would order a pizza cold
with no toppings? What sane person would purposefully hike Mount Everest? What
sane person would take a shower with absolutely no hot water? Anything someone
does that seems baffling to others brings up the question 'What sane person
would do THAT?'  
Addiction is NOT a disease, but can be the cause of some diseases. Addiction
to alcohol = all of your organs will be damaged over time. Addiction to drugs
= brain functions differently because the chemicals of the drug substance is
altering your body's chemistry. Addiction to smoking = throat cancer as well
as other cancers, bad breath, yellow teeth, etc.  
Once again, the kids that take the drugs are choosing to take it and choose to
continue to take it. The constant presence of the substance in the body will
of course continue to ravage the body in the side effect that it causes.
That's why people go through withdrawals and have to detox when away from the
drug for a certain amount of time. It means the body is trying to rid itself
of the toxins (ie. the drug) and the effects of detoxing (night sweats,
vomiting, sweating, etc.) are what addicts are trying to prevent and take more
of the drug so they won't be "sick".

If you'd like to keep going, I can continue this forever.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

October 26, 2018 at 6:55 PM

Two constructive observations:

It is better to understand than be understood; and your anger addiction will
consume you if you don't get help.

Reply

    
    
            * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/440b1af197ee6f4c0d16c46ae2ec83f2?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Keisha says
    

October 31, 2018 at 2:30 AM

1\. I have always been proud to say that I've never touched any drug. Not even
pot. Not once, nor will I ever. If I have an addiction to something, (which we
ALL do) I will seek help when ready. My "addiction" is nowhere near the mind
altering substances we're talking about today.  
2\. I agree that it is better to understand. That is why I choose to talk
about what I know, and not guess at meanings. I like to learn and ensure that
I have all the tools in my arsenal before getting into a debate.  
3\. I still don't know why you're insistent that I'm angry. I am not. I am
quite calm. I don't like to get upset.

Reply

    
    
              * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

October 31, 2018 at 11:52 AM

If it walks like a duck and talks like a duck it is probably a duck. . .

I know from experience that when a person accumulates enough anger that it
permeates everything we do whether we "feel" angry or not at the time.

One thing that makes your behavior angry is that you are so "passionate," even
willing to do battle, about a condition you have never experience with and
don't understand and should have no feelings about.

To be frank, it is quite obvious that you know nothing substance abuse or
addiction.

Again, your anger is going is probably already consuming you.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d2017d3989cb9b0c86f7b2a5ee5609df?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)LostMom says
    

April 1, 2019 at 2:11 PM

SoberinMI I wholeheartedly agree with you. I watched two of my sons suffer
through the disease of addiction. My family and my husband’s family have a
long history of alcoholism. There has to be some genetic link.  
I lost my youngest son in May of 2015 and my oldest son in November of 2015.
My youngest was 25 and my oldest was 31. I watched as this drug altered their
brains and personalities. Grown men crying that they wanted out of this. And
guess what?! Neither of them ever said when I grow up I want to be an addict.
Which might indicate a “choice”.  
I blame pharmaceutical companies who push them on doctors for profit and
doctors who push them on patients for profit. And then throw in the growing
pain management clinics , whose sole job is to keep you on drugs or to offer
an alternative, suboxone or methadone, both equally addictive.  
All drug pushers don’t lurk on dark street corners.  
Please Dr. Slate explain how meth has no effect in the brain. My boys did not
use this drug but I am seeing an alarming rise in the use of it. I have a
nephew who uses it. I’ve read it can irreparable damage to the brain. BRAIN
not mind.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

April 3, 2019 at 12:28 AM

LostMom,

I am not a doctor.

I will not "explain how meth has no effect in the brain" because it is not
something that I believe, nor is it a claim that I have ever made anywhere.
What I have done, regarding the effects of methamphetamine on the brain, is
refute the idea that it "hijacks the brain" and causes "addiction"/involuntary
substance use.

-Steven Slate

Reply

  1. ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/440b1af197ee6f4c0d16c46ae2ec83f2?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Keisha says

October 31, 2018 at 5:20 PM

Ok I'm ending this.  
Yes I do know what addiction is like because there is something that I'm
legitimately addicted to. And you know what? I choose to continue to do it
because it has yet to harm me in any way, and I like it. Should I stop the
behavior? Everyone else wants me to. But the reality is that I'll quit when
I'm ready.

As for substance abuse, I'm on pain killers that EVERY DOCTOR warned me was
highly addictive. Guess what? I didn't get addicted to it! Haha! But every now
and then I'll take one.  
So don't assume I don't know what I'm talking about. Like I said before, I
only talk about the things I have knowledge about. The argument here was that
"Addiction is NOT a Disease." I happen to agree with this statement as I have
much to say about it.  
Good day to you sir, and stay sober.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

November 1, 2018 at 7:16 PM

If you truly understood addiction you would act like it and you show no
evidence that you do. I am being analytical here and not judgemental.

You went off on a tangent, I merely offered you some compassion and
understanding.

While you and others want to believe otherwise, and many want to oversimplify
the situation by pretending it is nothing more than a choice, but substance
addiction does in fact meet the definition of being a disease, logically and
reasonably a brain constantly exposed to high levels of chemicals, a
"toxicity," will begin to malfunction for longer and longer periods during and
after exposure:

"a disordered or incorrectly functioning organ, part, structure, or system of
the body resulting from the effect of genetic or developmental errors,
infection, poisons, nutritional deficiency or imbalance, toxicity, or
unfavorable environmental factors; illness; sickness; ailment."

If, for instance alcoholism wasn't a disease, why is it that we suffer through
delirium tremens upon alcohol withdrawal, with a long list of symptoms
including grand mal seizures and potentially death? Other substances all
suffer serious withdrawal symptoms upon sudden abstinence.

I wish you the best and hope you get help with your anger problem, I've been
there!

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5bd8536a06018b62e01098fdcd6d8e1a?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Ashley says

January 26, 2019 at 5:53 PM

I couldn't get past the first paragraph of this sorry excuse for an article.
It is uninformed and the author's concept of a disease is disgustingly rigid
and blatantly ignorant. As someone formally educated and currently employed in
addiction treatment, I strongly suggest that any readers who find themselves
in this bias corner of the internet move on to more refutable websites. Yes,
people who have substance abuse problems made a choice once, but for many
individuals that was the last time it was a choice for them. Just because
someone made the choice not to wear sunscreen does not mean that their
subsequent skin cancer is not a disease…

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

January 26, 2019 at 6:07 PM

Dear Ashley,

Your comment fits the definition of ignorance - you didn't read the article,
and now you proceed to knock down an argument that I did not make and do not
subscribe to.

**My position IS NOT that people make choices that result in addiction** (as
one makes the choice to smoke, resulting in emphysema or cancer). **My
position IS that people are never truly addicted at any point.** That is, they
retain full power of choice at any stage of their substance-using career. I
've shown that substance use is voluntary in many ways in my writings. In this
particular article, I showed that the brain changes involved in addiction are
normal - they are what happens when any activity is habitualized. That being
the case, control over one's behavior is not truly lost.

Steven Slate

Reply

    
    
      * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

January 26, 2019 at 6:11 PM

Further, if you contend that other "normal" habits are not under our control -
or if you contend that there is no such thing as free will at all - then at
best this still means that so-called addictions are absolutely normal human
functioning, and not in the realm of disease. Of course, I wouldn't agree with
those contentions, but just putting this up in case that's where you or some
other commenter is tempted to go.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

January 26, 2019 at 7:46 PM

You're a bit caustic there! If you believed in your position you wouldn't
upset so easily.

Following your argument that there is no such thing as "addiction," that the
"addict" is a always a mere substance abuser and always has a choice, that no
substance on this Earth is able to make a person act contrary to their own
"free will" means that those who ultimately die from their substance abuse
have chosen freely and informed to die, their will to live has not been
compromised by their substance abuse, that their cognitive functions have
never been impaired which means there is no such thing as a narcotic, the
medical community you really on so much has been lying to us.

So, why do rehabs and 12-step groups exist since they can do NOTHING to stop
these suicides rather than having the courts refer substance offenders to
suicide counselors?

Where is the evidence that brain changes made by substance abuse are "normal"?
I think you mean that those brain changes are predictable.

Are you suggesting that reports from substance abusers of their compulsion to
use and their consequent actions evidencing this "compulsion" doesn't actually
happen?

Ever hear the saying that you must walk a mile in other man's shoes before you
can judge them? Until you have experienced "addiction," you're in no position
to judge whether addiction and compulsion really exist.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

January 26, 2019 at 8:56 PM

SoberinMI,

Not caustic, not angry - just accurate. She's literally ignorant of what is
written on this page. And she is arguing against a position I do not hold, did
not write on this page, and have spoken out against in the comments several
times, and in other articles on this site, and which I addressed in great
detail on my FAQs page. Here is the position she argued against, in her words,
which I do not make on this page:

> Yes, people who have substance abuse problems made a choice once, but for
many individuals that was the last time it was a choice for them. Just because
someone made the choice not to wear sunscreen does not mean that their
subsequent skin cancer is not a disease…

On my FAQs page I make a big point against this argument, it starts out like
this with me paraphrasing people who express that position sincerely thinking
they are in agreement with me:

> **“I agree with you Steven, people choose to get addicted. It’s their fault
because they chose to do drugs in the first place, and then got addicted.”**

>

> I realize this isn’t a question, but it’s a frequent comment that I need to
address. Now, please take note of my response to this sentiment, and let me be
totally clear:

>

> **WE ARE NOT IN AGREEMENT BECAUSE THAT IS NOT HOW I SEE THIS.**

I explore the issues related to this, and then further down in the same
section I speak directly to the cancer example Ashley raises:

> If you try to make some comparison to cancer or diabetes, then you look like
a total idiotic fool, and I hate to be associated with you. I hate it. Your
argument is so silly on it’s face. People say nonsense such as:

>

> _“You don’t choose to get cancer but you choose to get addicted. You didn’t
have to take drugs but you did, and now you got yourself addicted, and it’s
your fault – so addiction isn’t a disease, it’s a choice.”_

>

> God, I really can’t get across how much I HATE being associated with such
views. I completely disagree.

>

> Here’s a simple hole in that statement: you absolutely can make choices that
bring cancer upon yourself. Lung cancer from smoking is the perfect example.
And now your whole argument has fallen apart. So if your contention is that
any condition acquired by choices is not a disease, then you are wrong. PLENTY
of disease are acquired by our freely chosen behavior. The fact is that you
can make the choices that develop cancer, but then the cancer has a life of
it’s own, and you can’t choose to not have it in an instant. It requires
medicine or a fluke of a miracle to reverse/stop the progression.

>

> Also, in such an argument, YOU ARE AGREEING WITH THE MAIN FEATURE OF THE
DISEASE MODEL OF ADDICTION. You are saying that they’ve gotten into an
addicted state in which they can’t stop. You may say you don’t believe
addiction is a disease, but YOU BELIEVE IN EXACTLY THE SAME THING.

>

> The debate here, for people who are seriously interested in addiction is
whether or not people who use substances are compelled or currently in
control. It’s not about their past choices – it’s about their present
ability/or inability. I believe they have the ability to choose now, and I
believe my conclusion is a solid scientific conclusion based on all the
evidence I have been able to gather and analyze.

>

> I can’t say this enough times: people choose every single instance of
substance use. They aren’t “addicted” they are freely acting at all times. IF
YOU THINK PEOPLE “GET ADDICTED” THEN YOU AND I DISAGREE.

I'm not angry at Ashley at this point because I've encountered her rhetoric
thousands of times. It's just plain comical for someone to come here telling
me I'm wrong by arguing against a position I've explicitly demonstrated my
disagreement with. I'd say she's exhibiting the reading and comprehension
level of a first grader, except for the fact that she admitted she didn't even
read what's here before she decided to argue against what she imagines is
here.

I'll get to your nonsense in my next comment.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

January 26, 2019 at 9:56 PM

Now, SoberinMI - let me attempt to respond to your astonishing run-on
sentence:

> Following your argument that there is no such thing as “addiction,” that the
“addict” is a always a mere substance abuser and always has a choice, that no
substance on this Earth is able to make a person act contrary to their own
“free will” means that those who ultimately die from their substance abuse
have chosen freely and informed to die, their will to live has not been
compromised by their substance abuse, that their cognitive functions have
never been impaired which means there is no such thing as a narcotic, the
medical community you really on so much has been lying to us.

All of those things don't follow from my position that substance use is
voluntary. The effects of a drug are a separate issue from the choice to take
the drug.

I am not saying that, for example, opioids don't depress respiration. They do
depress respiration. When people die of opioid overdoses they're usually
technically suffocating to death because the drug has slowed their breathing
to a halt. I haven't denied this.

Nor does it logically follow from my position that drug-taking is voluntary.
Driving a car is voluntary. It comes with risks. If I decide to get in a car
and drive to the store to pick up some bread and eggs, another car may crash
into me on the way, ending my life. Does this mean that I chose to die on this
trip? No. It means only that I chose to drive to the store for some food.

Does my death indicate that I was suicidal? No. I was trying to get food - not
to die.

Does my death mean that logically I didn't choose to drive to the store? That
seems to be the argument people make when they say "John Doe couldn't have
made this choice to use drugs - it killed him!" A negative result doesn't
obliterate the goal and free choice that led to it. If you invest in the stock
market, you hope to make money. You don't all of a sudden become a person who
was compelled to hand over your money when the company you invested in goes
belly up. You wanted to make money. You freely chose a means to make that
happen. It didn't work out. So it is the same with drugs. We try to get high
with them, to relieve emotional pain, to be social, etc. - and sometimes the
results are bad, tragically bad, or even fatal.

> Where is the evidence that brain changes made by substance abuse are
“normal”? I think you mean that those brain changes are predictable.

I've given citations in this article. Check them out. Here's another recent
reference that covers all the big neuroscience claims better than any I've
seen before: Brain Change in Addiction as Learning, Not DiseaseMarc Lewis,
Ph.D.

> Are you suggesting that reports from substance abusers of their compulsion
to use and their consequent actions evidencing this “compulsion” doesn’t
actually happen?

They often feel compelled - but in the same way that we feel angry sometimes
when no wrong has been genuinely done to us, we can feel compelled when we
actually do retain the ability to choose. IMO most of the feelings of being
compelled come from everyone berating us and telling us we're monsters who
can't control ourselves, and that drugs control us. I am not denying the
desperate actions, such as when I kept boosting baby formula to sell at
bodegas to make money for heroin. But desperate measures are only proof of
desperation. They aren't logically evidence of "compulsion" in and of
themselves.

> Ever hear the saying that you must walk a mile in other man’s shoes before
you can judge them? Until you have experienced “addiction,” you’re in no
position to judge whether addiction and compulsion really exist.

Yes. I've heard it from every knee-jerk reacting dummy who comments on my
site, messages, or emails me without even bothering to glean from the many
places where I"ve said it outright that I had a massive drug problem and
underwent a lot of treatment. Again, screaming at me about things like this
when you could easily find out that I've walked in the shoes of an addict just
makes your ignorant retorts that much more laughable.

Best,

Steven Slate

Reply

    
    
            * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

January 26, 2019 at 10:39 PM

You are entitled to your opinion and you are entitle to be wrong:

I don't have to look at your citations, I have lived it. Nobody is going to
tell me I didn't experience what I did in fact experience except you.

I suppose the fact you are attacking me doesn't mean you're angry with me.

"Does my death indicate that I was suicidal? No. I was trying to get food –
not to die." If you freely and knowingly chose to engage in the behavior that
ultimately killed you over and over again until you died that is suicide and
the definition of insanity according to Albert Einstein. Cigarette packs have
had the Surgeon General's warning for decades, but people still die and suffer
other substantial ailments from their smoking.

"All of those things don’t follow from my position that substance use is
voluntary. The effects of a drug are a separate issue from the choice to take
the drug." Unto itself, these are inseparably intertwined and undeniable…

Otherwise, you just contradicted yourself: "My position IS NOT that people
make choices that result in addiction (as one makes the choice to smoke,
resulting in emphysema or cancer). My position IS that people are never truly
addicted at any point." So why do they continue to smoke when the Emphysema
first appears? A-D-D-I-C-T-I-O-N!

"Nor does it logically follow from my position that drug-taking is voluntary."
If "drug-taking is not "voluntary," you have just admitted that addiction does
in fact exist.

Some addict or alcoholic must have crossed you at some time to make you attack
other substance abusers. As constructive criticism, you may want to seek
emotional help.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

January 26, 2019 at 10:05 PM

Denial isn't just a river in Egypt! And the fact you declare you're going to
attack me proves it!

Reply

    
    
            * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

January 26, 2019 at 10:06 PM

Lol. Well that does it. I guess I'll just shut down my website now. You got
me!

Reply

    
    
              * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/440b1af197ee6f4c0d16c46ae2ec83f2?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Keisha says
    

January 27, 2019 at 1:29 PM

I believe this person is bitter and cynical. They felt that I was "attacking"
them and others as well. They're seeking attention and are trying to illicit a
response. Is this what an 'internet troll' is? If so, thanks for helping me
know what that definition really means SoberInMi!

Reply

    
    
                * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

January 27, 2019 at 8:07 PM

It is true that one cannot see the for forest for the trees. I still see anger
and vitriol in your posts, not unlike Mr. Slate's.

If you don't see it, then some help may be warranted, but there is no anger,
vitriol, or personal attacks here.

    
    
                * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says
    

January 27, 2019 at 9:10 PM

It is true that one cannot see the forest for the trees. I still see anger and
vitriol in your posts, not unlike Mr. Slate's.

If you don't see it, then some help may be warranted, but there is no anger,
vitriol, or personal attacks here.

    
    
          * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d2017d3989cb9b0c86f7b2a5ee5609df?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)LostMom says
    

April 1, 2019 at 2:26 PM

You have to be the most arrogant and ignorant man I’ve ever not had the
misfortune of meeting. You stand by your argument as if you are the sole
authority on substance abuse, ie the disease of addiction. Forgive me , you
did on a planet of billions of people , find 3 supporters of your opinion.  
I pray you never meet this disease face to face through the painful eyes of a
loved one. And I also pray you do not preach to them to “just quit”. If it was
as easy as that we’d have no addiction problems. I assure it’s not as easy as
that. I’ve lived it.

Reply

    
    
            * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

April 2, 2019 at 5:36 PM

Dear LostMom,

Regarding this and your other comment: I sympathize with you for having lost
your sons. I count myself as lucky that when I was using heroin in the mid-
late 90s to the early 2000s, the street opiate/opioid supply was not tainted
as it is now. Had I been using when your sons were, I might have met the same
fate.

I wanted out of my heroin use problem as well, but I was extremely confused
and disillusioned by the disease-centered treatment I received. My spirit was
crushed, and I was under the false impression that my life was permanently
ruined, and that more heroin would be the only thing that could make me feel
better. This ended for me when I rejected the disease views. So you see, this
is a personal issue for me too. I have dealt with it firsthand. Under the
confusion, I couldn't choose. It took changing a whole bunch of beliefs to be
able to choose to quit.

I wouldn't shame your sons for their fate. That's never my intention. Life is
hard, and complicated, and I think many of our helpers make it even harder and
complicated.

I am not alone in having bad experiences with addiction treatment and
rejecting it's views. Many others share this experience and view. Nor do I
have only 3 professionals who agree - here is a list of 94 signatories to a
statement rejecting the brain disease model of addiction, published in the
Journal Nature - Addiction: not just brain malfunction. They say, among other
things, that:

> we disagree with your one-dimensional view that addiction is a disease, and
with your claim that this view is not particularly controversial among
scientists (Nature 506, 5; 2014). Neuroscience has been widely documented as
just one of many important influences in drug addiction.

If you've run into my website, I can only assume you're still looking for
information about addiction, and maybe that you are even engaging in some
activism to help change things. If so, I applaud your efforts. You may want to
seriously consider other viewpoints. I have compassion for all people with
substance use problems. It is not necessary to see them as diseased in order
to have compassion and want to help.

Again, sorry for your loss.

Best,

Steven Slate

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b4a76821138e03afc584ad2108c1c9bf?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)SoberInMI says

January 26, 2019 at 10:53 PM

Steven:  
I am sorry, it just wasn't worth reading all of that drivel. Or was it to see
that you admit to being an addict, but there is no such thing as "addiction":
"Again, screaming (no screaming S.I.M.) at me about things like this when you
could easily find out that I’ve walked in the shoes of an addict just makes
your ignorant retorts that much more laughable."

Note that I have not attacked you personally, but I have found unwarranted
personal attacks come from someone who has run out of arguments, often small
minded people, the ones Randy Newman sung about ("Short People") so long ago.
You are forgiven.

Have a blessed day!

Reply

  1. ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/77bac22fecf68d223491e654ce95fe3e?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Jacob says

February 13, 2019 at 7:37 AM

I love this. I think it gets to the root of addiction when you acknowledge it
as being a choice, rather than a 'brain disease'. People have good reasons for
using drugs, regardless of whether they are positive (eg. fun, curiosity) or
negative (eg. attempts to avoid or treat pathology). Simply plastering
addiction with a label of 'disease' way oversimplifies the matter.

I think you are right when you characterise the brain disease model as a
failed attempt to avoid shame. I think avoiding shaming addicts is the right
way to go, so the people who support the 'brain disease' model are very well
meaning here. Since the substance use is a free choice the individual has
made, they will have to make their own decision to change for themselves,
rather than being shamed into changing. I know what it's like to have somebody
attempt to shame you into making positive changes in your life, and I found it
incredibly confusing and unhelpful.

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bc9a87ea469da723516837cc29df50df?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)James says

March 2, 2019 at 7:56 AM

Regarding: is being a taxi driver a disease? No, because t does not have
negative consequences for our bodies.

Are the millions of bacteria in our guts a disease? no, because they are good
for us.

You see, disease is defined as a disorder, which is sensible, otherwise
everything would be a disease! Disorders are only in 'things' in context - if
out gut bacteria spread to our bloodstream, then, yes, they would be a
disease.

If the taxi driver became obsessed with learning and following route to the
detriment of his health (eg: OCD) then that would be different: context is
needed.

Reply

  1. ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a7e56e4a7dfe5bbac0e7994b890d07a7?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Colette says

March 3, 2019 at 12:14 PM

Yes, addiction is certainly a problem, but I think it is different from a
disease. Those who suffer debilitating diseases would do anything -- or cease
any activity -- if that would make their diseases go away. They do nothing to
perpetuate the disease.

Addiction is a choice. The addicted know what the cure is: abstinence. Yet
they choose to perpetuate their addiction through continued abuse. They remain
diseased because they refuse the cure!

To categorize addiction as a disease is an insult to those with muscular
dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, cancer, diabetes and thousands of other diseases,
for which there is no known cure.

That does not mean we should ignore addiction as a social ill. It just means
that the addiction problem requires different approaches and methods than that
of true diseases.

Reply

  1. ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/0f357c7422542977c91875812a14f463?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)LDS says

March 15, 2019 at 11:21 PM

The American Board of Preventative Medicine has now recognized Addiction
Medicine as its own nationally recognized medical specialty. My husband (a
doctor with two college degrees and 18 years of practice), is doubled boarded
in emergency medicine and addiction medicine. Addiction medicine is now seen
as a medical specialty, just like gynecology, oncology, family medicine, etc.  
My husband has been treating addicts for many years. It’s a disease process.
Period.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

March 16, 2019 at 3:08 PM

None of what you said makes any sort of case for the disease model of
addiction. There's a long list of dubious diseases that have been endorsed by
doctors' professional organizations/trade guilds throughout history. That
doctors declare something a disease doesn't make it true. One well known
example: homosexuality was considered a mental illness by the American
Psychiatric Association until 1974.

If you're going to make an argument, try to make it on the facts, not on
appeals to authority alone.

Reply

  1. ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b15b815f1f54de80a3149b0f15ee41ca?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Lisa says

March 21, 2019 at 1:25 AM

What is your take on eating disorders? Is it all a choice because it is an
addiction. If you even suggest that eating disorders are a choice, I can’t
believe you work at slate. As someone in recovery from anorexia and
hospitalized 8X, your addiction comments are invalidating and I would be
careful with what you say because you have an online public blog attached to a
genuinely respected company ( slate ) and so your words can cause someone to
truly beat themselves up over an addiction ( and disease). Be careful in any
way you may play a role in someone who is already sensitive emotionally and
may be feeling suicidal. Then they watch your TedTalk. Watch yourself before
you find your words becoming a trigger and/or last straw in a string of things
that can cause one to decide to end their life. Words matter. Invalidation in
addiction awareness , saying it is all a choice ( thus shaming the addict).
And , you’ll never know if your words were the last thing someone read. Think
about that possibility. Am I guilt shaming you? Yes. The same way you shame
addicts, except my statement may be true.

Also cancer is not called cancer the disease because it is assumed that
everyone knows that cancer IS a disease. So, there’s that answer.

However, I will say : recovery is a choice.

And it’s not just an easy choice.

If you’ve read up on NIH reports on addictions. You’d find out that anorexia
is the leading cause of death for all mental health DISEASES. You would find
out that anorexia is harder to treat than other addictions. You would find
many studies that show that the reward neuron pathway is often running
backwards. You’d find that many of the reward section of the brains of addicts
light up at different times and is different than a non user. I would cite you
know, one article to seem legitimate but you could google how addiction can
affect the brain- make sure it’s on the google scholar part though and that
you’re only reading studies that have been vetted enough by multiple
professionals to be published in an academic journal.

Please educate yourself more properly before using your public platform to
shame those already hurting.

Thanks

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

April 1, 2019 at 2:59 PM

First, who I work for (BRI) and what this blog is attached to (nothing but me)
is clearly stated on the About page, accessible from the menu bar which
appears on every single page of this site. The brazen _arrogance_ of angry
commenters like yourself is betrayed by the fact that you spout a bunch of
strange claims, insults, and charges that would easily be dispelled if you
simply clicked on that About link or the FAQs link. I love when folks like you
chastise me about _the facts_ when you can 't even do 1 second of research
about me before blasting out a bunch of nonsense about me. **_Slate is my last
name._**

Second - there are plenty of peer reviewed journal articles cited and linked
in this very page on which you are angrily commenting and telling me I should
look at some peer reviewed research. Don't tell me to "educate yourself more"
when you obviously can't even be bothered to read the blog you are railing
against.

Third - I am not shaming anyone except for _some_ (read: not all) of the
people who spread the "disease of addiction myth." And most of them needn't
even be ashamed, because they simply don't know any better. I understand their
hearts are in the right place, even if they get the facts wrong.

Based on this sentence fragment "Invalidation in addiction awareness , saying
it is all a choice ( thus shaming the addict)." your logic seems to be that to
point out that a behavior/preference is not a disease is to shame people who
engage in that behavior/hold that preference. I find your logic to be faulty.
To be ashamed of drug/alcohol use, you first have to believe that drug/alcohol
use is inherently bad. Not everyone believes that. I don't believe that. I am
not ashamed of my past heavy substance use, and I know that even when I was
inject heroin and cocaine dozens of times a day, I was in full control, not
diseased, doing exactly what I believed I needed to do at the time. I believe
it is my right to use whatever drugs I want to use; that drug use is a
victimless behavior; and that acting by your own judgment is the ultimate
virtue even if your own judgment sometimes leads to bad consequences. I do
have regrets about some of my past drug use and some choices related to it -
but I do not have any shame over it.

I am a homosexual man. I don't take any strong position on where my
homosexuality comes from. _I only know that it is what I like, and like drug
use, I do not think that it is inherently bad/immoral_ , nor that it has any
victims. _If someone were to come up with indisputable evidence that
homosexuality is a choice, I would not feel ashamed, nor would I choose to
stop being homosexual._ It wouldn 't affect me emotionally in any way. I know
that many people disapprove of homosexuality, but I do not care. Shame doesn't
just hinge on control over a behavior; it requires the belief that an act is
bad - this holds for drug use, sexual behavior, or any other thing.

I should also add that shame shouldn't Trump the truth. If you react with
negative emotions to some truth, but that truth helps you to improve your life
and ultimately feel much better in the long run, then the temporary negative
emotions were worth suffering. But again, I don't personally think substance
use is shame-worthy.

Per your warning that my words will harm - I have received countless personal
communications from people who say that the information on my website, in my
book, and in my ted talk helped them to improve their lives/get over their
substance use problems. Many have literally said that I "saved their life." I
can't take credit for that, because they saved their own lives, through their
own power of choice - but I can say it flies in the face of all the people
over the years who have told me my ideas are dangerous.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/74df4c0bbc46adcd99755e2043837a35?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Tibur Ron says
    

April 6, 2019 at 11:09 PM

Beautifully stated. Unfortunately ignorant commenters basically COMPLETELY
failed to comprehend the article and the studies done on addiction as a
choice.

EVERYONES brain changes with habits and mere repetitive thoughts!  
Choose a really bad habit your brain will alter for the worse. CHOOSE to quit
(yes much harder with horrible habits) and your brain will REVERT to near
normal. You think there won't be consequences for incredibly bad dare I say
stupid choices?

Unfortunately, there are many in this world try suffer and then want to blame
the world and hold it responsible for their failure to choose a non-
destructive path.

Don't eat crap you're unfamiliar with. Basic common sense. All the information
on every life destroying drug is out there. It doesn't jump down your throat.
It's a choice.

Reply

  1. ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6c27088099f9f00b687d903734f4ee93?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Christina McCall says

April 12, 2019 at 10:07 AM

I think this argument is oversimplistic. It seems to do what it crtiticizes,
placing the 'blame' on one factor, it just chooses a different one. Instead of
drug abuse being all and only a 'disease', it is all and only a 'choice'. In
truth, it is both of these things and more, all intertwined in a complex and
frustrating cycle.  
One may choose to begin using drugs for many reasons, such as injury or
illness, recreation, escape, a coping mechanism, peer pressure, etc. They may
choose to keep using until they cause  
dis-ease in their brain and body, the same way someone can cause diabetes from
poor diet choices. It's normal for one to accumulate excessive amounts of fat
(among other things) from eating more calories than they burn, but that
doesn't make it healthy. Then, that extra weight and all the problems that
come with it make it exponentially harder for a person to make the healthy
choices necessary to cure the dis-ease that they have created by their
choices. I don't see how altering your brain structure through the use of
harmful drugs is any different.  
Personally, I can attest to the overwhelming 'compulsion' that these brain
changes can cause. Everyone is different. We do not experience all things the
same way or even at all. One person may have strong compulsions, or shame, or
something else, and another may not. Some depressed people are so
overwhelmingly affected by their own brain dis-ease that they kill themselves,
even when it looks to everyone around them like they 'have it all'.  
Disease can be spontaneous, congenital, or caused by the person's life
choices. Some of those associated with the brain that deal with intangibles,
such as thoughts and feelings, are naturally more difficult to objectively
study and quantify, for now. That doesn't mean they don't exist or
overpoweringly affect our behaviors sometimes.  
Chemical and structural changes in our brains, normal or natural and chosen or
not, strongly affect our perceptions, behaviors, cognitive abilities, and
decision making processes. To imply that drug abuse is simply choice is not
telling the whole story, and not as helpful to as many people as a more
complete understanding would be.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c5b9880de075c8cbe8418a305480f141?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg)Steven Slate says
    

May 7, 2019 at 4:05 PM

> "I don’t see how altering your brain structure through the use of harmful
drugs is any different."

Then please read the post. The whole point of this post is that the brain is
altered with any repetitious activity/learned skill/habit - which includes
countless activities in which no drug or substance enters the body. So, it's
very different than putting on weight from eating.

Also, if you want to use the old english sense of the word disease (as
evidenced by your constant use of "dis-ease"), go ahead. But then don't argue
that it's a medical disease. You're conflating.

> "To imply that drug abuse is simply choice is not telling the whole story,
and not as helpful to as many people as a more complete understanding would
be."

I wrote a 450 page book fully explaining addiction and quitting in depth. Do
you actually expect me to reprint that in a blog post? This post is about a
single issue: the fact that there is no condition of the brain that robs
people of the ability _to not choose to use drugs/alcohol_.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b7b3c278751e5b94aa2de696bbc42378?s=48&d=identicon&r=pg) brandie says
    

May 29, 2019 at 4:47 PM

While I think you have done a great job arguing your belief/opinion, backed up
with a lot of great studies and facts, I choose to agree with Christina
McCall. Your argument is just a little over simplified. Your arguments have
validity, but there are so many factors that are in play here. And… While this
post might have started out as a single issue, it has taken many different
directions. For you to dismiss her comments in such a flippant way shows, to
me, that maybe you didn't fully read or understand her comments. Maybe the
real issue here is to ask why do some people continue to choose behavior with
such negative consequences…does that result from something that can be a
"brain disease"? It is all a worthy subject for sure, and it would be
spectacular to find a solution! For now though, I believe it is great to have
discussions like these, so people can have different avenues to find success
in overcoming addictions. One size does not yet fit all.

Reply

« Older Comments

### Trackbacks

  1. **Brains “Hijacked”: By Drugs ? or by a Fictional Medical Model and Multibillion Dollar Criminal Treatment Scam ?- A Critical Discourse** says:

August 8, 2018 at 10:55 AM

[…] or disease model of compulsive substance use are thoroughly discussed and
analyzed here, and here for […]

Reply

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Notify me of followup comments via e-mail

Name *

Email *

Website

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is
processed.

### Drug & Alcohol Detox Info

While addiction itself cannot be treated, withdrawal syndrome that follows the
cessation of some substances can be treated. In some cases, it is dangerous to
go without this treatment. If you ever feel in danger when going through
withdrawal, go to your nearest hospital or call 911 immediately.

The treatment locator can help you to find detoxification clinics: Click here
for SAMHSA Treatment Locator

Private detoxification is available, and where this is preferred and you have
the means, I recommend Gallus Detox Centers for the highest quality of care:
Click here for Gallus Detox Centers Info They are the preferred detox of my
employer, Saint Jude Retreats.

### Recommended Sites

  * Alcohol and Drugs History Society
  * Dr Carl Hart
  * Gene Heyman PhD
  * Global Drug Survey
  * Hanna Pickard
  * Harm Reduction Network
  * Jeffrey Schaler PhD
  * John Clark Miller - A Critical Discourse
  * Leaving AA
  * Michelle Dunbar Radio Show
  * More Revealed
  * Orange Papers
  * Rational Recovery / Jack Trimpey
  * Safe Recovery Radio Show
  * Stanton Peele
  * Stinkin' Thinkin'
  * Stop 13 Step in AA
  * The Freedom Model for Addictions
  * The Social Exchange w Zach Rhoads
  * Thomas Szasz

### Tags

AA addiction Alcoholics Anonymous Alcoholism alternative brain disease Brain
Disease Theory Brain Scan Celebrity Charlie Sheen choice comedy conventional
treatment disease debate fallacy free will government heroin Heyman Hollywood
Lindsay Lohan loaded words logic Loss of control Maia Szalavitz moderation
myths NESARC neuroscience Nora Volkow NSDUH of mice and men powerlessness
propaganda Recovery recovery culture relapse research self-change self-
fulfilling prophecy self-help Stanton Peele treatment Uncategorized Volkow

### Get Real Help

![Addiction Help](http://www.thecleanslate.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/freedommodel.jpg)

Copyright (C) 2019 * Smart Passive Income Pro on Genesis Framework * WordPress
* Log in

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

