

  * Get Listed
  * Login

GoodTherapy

Find a Therapist Find a Facility Find an Event

__

__

Be found at the exact moment they are searching. Sign Up and Get Listed

  * Get Help
  * Learn
  * About

__

  * Login
  * Get Listed
  * Get Help
  * Learn
  * About

__

* * *
    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Marriage Counselor
    * Find a Child Counselor
    * Find a Support Group
    * Find a Psychologist
    * If You Are in Crisis
    

**Common Issues**

    
    
    * Depression
    * Abuse
    * Infidelity
    * Self-Esteem
    * Sex Addiction
    * Relationships
    
    
    * Child and Adolescent Issues
    * Eating Disorders
    * Grief
    * Anxiety
    * PTSD
    * See More
    

  * 

* * *
    
    
    * How to Find the Right Therapist
    * Explore Therapy
    * Issues Treated
    * Modes of Therapy
    * Types of Therapy
    * Famous Psychologists
    * Psychotropic Medication
    

**Common Questions**

    
    
    * What Is Therapy?
    * How to Help a Loved One
    * How Much Does Therapy Cost?
    * How to Become a Therapist
    * Signs of Healthy Therapy
    * Warning Signs in Therapy
    

**Blog**

    
    
    * The GoodTherapy Blog
    * PsychPedia A-Z
    * Dear GoodTherapy
    * Share Your Story
    * Therapy News
    * Subscribe
    

* * *
    
    
    * List Your Practice
    * List a Treatment Center
    * Earn CE Credit Hours
    * Student Membership
    * Online Continuing Education
    * Marketing Webinars
    * GoodCause
    * Mission and Vision
    * About Us
    * Press Room
    * Partner or Advertise
    * Contact Us
    

# Freeing the Parents of Adult Alcoholics and Addicts

August 18, 2007 • Contributed by Mary Ellen Barnes, PhD

  * ![](/graph/bubble_arrow.png)
  *     * ![](/graph/bubble_arrow.png)
  * ![](/graph/bubble_arrow.png)
  *     *       * 

![87542034](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2008/02/87542034-200x300.jpg)The conversation began easily
enough, "My brother is bleeding our parents into the poor house with his
unending demands for money - money to support his addictions – and they don't
seem able to stop giving it to him, even though he isn't getting any better.
What can we do?"

Or we hear from the parents themselves, "How can I get my spouse to stop
giving our adult daughter money she just spends on booze or drugs? Her
promises are worthless and the demands endless."

It's not an uncommon condition. Parents are living longer, some adult children
make childishness a career, and it isn't easy to say no to a son or daughter,
regardless of their age. Then add in the grandchildren, hostages held for
ransom as your child essentially blackmails you into supporting their drug
and/or alcohol abuse: "Give me the money or I will kill myself," or "they will
starve," or "we'll be on the streets," is the implied or actual threat, yet
the money does no good.

## Find a Therapist

Advanced Search

As parents you capitulate even as you destroy your own fragile financial
security. You hand over cash, even though you know it's useless, often
wondering if your child's problem is something you caused. You post bail, buy
cars, pay rent, doctors' and attorneys' fees, and pay for treatment that they
rarely see through and that usually doesn't work even when they do. Funds
intended to benefit the grandchildren disappear without benefiting anyone. The
cycle continues until someone dies or there isn't anything left to extort. It
seems like the only choice.

But is it?

Though it takes toughness that's hard to muster and support which is even
harder to find, there are alternatives. It means finding the courage to face
the reality without being swept away by understandable emotions. Managing this
means overcoming a lot of mythology.

The most destructive belief most of us have held at one time or another is
that alcohol and drug abuse is an incurable disease over which the addict or
alcoholic has no control. Believing this, how can any parent deny support to a
sick child? This is the lever that every active drunk and junkie – and many
"recovering" ones as well – use to control everyone around them: "It isn't my
fault and if you don't give me the money I'll die."

The trouble is that drug and alcohol abuse, dependence, and addiction, aren't
really diseases, they're choices – choices the alcoholic and addict made and
continue to make. These choices can be unmade, but as long as you're
supporting them financially, protecting them from the consequences of their
choices and behaviors, why would they change?

The answer to that is that they aren't going to.

Most of us go though our lives wishing someone else would change. The reality
is, however, that we can't change anyone but ourselves. It may not seem like
much, but sometimes it's enough. When you change how you deal with your adult
children they too are forced to change. How they change isn't predictable, but
they will change.

These reactive changes are the hard part. Initially they will probably
escalate their aggressive behaviors to get you to return to the old status
quo, no matter how awful that really was for everyone. That will include using
their children to get to you.

And what about those grandchildren?

This is when the need for support comes in. It's hard to stand up to the drunk
or the druggie when they have no restraints on what they will say or do.
Endless promises, threats, and blame will follow any interruption in the cash
flow. You want to believe the promises, you succumb to the threats, or you
cave in to the guilt that the blaming dredges up, no matter how real or
ridiculous. But you need to stand firm.

So how do you go about doing what you know is right when everything seems
stacked against you?

First, it's necessary to keep in mind what you already know: your child will
bleed you dry and out onto the street before they will stop exploiting you.
You also know that continuing will never benefit your grandchildren. That's a
fact. Hold onto it. Cut them off and they may in fact decide to die rather
than clean up. Instead, begin to plan ways to taper off the support in return
for demonstrated progress in cleaning up – and be prepared to either take on
the grandchildren yourself or allow someone else to. Make arrangements or
contact Child Protection or both. Explore the options.

Second, they can clean up if they are sufficiently motivated and the treatment
mode is carefully chosen. That's a bit of a problem, of course. Virtually all
forms of treatment in the U.S. have success rates of less than 10% over two
years. AA itself reports a 95% dropout rate in the first year, and most
treatment is based on AA.

Third, it really is okay to save yourself and the rest of your family. An
almost universally overlooked aspect of the relationship of older parents to
adult addicted children is that the financial support actually rewards the
child for their self-destructive choices and behaviors while penalizing the
parents, other children, and grandchildren. What kind of nonsense is that?

So what's a parent to do?

Remember that you don't have to stay stuck in the insanity of the addicted
child's world. You can stay clear and not be sucked down in all of the usual
"powerlessness" and "disease" model ad copy that only serves to perpetuate and
justify addiction-based exploitation. Drug and alcohol abuse, dependence and
addiction are a choice. Sometimes the choice makes sense, sometimes it's
accidental, and sometimes it's crept up so gradually that no one noticed it
for a long time, but it's still a choice. So is cleaning up.

You can offer to help them sober up. It's hard to find effective treatment,
but you can look for programs with a multitude of options for clients, a
diverse staff (not dominated by "recovering" individuals), aftercare that
isn't limited to attending recovery groups, and a focus on the client's
strengths, interests, and future activities – not on the past, on drinking and
using, or helplessness. Remember that the most common cause of relapse is a
belief in powerlessness. Avoid any program that makes that belief part of
their philosophy.

Start rewarding yourself and your family for achievements and accomplishments,
not for destructive choices and habits and behaviors. You may not be able to
keep a son or daughter from destroying themselves, but you and the rest of
your family don't have to go with them.

Finally, it's good to get competent help in this process. You need to know,
regardless of the outcome, that you have done everything possible, given every
opportunity, and explored every option. The process of genuinely helping an
adult child is difficult at best and outcomes, regardless of advertising copy,
are very uncertain. Give yourself, your troubled child, and the rest of your
family, the benefit of the best opportunities and support available.

Your addicted adult child is still an adult and will still make their own
choices, one of which may be their own destruction. You can encourage and
support other outcomes, but not by financing the addictive behaviors. Don't
let yourself be guilt driven, blackmailed, or intimidated into perpetuating
the problem.

(C) Copyright 2007 by Mary Ellen Barnes, Ph.D., therapist in Rolling Hills
Estates, California. All Rights Reserved. Permission to publish granted to
GoodTherapy.org.

The preceding article was solely written by the author named above. Any views
and opinions expressed are not necessarily shared by GoodTherapy.org.
Questions or concerns about the preceding article can be directed to the
author or posted as a comment below.

## Read More

  * ![](https://www.goodtherapy.org/thumbs/175x175/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2008/10/womens-hands-toasting-with-wine.jpg)Menopause and Alcohol Abuse 
  * ![](https://www.goodtherapy.org/thumbs/175x175/blog/wp-content/plugins/wp-thumbie/images/default.png)Inspiration May be More Important than Perspiration for Alcohol Treatment
  * ![](https://www.goodtherapy.org/thumbs/175x175/blog/wp-content/plugins/wp-thumbie/images/default.png)How Age of Onset Predicts Drug and Alcohol Dependency

Please fill out all required fields to submit your message.

Invalid Email Address.

Please confirm that you are human.

  * 789 comments 
  * Leave a Comment

  * ![Lyle](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lyle

February 19th, 2008 at 7:09 AM

As the parent of two small children, this scenario of an adult child addicted
to drugs or alcohol is one of my worst nightmares. I know that hind site is
20/20, so what can parents of adult children offer in terms of advice? How can
you raise healthy kids that will have the internal strength and motivation to
resist caving into the temptations of drugs and alcohol?

Reply

  * ![Victor](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Victor

August 15th, 2016 at 3:26 PM

I noticed you put your arrival in 8 year ago if you haven't had this reply
before now please give it a chance  
Being one of the worst case Alcoholic with an addictive nature to both Alcohol
and Drugs I've now been with sobriety for over 12 year now by the grace of God
and now being a spinner in the AA myself can only suggest what some people
have done and they said it helped not one but all the family as Alcoholics
ages are from as young as 15 16 years old if you need a drink to function at
all in the morning your well on your way depending on the age go to the police
stn ask them where the AA meetings are held go there get anyone you fell
comfortable to SPEEK to as there we are all in the same boat to get the head
spinner ask him can you take your kids along he will ask there ages that I
don't no if only one is ale final please just go as when they can identify
with someone that's named a share that person will be more than delighted to
help you in any way he or she can as we all no that was just like ourself not
that long ago your a lady what could I learn you about having a baby we are
just the same you must be one to be able to first having lost the will to
carry on along with every single thing you loved and cherished in your entire
life then went through hell and back to now Alcohol is an illness but remember
this if you don't take that very first drink you'll never get drunk hope this
helps a bit my dear I truly do mean that  
With my kindest regards to yourself and all your family God bless and keep you
safe also well  
Victor Pollock Henderson 🙏

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

February 19th, 2008 at 7:11 AM

Yes, indeed, hind site is 20/20. But, I think just considering this threat
when your children are so small is a huge first step. Research confirms for us
that talking to your children from a small age about the dangers of addictive
substances is key in this battle. Also, making sure they find activities they
are good at that increase their self esteem is important. Also, be sure to
make time for them that makes them feel special and worthwhile. The best way
to combat a future addiction problem is to raise a child up so that he or she
will know that there are things better than drugs and alcohol and that they
are worth so much more.

Reply

  * ![Teresa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Teresa

November 21st, 2017 at 9:34 AM

My husband and I did all the suggestions on how to raise children to not do
alcohol or drugs and we lost our olest son on 11/29/17 to alcoholism. We never
had alcohol in our home and neither did his grandparents. He lost a 14 year
battle with alcohol, left behind a wife and 3 children under the age of 3. So
I my advice is to not over look Peer Pressure and addictive behaviors in the
family tree.

Reply

  * ![Teresa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Teresa

November 21st, 2017 at 9:35 AM

I meant he died on 11/29/16

  * ![Art](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Art

February 19th, 2008 at 7:14 AM

I am glad that the author has let parents off the hook when it comes to
supporting an adult child who is an addict. So many parents know they should
stop supporting their child, but guilt steps in and gets in the way. With
blogs such as this one, hopefully parents can start to see that giving an
adult child money is enabling the child and his or her addiction. Real help
comes in the form of ceasing financial support. And, the author's suggestion
to call social services is a sound one. If grandparents are willing to take
the grandchildren and can provide a secure home environment, they are almost
certain to receive guardianship.

Reply

  * ![amy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### amy

February 19th, 2008 at 7:15 AM

I like the author's reference to the pay off addicts receive when someone
gives them money. I have had more addicts tell me they didn't have to quit b/c
they didn't have a reason to. They were having all of their needs met while
still being able to drink and drug. Sometimes, well intentioned parents can be
the enemy.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Mary Ellen

February 19th, 2008 at 5:31 PM

I appreciate the comments and will address these issues in up-coming posts and
articles. For now, it's very important to have accurate information and to
share it with children. The best source currently available is the SUNY site
"Alcohol Problems and Solutions" which can be found at
www2.potsdam.edu/hansondj/ It's also important to teach responsibility for
behaviors and consequences and to protect children from counter-productive
programs like D.A.R.E. which have been repeatedly demonstrated to increase
drug and alcohol use in adolescents.

Thanks again for the thoughts,  
Mary Ellen

Reply

  * ![Carol R Cann, MA, LCPC, CADC](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol R Cann, MA, LCPC, CADC

February 29th, 2008 at 7:32 PM

As an alcohol & drug counselor and psychotherapist who often deals with family
members of people with addicitons, I found Mary Ellen's article to contain a
great deal of good sense and helpful suggestions. Realizing that we can't
change anyone's behaviors but our own can be a giant leap forward for the
codependent family member.

I would pose a two-part response to Lyle's question about raising children who
aren't likely to become addicts. There is a genetic component to addiction, so
that if there are addicts in the family (parents, grandparents, aunts &
uncles), it raises the probability that a person will develop an addiciton if
they use drugs or alcohol. This part can't be helped, but it can be minimized
by family members who educate their children to the propensity to addiciton in
the family by such actions as telling them about relatives, not having alcohol
use as a centerpiece of family gatherings, seeing family members who have
successfully participated in recovery. The other significant factor in
predisposing a person to an addiciton (which could be something other than
drugs or alcohol) would be a sense of emptiness and the feeling that the
significant people in their lives (particularly parents) cannot be counted on.
This begins in infancy. No parent can meet their child's expectation 100% of
the time! (To paraphrase Donald Winnicott, a pediatrician who became a
psychoanalyst, one just has to be a "good enough" parent.) But the child must
have the general sense that their cries (signifying wants & needs) will be
heard and responded to in usually meaningful manner. This acknowledgement &
sense that the world can be trusted expands to being supported and loved for
what the child is, not what the parent thinks they should be; for example,
allowing the child to explore playing a musical instrument (if that's what
they express interest in) instead of insisting that they play sports.

Becoming an addict may or may not be a choice. BUT whether or not a person
does something about it once they realize they are an addict, IS a choice.

Reply

  * ![lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### lynn

February 4th, 2017 at 5:07 PM

The one thing that always amazes me is the lack of addressing the prenatal
exposure to alcohol problem Many people are born addicted to alcohol because
of said exposure. Advice to parents who are concerned about raising addict
free children is to make sure you abstain from alcohol BEFORE you even become
pregnant.

Reply

  * ![Ed Wilson, Ph.D, MAC](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed Wilson, Ph.D, MAC

March 3rd, 2008 at 7:09 PM

As Mary Ellen's private practice partner, and sometimes co-author, I will note
that the issue of addiction "running in families" should always be handled
very carefully. The increased risk actually seems to be about 6%,and most of
that can be explained environmentally as well as genetically, but, the self-
fulfilling prophacy (and excuse) risk is very high indeed. The number one
factor in relapse is a belief in "powerlessness" and anything, including a
belief in unfounded genetic links increases both the likelihood of abuse and
resistence to remediation.

Yes, a family history, just like a cultural history, increases risk, but this
shouldn't be exacerbated using it as justification. If anything it should
reduce the excuses by warning individuals about their possible vulnerability.

And, of course, people should be equally educated with regard to the proven
health benefits of moderate alcohol consumption. Everyone benefits when the
demonization of alcohol ceases and realty replaces mythology. Would that more
of that were happening these days.

Reply

  * ![Art Becker-Weidman](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/arthur-becker-weidman.jpg)

### Art Becker-Weidman

March 20th, 2008 at 7:15 AM

Dr. Wilson's comments are very important. While there is increased risk of
dependency when there is a family history of this (the genetic dimension) it
is NOT a 1:1, 100% issue nor is it even like eye color. The increased risk is
notable, but it is still less than 10%. In a similar vein, the general risk of
schizophrenia is about 1%, but if you have schizophrenic parents, the risk
goes up by a factor of ten (sounds bad), but that only means a 10% risk…and,
of course, there are environmental factors to consider as well.

This is a very helpful article and an excellent blog thread.

Reply

  * ![Stacy1](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Stacy1

April 2nd, 2008 at 3:23 PM

I am so glad to see the comments that this does not necessarily "run in
families" but that it may well be more along the lines of self fulfilling
prophecies. But that then turns the table on the addicts and takes away their
excuse for why they do what they do.

Reply

  * ![amyhop](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### amyhop

April 22nd, 2008 at 1:58 PM

My grrandparents have been the victim of a shameless alcoholic family member
and child of theirs, and they continue to give and give and give yet get
nothing in return. How do you teach this older generation about tough love and
that money in this case will never buy sobriety?

Reply

  * ![Jill](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jill

June 3rd, 2008 at 6:00 PM

Our late daughter became addicted to marijuana & prescribed medications.

As a child & young adult her life was full of promise.

She was involved with Scouting & many other not for profit groups. She was
full of energy & idealism and worked hard to achieve graduate & post graduate
degrees.

We were always careful to make sure our daughter stayed connected to the
family and were mindful of the issues surrounding "enabling".

We were helpless, the medical professionals treating our daughter would not
listen (quoting privacy laws) and we slowly watched our wondeful child who had
so much to give, lose control of her life & ability to make sound judgements.

She died aged 31 in 2006.

Where do the broken hearted go to be listened to?

Reply

  * ![marie s](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### marie s

September 20th, 2016 at 11:13 PM

I am sorry for the loss of your daughter in this life. I do not think you were
an "enabler", but rather a loving person who loved your daughter and did all
you could to help her . I think your daughter knew she was loved, and i hope
you have been able to find as much peace and happiness as possible in your
life in the passing years. love and god bless

Reply

  * ![Dorothy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dorothy

November 19th, 2016 at 6:36 AM

You have my sympathy though I am aware how that doesn't help your heart from
cracking; I have dealt with a daughter (now 54 yoa) since she was about 11
years old. If I did not have a God to go to and cry to, I don't know how much
worse the pain would be. I am currently wondering if involuntary commitment
would help; if so I have to travel 3 hours to the court and deal with that -
but she is quite capable of harming herself and others.

  * ![sandra](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### sandra

December 10th, 2016 at 7:44 AM

I'm sorry for your loss and we are having a difficult time with our daughter,
we provided her with the medical care last year, treatments but she revoked
all permissions to us to be able to talk to anyone, as a result of the drugs
and alcohol she is bipolar now, she start to do dangerous things and we fear
for her life, but she won't listen, my other daughter is in college but on her
little vacations thing always turns a nightmare for her, now, she is telling
me that if I kept my oldest living with me she won't come home, because we are
enabling her to continue with her conduct. We are desperate

Reply

  * ![Gamoma03](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gamoma03

April 14th, 2017 at 1:33 PM

As an adult sibling of 2 addicts in my family, I can relate to how your
college age daughter feels. There are 4 children in my family… 2 of us who
went to college, married, had kids and work to make an honest living. Then
there are 2 who are destructive addicts… one who married another addict and
had 2 kids. My oldest child is 18 and from the day he was born he has been
unable to have a healthy relationship with his grandparents because of these
trashy people. They have ruined every single family holiday, week-long stay at
grandmas during the summer, spring break, family trip… you name it, they have
ruined it. It does nothing but cause bitterness and resentment. Yet my parents
continue to enable them over and over and over… Their patterns are identical
to what is mentioned above in the article. They use "the poor kids" routine a
lot, or when my parents try to cut them off or wean them off it becomes world
war 3 with threats of violence and ridiculous verbal abuse. They are all
transient now but continue to be under my parents' roof quite frequently. The
children have been removed by DFCS and yet they still do not learn. They have
not had to deal with the consequences of any of their actions in 20 years. My
suggestion to you would be to listen to your "straight" daughter… who is not
an addict. Put your foot down with the addict and cut her off….before you lose
both your daughters.

  * ![Arthur Becker-Weidman, Ph.D.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Arthur Becker-Weidman, Ph.D.

June 4th, 2008 at 1:39 PM

Dear Jill,

What a very sad story. I am so sorry for you and your family. Your loss is
profound. Where to go? I'd strongly urge you to find a person you can talk
with about your loss, pain, anger, and saddness.

Reply

  * ![Ed Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed Wilson

June 5th, 2008 at 7:47 AM

Dear Jill,

Yours is a heartbreaking situation. Losing a child is very hard, and seeing it
coming and being unable to stop it is hardest of all. I too would recommend
counseling with someone experienced in both grief and cognitive behavioral
therapy.

My sympathies lie with you,  
Ed Wilson

Reply

  * ![terri](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### terri

July 14th, 2008 at 4:16 PM

Jill,  
I find your story heartbreaking, and can particularly understand your
frustration in feeling helpless. My 26 year old is also addicted to narcotic
pain killers, denying the problem and making frightening choices. I am also at
wits end with the medical profession in that even physicians who know he has a
problem continue to prescribe the drugs. When he is hospitalized, they will
not communicate with us or sometimes even let us see him because of privacy
laws. Thank you for sharing this-letting people know how the lack of support
from the med. profession may have been contributed to your loss. Our son also
was a gifted child, we knew all his friends and their families until high
school when it became harder to do that. My heart goes out to you. I hope your
have the support you need.

Reply

  * ![denise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### denise

August 23rd, 2008 at 8:53 PM

Thanks to everyone who comments on this site.I have a 39 year old daughter in
jail who has always been a very difficult person to help.Very Low frustration
level, maybe ADD and a strong personality were all aided and abbeted by my
broken marriage ,my immature single parenting and an absent father. I kept
trying to stave off disaster by providing money because I felt she was fragile
or incapable of caring for herself. I admit to all of these failures but I
always loved her and misguidedly intervened too many times to save her,give
her a new start etc.I know now love is not enough. I did not have the
experiences or knowledge to be a good guide.

Today I fear for my own safety due to her level of rage.Yes she has made
choices and yes I have not helped to guide her as she needed but what do you
do when you are emotionally still a baby and you have a baby .  
At this point after thousands of dollars, a horrifying intervention attempt
involving a specialist and her two best friends and too many heartbreaking
conversations,I feel the need to save myself and other family members .Can I
be forgiven. I do not know.

Reply

  * ![Cindy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cindy

November 12th, 2008 at 7:11 AM

I have been searching for a "parent support" group per se, my 23 y/o son is a
recent heroin addict. He is currently in a part-time evening program which I'm
not convinced is doing what he needs. I read your blog and completely agree
reagarding us as parents enabling him to continue. He is living at home, so we
are in a way supporting him-he eats, sleeps, showers and does his own laundry
here-we offer him no spending money, he tells me he begs for gas money. I feel
that he is motivated for recovery but his girlfriend (she's 28) who is a long-
time addict is still in the picture. He had never used before being involved
with her, when he met her she was clean. I'm not blaming her, his using was
his choice. I asked him if it meant that he had to give her up for a while to
get better, would he-his answer was no, so I'm not convinced that this will
work for him. I believe as long as he remains with her, he doesn't have a
chance at recovery. I am angry that he has chosen this route. Where can
parents go to get the support for this? There are all kinds of AA/NA support
groups for addicts, but I can't find support for us and his siblings.

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

November 12th, 2008 at 10:00 AM

Frankly, there aren't any good support groups for families. Those that do
exist tend to follow the AA/NA model (Alanon) but have the same problems as
AA/NA - a misguided model and focus. The best we have come up with is to
remember to detatch from a situation you didn't create, can't fix and can't
control. Set clear limits with your son and set clear deadlines for
eliminating support and keep them (i.e., don't set conditions you won't stick
to). Frequently we play the role of intermediary so you may want to look for
someone to fill that position. Also, look at the materials available at
threeminutetherapy.com and see what applies to your situation. Feel free to
call us as well.

Reply

  * ![Dr. Arthur Becker-Weidman](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/arthur-becker-weidman.jpg)

### Dr. Arthur Becker-Weidman

November 12th, 2008 at 12:23 PM

Many parents I see have found Alanon to be very helpful and supportive. While
it is primarily for the family members of alcoholics, I do think you too will
find it very helpful. If you call your local United Way they can give the tele
number for the local Alanon or AA office that you can then call to get
schedule and location information. You may want to go to several different
groups as each one tends to have its own "personality" and you may need to go
to several until you find one that fits for you.

regards

Art

Reply

  * ![Marilyn D.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Marilyn D.

November 19th, 2016 at 9:17 AM

What do I do about growing  
And children? Their father has them part time but is struggling financially so
I cannot try guardianship of my grandchildren. My daughter is a drunk lying
self absorbed the if who has wiped out my savings. I want her out and do not
want her children here in visiting days as she is a neglectful mother. My
heart breaks for them. But I want her out of my life without my grandchildren
thinking I hate them too.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

November 16th, 2008 at 6:08 PM

This is the saddest website. Parents and loved ones seeking solace because of
a lost loved-one.  
What is the answer.Who knows. My beloved daughter died recently. It was a
natural death, I guess, that's what the cororner said anyway . She was not
speaking to me, because she did not want to listen to me about the choices she
was making. I can't really tell you how badly that hurts. I know tough love is
the way to go but sometimes you have to pay with guilt. I just know she wasn't
well, she loved me very much,and i don't know how I can bear life wihout my
sweet girl. I have to remember the daughter she was before the addiction took
her from me. Even then, I love her more than words or pain can say.  
She was onyl 39 years old.

Reply

  * ![Cherise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cherise

September 1st, 2016 at 2:20 PM

Been thru it all too. It has changed who I am. I no longer have a life it's
constantly full of remorse, guilt and regret. I know in my heat did all I
could do for my alcoholic son.  
I tried it all. Been thru it all. Keep the hope never & give up . Knowing
there are meds to help the cravings pellets to implant. On and on. Too much
when one day someone tried to kill him during his black out stage. Seeing my
son on life support not knowing if he will live or die has changed who I am
forever.  
I understand this horrible pain we all share all too well!

Reply

  * ![Jessie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jessie

December 17th, 2008 at 12:48 PM

This site is making me face the fact that I am enabling my daughter (25) she
finished an in house program about 3 months ago. When she came out she moved
to a new city, got a new job tried to get new friends. I don't know really how
she is doing, other then the fact that she is not keeping up with her bills
and it seems like an endless effort to help. She wants to come home and I
don't know how to say no. My Husband and I are well off and planning a trip
with our other younger daughter to celebrate her graduation from highschool
she is totally different from our older daughter. My 25 year old makes us feel
so guilty about the trip. She had such a promising future now shes just so
angery all the time. I don't know if she is using but I just feel that
something is not right. When I question her she gets really mad and tells me
she is fine. I love her so much and want her to do well.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

January 27th, 2009 at 5:57 PM

Jessie,

If you feel that something is not right, it probably isn't. You have to make
the decision to enable her or to cut her off. It is a lose, lose situation,
i'm afraid. I hope she is doing better, by now. If she is, you will know in
your heart, otherwise, pray for her.

Reply

  * ![Charles](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Charles

February 18th, 2009 at 9:36 PM

I feel like I could have written several of the comments on this website. My
29 year old wonderful son (before the addiction), a college graduate, was
arrested again tonight. Just hours before the arrest, I once again had the
delusion that he was clean. I have enabled, I have tried, I have cried, and I
have failed. One of the comments above is so true: lose/lose. He has lost so
much, and my family has lost my son to the ravages of the drug epidemic in
this county. Maybe we parents of addicts need a "bailout" ourselves. I KNOW
that I do. Remember the "War on Drugs"? I do believe that we have lost that
war. Tough Love? Yes it is. The person who wants to teach very young children
makes me feel so guilty, because I took it for granted that my children would
know better. What an idiot I was and am!

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen and Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen and Ed

February 19th, 2009 at 9:20 AM

That this is a common tragedy is demonstrated by the continuing stream of
readers both here and in other places where we've published variations on this
article - including Australia where it's been reprinted as a social services
handout.

But that doesn't fix anything, unhappily. Nor did the "War on Drugs" or
various other approaches, nor does "treatment" which, in the U.S., is still
obsessed with cult mentalities, discredited disease models, and being
satisfied with a less than 5% efficacy rate.

What does work? Occasionally we are able to work with families as a whole
because drug and alcohol abuse always occur within a context, and the abuse is
always a choice on the part of the user. That is the devistatingly obvious
flaw in most approaches to abuse and dependence, the idea that the person
using the drugs or abusing alcohol is "powerless" over their "addiction". This
is simply nonesense.

But so-called "addicts" and their apologists have succeeded in spreading this
myth far and wide until most people have come to accept it. And that means
that people continue to support the drug/alcohol abuse with the result that
the addict/alcoholic has absolutely no reason to change their behavior. Hand
me $8,000 a month, as one recent couple was, and I will hardly change a life
style that'll actually require me to be responsible for myself.

What can work? Weaning the person off of their access to financial support,
frequently with third party support, and meaning it. Refusing to be
blackmailed, emotionally or otherwise. Refusing to provide money to an addict
if you aren't giving equal amounts to your other children. Better yet, give to
the others and let the addict know that getting their share depends on
cleaning up first.

Other ideas? Remember that drug and alcohol use and abuse are always choices
that the abuser is making and they are choices that can be changed. Stop
rewarding the use and abuse.

Our sympathy to all of you - we have been on both ends of this problem and
understand the frustrations, hurt, anger, and, yes, dispair. But while you are
not able to control the outcomes, you aren't powerles to make changes that can
result in the best chances of favorable change in your son or daughter.

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

February 23rd, 2009 at 7:31 AM

Thank you to those that created this website - I am a mother of a 30 year old
I.V. methodone addict who has been using this oral form of medication to
inject into her body, she has chosen to do this for the last 7 years although
it feels like forever. The saddest thing about this for me at this incrediable
burnt out moment in time is the fact that she is raising a child. A child who
I love and adore and the carnage is hofific. Yes I have had legal custody,
those of you who will understand know that I have exhausted every avenue of
help and hope and am emotionally financially and psychologically burnt out. I
read other peoples stories and instantly understand, especially the quote
"Fear for my own saftey because of her level of rage".  
I do not mean to take away from others grief but sometimes I think that death
would be easier to deal with. I live in a nightmare. She also has a mental
health diagnosis: Mood disorder. Of course the drugs and she is a poly addict,
accentuate this condition.  
I have had custody of my grandaughter but the love and loyalty and disfunction
is such that she prefers to be with her mother as the roles in this
relationship are reversed, the child does the parenting.  
At this point in my life I am selling my home in this recession and moving
countries to get away from this madness. I will always have a safe home for my
grandaughter to come to should she wish that wherever I am in the world  
I dont even expect to be happy anymore, I just want some peace in my life.

Reply

  * ![Margaret Conroy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Margaret Conroy

February 25th, 2009 at 1:35 AM

I am a widowed mother of 3. My youngest, in his 30s is my concern. I have read
this with a view to him that he is not necessarily addicted to drugs, but
perhaps, addicted to video games. He is a college grad., has been unemployed
for a year, and not making much effort to find employment. Now living in my
basement, he spends his time playing video games and is very good at "working"
me. When I express my concerns, he argues that there are no jobs for him. I
have already had to refinance my mortgage in order to pay for a college loan
that I co-signed for him.  
Do I get "on him" about all I've done for him? Do I make threats of throwing
him out of the house?  
Where can I get help in dealing with this issue? If you can direct me I would
really appreciate it. Thank you.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

March 12th, 2009 at 5:11 PM

It will not do any good to get on him. Get tough. good luck

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen & Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen & Ed

March 13th, 2009 at 5:20 AM

Unhappily, as we have noted, your options are limited and talking won't help -
only actions will suffice.

We would suggest that while there are some factors in common with addiction,
this is much more apt to be a case of avoiding growing up. Apparently he went
from sheltered home to sheltered college back to burrowing in at "home" again.
Regardless, his behavior is still a choice on his part.

Time to ramp down the support. Set some deadlines for contributing or leaving.

We don't know where you are so it's difficult to suggest specific resources
but feel free to write us directly for more information.

Reply

  * ![Alithia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Alithia

March 28th, 2019 at 2:53 AM

Good morning, I am a South African mom. I lost my husband to cancer two years
ago and my two sons (22 and 25) were using drugs even before my husband became
ill. We tried everything and I know can see, after reading all the replies on
this site, that we as parents tried all we can, they were very young and did
not listen and the biggest mistake I guess we made was believing them, always
helping them out of messes they got into and forcing them into every therapy
we could think of, believing this is it.  
Sad to say, after my husband died thing only became worse and they started to
manipulate and mentally and verbally abuse me. By times they would even get
aggressive towards me pushing me around to get their way. Very soon they were
the parents and I the child. They ruled every aspect of my life. It was as if
I belonged to them, like property. They stole from me no matter what, they
took it without remorse. Their druggie friends occupied my house when I come
from work with no intention of respecting me or my home. I really started
fearing for my life and made a choice to take my own life. Just to put a end
to my hell. Then I met a lovely man. My boys treated him like trash. the tried
to intimidate him by frequently sending him text messages or voicemails
threatening his and his little girls life.  
Despite all of that and with numerous attempts from himself to make peace with
them (even though he did nothing wrong) it just kept on spinning more and more
out of control.  
After a year of dating, and when my oldest assaulted me in front of him he
took me away from it all to live with him.  
They then moved to my parents sucking them dry. My parents would not listen
when I told them to stop aiding the boys. I got married and my boys did not
attend the ceremony (still blaming me for leaving them for another man). Soon
my parents (being very ill) ask the boys to get out. They moved in with an
older girlfriend of my youngest.  
I had enough for even if they do not stay with us or my parents, they still
keep on sucking my parents dry and keep on demanding stuff I owned, stating it
is their inheritance. My new husband doesn't want anything to do with them and
said he will divorce me if I do not cut any relations with them.  
I feel I am placed in the middle (on the spot) to make a decision regarding
cutting them of and getting them out of every-bodies lives. I am so tired and
feel past hopeless.

Reply

  * ![Margaret Conroy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Margaret Conroy

March 13th, 2009 at 8:03 AM

Thank you very much for your input. Sometimes, especially as a single parent,
it's hard to trust my own instincts. If his father was alive I don't think he
would put up with his "failure to launch" nor would he have allowed two extra
years of college because he was failing subjects.  
He was diagnosed at age 9 as "classic ADD" and perhaps I've babied him because
of it.  
I will be talking with a counselor next week - a man, in order to get a male
perspective - and that may help. However your responses have also been very
helpful. Again, thank you.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen & Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen & Ed

March 13th, 2009 at 3:11 PM

You're very welcome and if you'd like to call next week and talk to one of us
we each have a lot of experience, some of which may apply. At least you'd have
someone more to talk to.

Ed's usually available by phone until; 8:00 p.m. Monday and Tuesday evenings
for free consults.

Reply

  * ![Margaret Conroy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Margaret Conroy

March 23rd, 2009 at 3:22 AM

Sorry to take so long getting back to you. Don't know that I'm getting the
"practical" advise I need with the counselor I spoke to.  
Please let me know how I can reach you by phone - that is, time zone and phone
number.  
Thank you.

Reply

  * ![Denise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Denise

September 4th, 2016 at 3:30 PM

Remember to do what we always do anyway, take what you like & leave the rest.
I feel supported in Alanon its aparent focus group. My caring thoughts to all
of us who still struggle

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

March 29th, 2009 at 6:30 AM

I am so glad to have found this web site. I to have a 26 year old daughter who
I am certain is on drugs. She was doing fine until a year ago. All the sudden
she could no longer afford to pay her bills, buy groceries, etc.  
We let her move into one of our rentals and she was doing fine until around
Christmas. She had all kinds of excusses why she could not pay her rent. We
let it slide because she is our daughter that is having a hard time. Then, she
just quit going to work all the while being reminded by us that her rent was
past due over and over again. Then, she spent her tax money and unemployment
checks on laptops, etc. and almost $3500.00 gone! Still no rent, no groceries,
no electricity, etc. Her behavior is irrational, loosing weight, I found drugs
in her apartment and THEN offered help in rehab or move. She did nothing so I
served her a 3 day notice to move. She is now staying in a motel room. She has
called me repeatedly to help her financially and I won't until she agree's to
rehab. I did supply some groceries two days ago just to find out that she
shared them with her low life drug friends… My heart is breaking as a parent
and I'm finding it harder and harder to practice tough love but know I must.
The last straw was yesterday when she got into a car accident and had her car
that WE gave her totalled. It was discovered she had no insurance, no current
registration and once again asking only for help and money. I declined both
and again only offered help with rehab. She called me stupid for thinking she
is on drugs and some other very painful comments. One would think these
painfull words alone would help me to stay strong and not enable her but my
heart is still breaking and am fighting the desire to help her since she will
be kicked out of her motel at noon tomorrow. How do I stop my heart from
breaking? I hate to see my own child homeless but know she must learn from her
actions. If anyone has words of hope it would really be appreciated right now.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen & Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen & Ed

March 29th, 2009 at 12:25 PM

We understand the heart ache, and the heartbreak.

Unhappily, most of us have this underlying belief that there is a good choice
in all situations - something that will make things right or better or okay.
But experience teaches us that all to often we are left with the least awful
of a lot of lousy choices.

When these time appear, as they have for you, we are stuck with looking at the
alternatives. Obviously your daughter isn't going to change her behavior as
long as she can avoid it - no matter the cost to her. You don't, however,
compound the problem by supporting her at an ever increasing cost to you, a
cost which merely helps her to dig herself into an ever deeper hole.

It really does help - albeit only slightly - to remember that she has no
interest in changing at this point in time. That doesn't mean that the time
won't come when she will decide that drugs and motels aren't all that great a
life.

It might help to call and talk to one of us and we are usually available
Monday - Friday or read additional notes for families on our website.

Again, you have our support with a very very difficult situation.

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

March 29th, 2009 at 8:07 PM

Thank you for your words of wisdom. This is just what I need during this
difficult time, someone who know's what I'm going thru.  
Today was another very difficult day. After loosing sleep last night over our
daughters situation, hating the fact that I MUST be strong and not enable her
any more and also realizing that although I must be strong with/for her, I
must also allow myself the time to grieve. As most of you probably know only
to well, it is such a feeling of loss and uncertainty right now. I find my
emotions going up and down. My fear that I may loose her forever is almost to
much to handle. My husband has reminded me that we must step back and allow
her to get to a point of her asking for help and although I do realize this in
my mind, I wish I could realize this in my heart.  
I now realize that my daughters hatred and anger towards me are because I
chose early on to not believe her lies and have pointed this out to her when
she would call for money. Maybe I should have been like the rest of my family
and just shut up and not said anything except that I would not help her but I
just could not bring myself to listen to her obvious lies and not comment
back. I have learned since that I must make any phone conversations with her
short and sweet and to the point. No more calling her on her lies, just say no
to her request and let it go. It has actually gotten to the point to where I
have chose not to even answer the phone when I see it's her calling and not
respond to any of her constant text messages. It makes it easier to not hear
any more sob stories or lies and just let it go. I have made it very clear
that the only help I will give her is rehab. I just hope that message sticks
with her when/if the time comes that she realizes she needs it and wants it.  
Thank you again for your words of wisdom.

Reply

  * ![Monique](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Monique

April 4th, 2009 at 1:52 PM

I received a call last night from my 25 year old son. He was crying and told
me that he needed help. He has been on and off drugs and alcohol since the age
of 15. My son has a heart condition and I am so afraid of getting that call.
What can we do to help him? I am 50 years old and have a 16 year old daughter
living at home with us. I desperately need some help. He has tried to kill
himslef once and is trying to change his ways.

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

April 4th, 2009 at 11:54 PM

Monique,I truly feel your heartache. In my own situation I have had that same
call from my daughter on more occasions than I can almost take. On the last
call she made to me with this threat I told her I was calling 911 to get her
the help she needed since she had denied my help in getting her to a Psych. My
medical training has always taught me to take suicide threats very seriously
so of course I did with my own child. I was totally shocked when her entire
story changed after I said I was calling 911, so much so that it almost
floored me. To date I have not received another call from her regarding that
subject. She had cut her wrist in her late teens and I did the same thing…
called 911 and got her into counseling so I believe she knew I was serious
about calling. Luckily, when she did cut her wrist it was a superficial scrape
but the undertones of her actions made me realize that she needed help. Most
people who have existing mental disorders, the use of drugs or alcohol only
amplify the disorder. I consider myself lucky that to date, her threats appear
to be just that… a threat following my denial of money.  
It was difficult to get her help then and even more difficult to do this now
when our children are grown and can make decisions for themselves. We can't
force them to get help unless we have a court order and it leaves us to have
no choice but to call 911 so they can be checked out and if the police feel
they are unstable, they can do a 51/50 lockup for their own safety and
hopefully get them the help they need. My feelings on this is that in my own
situation, I felt that if a third party went in there such as the police, if
nothing else they would find her under the influence or the drugs in her
posession and she could be taken to jail for that alone. Although I don't want
to see my child in jail, for me, it was far better a choice than to possibly
have her really go through with her threat. If the police intervene, a judge
can also give a court order for them to go to rehab while on probation and if
caught with drugs or alcohol while on probation, they are in violation and can
go back to jail.  
Although this choice was what I felt most comfortable with it may not be for
everyone.

My prayers are with you in this most difficult time.

Reply

  * ![Monique](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Monique

April 5th, 2009 at 3:33 PM

Thank you so much for your input Ruthie. I talked to my son today and he
sounded much better, I know that he is trying to get clean. He told me today
that he has got to get his life together. I also told him that I am here for
him when he needs to talk, but I would not send him money for drugs or
alcohool. He said that it was up to him to get better and he promised me that
he would get better. I also told him to live in the moment and not in the past
or the future. When he said goobye to me and said that he loved me, I know
that the day will come for him to be better. I also told him that we loved him
and that would never change but I would not be the one bying his drugs, he did
not want money he said and just before hanging up he said again that I love
you and I will change.

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

April 6th, 2009 at 4:21 AM

Monique,  
I am very glad to hear that your son realizes he is in need of help and has
the desire to get clean. That's a major start. I know first hand how difficult
it is to hear your child crying and upset. As a parent it breaks our hearts.
Although we must be strong as parents it does not mean we don't hurt. My last
conversation with my daughter involved me being strong and telling her that
the only help I would offer her was rehab and holding firm to that but, strong
or not, once I hung up the phone I cried my heart out. Not only does it hurt
that we must see or hear our children in this situation but also the hurtfull
words they can say to us . I try to find peace in my heart knowing that I have
planted the seed that we would help her into rehab once she makes the choice
that she wants to change but I am still waiting for that call that she is
indeed ready. It can't come soon enough for me. I want my daughter back and
our family whole again.  
I wish you the best with your son and hope that all works out well for you and
your family. As difficult as it is, we must all continue to hold hope that
things will change for the better.

Take care.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

April 10th, 2009 at 7:05 PM

I am the mother of a 22-year-old addict, and a 20-year-old with mental health
problems. I won't tell their stories now - you could just photo-copy all these
parents' stories, we are all so much alike. There are more common denominators
than differences.

I am working on the detachment, I am not enabling, I am protecting my
relationship with my husband and also guarding our finances. I know there is
not much more I can do. What I need now is some HOPE. What are the common
denominators in the people who do recover long-term?

Right now, I have almost no hope. I think if I had a glimmer of hope, and
maybe knew something I could do that would be positive, life would be more
tolerable.

Thanks!

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

April 10th, 2009 at 10:00 PM

Hi Dawn,As I'm sure most of us parents of Children addicted have done, I have
read so many statistics, reports, etc. to find just the same answer. Some say
alot depends on what drugs they are on, etc. but from what I have read and
seen first hand, it tends more to be their desire to be free from the disease
that matters the most. We all hear that someone must reach "rock bottom"
before they are willing to get help and yet again, in my own situation I have
seen my daughter hit what I would consider "rock bottom" on several occasions
but still not asking/willing to get help. What gets me thru my own situation
is that I use my best friends husband as an example. He was an alcoholic for
years who had been in and out of jail over a span of several decades. We all
knew the "real" person he was when he was not drinking but little hope was
held that he would ever change. All of the sudden, one day, he just made a
conscience decision that he was not going to do that anymore and got into some
very intense counseling. When I had questioned him once about this, his
response to me was that he finally realized that he needed to deal with his
"ghost". He had experiences in his life that he couldn't deal with and found
it easier to just escape by drinking. All those years he had been running
instead of dealing and it got him no where. That was almost 10 years ago now
and we have the wonderful friend back that we always knew was there. When I
start to feel very discouraged about my situation, I call him. He has been a
rock of not only support but hope as well. I've seen first hand that it CAN
happen! I am a true believer that no one can do this alone. My belief system
is that anyone that makes the decision to change needs counseling along with
medical supervision to make the transition back into the real world as easy as
possible. Dealing with whatever they are running from is a MUST in my book.
While in my own situation I found it hard to believe that our daughter would
have anything to run from since I feel we gave her the best life possible, the
reality of it is that I truly don't know what all she has gone thru in her
life. She has put herself in some very bad situations and God only knows where
that took her. She spent her teen years running away and trying to grow up too
fast and I really don't know what could have or did happen during that time
period. This is where as a parent we want to just reach out and hug them and
let them know that they can talk to us about anything and we will try to make
it all better but if their running from their own mind, only they can make it
all better with the help of a good therapist that they can talk with open and
honestly and feel no guilt or shame in expressing their feelings and
experiences with. Also, no matter if its drugs or alcohol someone is using,
the need for medical supervision is a must. Detox from any of these substances
can be life threatning and they need to be detoxed gradually to avoid any
serious side effects of quiting.  
I believe there is always hope and we must hang on to that hope. I would be
lying if I said I don't get sad and hurt and all the other feelings we parents
have when we see our children going through this but to give up hope would
just bring us down even more than we already are. Again, in my own situation I
have found this easier to do once I distanced myself from my daughters
problems and just put the message out to her that we will get her help once
she is ready and will not help her with anything but that.  
My heart truly feels for you at this time but I want to encourage you to keep
the hope alive. I have seen first hand that it can happen.

Take care.

Reply

  * ![Monique](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Monique

April 11th, 2009 at 7:31 AM

Talked to my son on Wednesday, he told me that he has been going to his
meetings and is also in contact with his sponsor. It is a big relief to me and
his dad and sister. He also told me that he went to put the money down at a
College so that he can continue his education and wants to be able to help
others in the future. I told him that we will support him with this decision
and would pay for his education but the money would go directly to the college
and he was happy with that. Is it a bad thing or am I enabling him again?? I
just want him to be happy. I love my son so much and have been through so much
with him? He is so kind and thoughtful to other people and has such a big
heart. I hope that he means it and that I can go to sleep at night and not
worry and cry myself to sleep.

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

April 12th, 2009 at 12:50 AM

Monique,  
I'm so glad to hear that your son is getting the help he needs. I'm happy for
you and your family. I'm not sure if it is enabling your son by paying for his
education since the money would be going directly to the school but I do think
you should be able to stay in contact with his counselor and make sure he
goes. If for some reason he stops, you can then have him drop the classes by
the designated date so you can get a refund of your money.  
This will require alot of work on your part. Besides paying for the units
there is also books, etc. to consider. These items will need to be purchased
as well and as you said, you will not give him the money directly which means
you will need to be there with him to purchase the materials for him if he
can't do it himself. If he's working or has some source of income, maybe you
could come to some understanding that you will pay for the untis while he pays
for the materials?  
I do hope that he starts off slow since his recovery should be first and
foremost. Having too much responsibility and stress in his life could lead to
the same old habit of escape again… As all college grads know, the studying,
test and finals can be quite stressfull. I would like to think that his
sponsor will remind him of this so he takes it slow at the start.  
He has made the right start by going to his meetings and staying in touch with
his sponsor and this makes me very happy for not only him but your family as a
whole. I wish you and your family the best.  
As for my situation, my daughter is coming over tomorrow for Easter dinner. I
was surprised she wanted to come over since she was so angry at me for calling
her out on her addiction and my suggestion of rehab but, if she wants to be
here as part of the family for the holiday, I will welcome her with open arms.
Although I must be strong, I am still a parent who wants my child to know that
no matter what, I will always love her. On a brighter note, she has gotten her
job back and is working just limited hours so she can attend her counseling
and also just purchased a new/used car. Although I can't dwell on the past, my
regret is that I didn't put my foot down sooner and step out of the enabling
picture and force her to do things on her own. I won't dwell on the past or
the could have, should have's, would have's and just continue to move forward
from here. Good or bad each new day is an opportunity for a brighter future.
Some days are better than others but my hope continues on no matter what.

Happy Easter.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen & Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen & Ed

April 12th, 2009 at 8:39 AM

In reading and writing about all of the difficult situations parents face with
their drug and alcohol abusing children - children of all ages - it is also
heartening to read about those of you who have seen posative changes. It's
easy to forget that many people do in fact leave their self-destructive
behaviors behind.

Part of the on-going problem remains, however. There is so much mythology that
has been peddled as fact that it's hard to know what to believe. "Bottoming
out" is one such myth. This one is based on the equally false notion that drug
and alcohol abuse are "progressive diseases."

Equally unfounded notions include the idea that abuse and addiction are
diseases - certainly abuse isn't - and that most current treartment programs
are effective - they aren't. The vast majority of treatment regimens are
counter-productive - creating and justifying more abuse than they end.

What does work? Unhappily, nothing works predictably. It simply isn't possible
for one of us to change another's behavior. But we can support posative change
(paying for college directly to the college is an excellent example) and
refuse to mitigate negative consequences.

Another important possibility is to do your own research - real research, not
treatment program marketing hype. You can find links to independent research
on our website and learn what actually does work. You can also find help on
this site, listings of professionals who do real treatment for real people.

Behavior change is a difficult process, and most of us don't start until we
feel sick enough of how we're living to take a chance on the possibility of an
unknown but better future.

Remember that drugs and alcohol do provide predictable and effective short
term relief and that switching to a long term perspective is hard - as any
smoker knows.

But successful change is possible, even likely, with the right information,
assistance, and willingnes to wait - hard as that is.

Remember, most drug and alcohol abusers do "age out" of their misuse.

So, again, beware of false promises, myth based "powerless lifelong recovery",
and other indications that you are being "sold", not helped.

Reply

  * ![Debra](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debra

August 25th, 2016 at 3:19 PM

A little history. I am mother of a 42 year old son and since junior high
school I have been bailing him out. He has never been arrested or in jail, but
has had several failed marriages and relationships over the years due to his
inability to keep a job and consistently stay off drugs. This past year he
stole $5,000 dollars from me and his step-father and at that point I told him
he was out of my life until he got clean and sober and made restitution for
the money. He moved in with yet another woman and did drugs for another year
when he called and said she left him and he was stranded. He had no car, home,
money or job, so I agreed to pick him up, but only if he was willing to go to
the Salvation Army men's shelter and rehab program. Currently, he has been in
rehab at the shelter for about 45 days. He says is doing well and just
informed me he has committed to the 12 month program, as he did not feel the
90 days would be enough. My concern is how to encourage without enabling. I am
meeting him for the first time in two days to take him to lunch. I know his
clothes were stolen and he has no money. I plan to take donations of men's
clothes, etc. from our neighborhood for the shelter, but should I give him a
few dollars for cigarettes etc. I hate contributing to such a bad habit, but
with trying so hard to kick the drugs, is it to much to expect him to give up
cigarettes too? I want to encourage and be there for him, but do not want to
fall into the trap of enabling. He seems to be very serious about changing his
life, but I have been down this road so many times before. Please, anyone have
any advice?

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

August 30th, 2016 at 8:14 AM

My son is 31 and on his 4th dwi, we stopped bailing him out on his third and
now 4th, he thinks he might get some prison time. He's been an drug and and
alcoholic for maybe 10 years now! He came to me and ask me for lawyer money
and said the only reason he drinks because he's afraid of going to the
slammer! Talk about manipulation! I said no, we couldn't afford it. I am
scared and out of my mind because I have to let him go and let him hit his own
bottom and be responsible for his own actions? I can't let him take us with
him. I started going to Alan-non and hate that I have to go, but it is helping
me to help myself, once I'm there I get a lot of help out of the group and
Everyone there is going through the same thing in different ways. I blame
myself for his addiction. I know its hard but I have to survive this one day
at a time. I'm not a big religious person but, God bless you all!

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

March 20th, 2017 at 3:46 PM

My son went through this Program through Salvation Army and he needs nothing
in there they give him everything and he will earn it through work. Great
program BUT they do get out and it has only been a year and my son is right
back to how he was when he went in. So I am just sad these drugs they are
choosing are so brain damaging it will be a life long fight.

  * ![Angie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Angie

August 17th, 2018 at 11:38 AM

I am so thankful that I found this site. I also have a 42 year old son that
has been struggling with alcohol addiction. He just got out of the hospital 3
days ago. I have always been there for him hoping that it would be the last
time and it isnt. His drinking got so out of control this time do I pulled
away from him and haven't spoke to him in a month. This is so different
because I have never done this before. Instead i am now going to Alanon
meetings for the support. I feel so guilty and his friends are telling me he
feels alone and like I have given up on him. I love him very much but I can't
keep doing this anymore. I am finally allowing God to take the wheel and help
my son make the right choice and get help. I am 65 years old and it is taking
a toll on my health so I had to make different choices for me. This is years
of trying to keep him out of shelters or the streets by paying for hotels
every time he walks away from jobs and apartments. I pray i am doing the right
thing this time because his drink I g has only gotten worse.  
Thank you so much for sharing your story and God bless your son and your
family.

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

April 13th, 2009 at 7:43 PM

Thanks, everyone. I feel strength in the fact that I am not alone in this. I
also feel dismay that the problem is so widespread.

This is the most painful situation I can fathom, and I appreciate you all
taking the time to respond to me.

Reply

  * ![John Marconii](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### John Marconii

April 14th, 2009 at 9:31 AM

Ruthie I had an EXACTLY same situation to yours, dot in dot, but my daughter
is 27 and now she also joined escort service. What else could be worse? If you
wish to contact me, it would be my pleasure to share my experience and to
listen to yours.  
I do not agree with some of you here. Talking about genetics addiction etc.
that’s (in my opinion) it is a complete nonsense. Neither I or my wife we have
never ever (and not our parents, or grandparents) taken any substances at all.
We’ve immigrated about 20 years ago to the US from one of the country in
Eastern Europe. Our life values and traditions are quite different then what
our daughter has had learn here. Her complete education (including some
private schools) was done here in the US. We (in on the other hand got our
degrees in Europe). Someone might ask what that has anything to do with the
described above situation. It does a lot! In my opinion and I highlight that
in my personal opinion the ones who should be blame for a fate of our children
are:  
• The government itself. Why? Because of lack of a real and true engagement in
the life of those young souls. In the US there are many restrictions but
almost NOTHING done to show them (the young people) the alternatives. The US
is maybe…and again maybe the strongest military power in the world, but at the
same time its people are very isolated, misinformed and having problems with
social interaction. So called American Dream is just a simple utopia and
propaganda that fits well an so called élite, but just looking at the
statistical data taken from many European countries, it is obvious that the
quality of life over there I higher than in here. That Dream was a true
reality maybe 50 or 70 years ago, but not now.  
• The schools and the whole educational system. I’ve watched my daughter
progress in school and she was one the best students through the whole
education circle, but I’ve seen so many (in my opinion) poor methods of
teaching here. Besides the methods themselves, there is lack of discipline,
lack of real competition (because it is too stressful for students =
nonsense), lack of justified distribution of funds and much more. For instance
those who are good with let’s say football are financially rewarded, others
are not. That’s completely wrong!  
• Media = propaganda. American news are not really news at all, but “smart”
prepared feed for masses. I’ve seen that before and I am resistant to that
type of “information”, but millions are not and are easily manipulated.  
• Way of so called: “American Life”. Teaching our children that we’re the
best, strongest, richest and the rest doesn’t count will create isolationism,
pompousness, arrogance and in the long run enemies. Openness, understanding,
respect, tolerance and proper cultural exchange, on the other hand will create
much larger and on the bigger scale richness to all of us in every aspect of
life.  
I do apologize any of you who might be insulted by my remarks. Some of you may
ask, if I don’t agree with all that, why am I living here? And my answer to
that is: I’m already making plans to go back to Europe.  
Summarizing this (in my opinion) this is what can be done to protect future
generation. Shield them VERY GOOD, talk to them a lot, read them even more
(forget about TV), teach them tradition and values in life, have discipline
and be consequent. That doesn’t mean to beat them up, but have strict rules
that have to follow. Travel with them all over the World (if possible), show
them different cultures and values, show them how other nation live, teach
them other languages (very, very important).  
How many languages you know - that many times you are a person said Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe  
Good luck to all of you.

Reply

  * ![Janet Chambers](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Janet Chambers

April 14th, 2009 at 2:50 PM

I am the mother of a 25 year old daughter who is addicted to drugs (I don't
know which kind, but there are several), alcohol and gambling. To say the past
7 years have been hell is to put it lightly other than the year she stayed
sober while she was pregnant with our grandchild (thank God). Our grandson who
is now 4 is with his father.  
J has been in and out of our home for a couple of years now. For the last 3
weeks I don't know where she has been. We have had contact via texting and
phone calls. We do pay the $10 a month for a mobile phone because I just can't
stand not to have some link.  
She says she wants inpatient rehab. She has no insurance of course (she hasn't
worked in over a year) and wants us to pay for a private facility. She has
never been in any rehab programs and while we are not poor, we are not wealthy
by any means. I am trying to get her to try state funded or sliding scale
programs at least for this first time and am getting a lot of "you don't love
me" and "my friend's parents have done this for them". I don't know what is
right. We have tried to temper the "tough love" with being helpful but this is
new territory. I don't want to make her worse, but I don't want to be an
enabler either. I feel like this is something she will have to for the most
part do on her own. Am I way off base?  
Like many other unexpected addicts, this is a young woman who was a high
school honor student, who held down TWO part time jobs, who had a BRIGHT
future ahead of her. I don't know what happened, but it is all wrong now. We
also have a son who is getting ready to graduate from university next month.
Whatever happened to J did not happen to our son, so I just don't know what to
think.  
Any advice would be appreciated.  
Thank you, Janet

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen and Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen and Ed

April 14th, 2009 at 7:27 PM

It's always very difficult to decide what to do, and where to draw the line.
It's especially so when there is, as always, too little information to go on.
But there are a few realities:

1) those who are motivated to change usually manage it;  
2) those who expect others (parents, friends, employer, counslors) to invest
in them first rarely accomplish anything;  
3) pick rehab carefully - since she is bright and capable her best shot will
be at a place that values that and builds on it - not any of the usual AA/NA
based places that disparage intelligence and independence;  
4) long term residential is usually counterproductive - the drug abuse has
developed in context and will only be fixed in context (not that a change in
geography isn't helpful and even recommended);  
5) additionally, she didn't consult you about becoming a drug/alcohol abuser -
and it was her choice - so she doesn't have a lot of room to demand particular
placements.  
6) watch out for anyone pushing the long debunked "disease" model or who
pushes "powerlessness." Smart users quickly learn to use these false concepts
to manipulate their families.

Otherwise?

If she is actually motivated and invested she will succeed. There are usually
some fits and starts along the way, but it's more than possible.

To educate yourself, pick up a copy of Changing For Good so that you will
better understand how real change occurs and not be misled by rehab sales
reps.

Read through the Smart Recovery website.

Good luck to you, and to her.

Reply

  * ![Ruthie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruthie

April 14th, 2009 at 8:09 PM

Janet,  
please see the text from Mary Ellen and Ed.  
In my own situation I contacted the County and found avail. help when/if my
daughter ever decides to go. If there is no income such as in both our
daughters situations, there is no charge (so i've been told). I have gone so
far as to get the necessary info for her if she wants it but I won't make the
call for her or pay thousands of dollars either (in California where I live
the cost of rehab can go as high as $10,000.00). During my own research I
found that Counseling and Psych was also avail. at no charge to my daughter
due to her income and this is something she has been doing for the past
several weeks now or should I say, since we cut off the money supply and the
help. For her, finding a good counslor/Psych has helped with alot of her
issues . Again, I gave her the info but did not make the call for her; this
was for her to do if she truly wanted it.  
I also think that if they WANT to change then they will. No one can make that
choice for them although I wish it was that easy.  
My daughter did come over for Easter and we had a wonderful visit.  
We to have another daughter who was an honor student. At the age of 14 she
wanted a pair of $160.00 shoes and when we refused, she got her work permit
that same week so I hired her in my office to earn the money she wanted for
those shoes. That was the last pair of expensive shoes she ever bought! I
still chuckle inside when she shows me a new pair of shoes that she is happy
with that she bought at Walmart :)  
My point is that children are just like any other person we would meet… all
individuals with thoughts of their own. Their choices are THEIR choices.  
I can't tell you how liberating it has been to say no to our oldest daughter.
It is such a tremendous weight lifted off our shoulders. At Easter, I couldn't
help but notice that she had her nails professionally done along with new
highlights in her hair. In the past I would have been furious that she could
spend money she didn't have to get this done but at Easter, I said nothing
because I know I won't be there to pick up the pieces when her rent is due or
car payment and she dosen't have the money. These are HER choices, right or
wrong and I hope that she learns along the way.  
As for the drugs, she still denys it even after I found her with it several
weeks ago but, as I have explained to her, I will be happy to talk with her
about anything but money issues and when she is ready for help, I have the
info avail. but I will not bring it up to her again. I planted the seed and
realize thats all I can do.  
John, I do believe what you say as far as "genetics". My family and my
husbands family are from another country and both our families, including
ourselves have spent our lives trying to better ourselves to be able to have a
better life for us and our children. THAT is the American dream. Our belief is
that our parents left their country to come to America where jobs were more
avail. and the opportunity to work IF that's what your desire was. I can't
imagine NOT taking advantage of that opportunity. We have always instilled
hard work and education in our children as did our parents. Maybe that's why
it blows my mind that our daughter would rather be homeless, no groceries and
yet would rather sit around and get high on drugs rather than take total
advantage of the opportunities that not only are avial. but that she had at
one point. I thought after her teens years were behind her that maybe she had
learned a lesson and would never want to go back to that way of life but i
guess I was wrong. That's the sad part. I see so much potential in her. She is
so caring and giving and just has the kindest heart but does not seem to care
that much about herself. This is what I wanted her to get counsling for. I
want her to know how precious she really is and feel that away about herself.
To have self worth and self esteem and to respect herself and her body.  
As one parent to others… God bless us all and our children.

Reply

  * ![Carol R Cann, MA, LCPC, CADC](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol R Cann, MA, LCPC, CADC

April 14th, 2009 at 9:30 PM

Hi Janet,

I am sorry to hear of the situation with your daughter (and, of course the
similarly-difficult situations of the other parents who have posted here).
Since you have asked a specific question for advice on rehab programs, and
this is something I have a great deal of experience with (as a counselor who
works with adults who have substance use problems and their families) , I will
give an opinion -- based on the information you have shared here.

It's great that your daughter has decided to go into inpatient rehab. Most of
the private ones are incredibly expensive but that does not necessarily mean
that they provide better care -- just plusher surroundings. Please do not
allow her to "guilt you" into thinking you aren't demonstrating love by not
paying for something you will be financially-stressed to do. I don't know
where you live, but I do know that around the Chicago and Milwaukee areas
(where I am), there are some sliding-fee programs that are quite good; you
could probably find something similar in your area. Part of coming to terms
with her addictions will be experiencing the consequences of her choices and
behaviors, which could mean a state-funded or sliding-scale rehab program. No
one (including you) owes her a luxury rehab stay. An inpatient rehab program
is a great way for a person to get clean and sober and get a concentrated look
at what recovery might mean. It's a great experience to be with others in the
same situation -- there will be young and old, male and female, professionals
and laborers -- all in the exact same place, learning how to begin to live
without addictions. And I mean it when I say "begin to live without
addiction," as the first 28 days is only the very first step. But an inpatient
program can help a person bond with others, learn some of their deeper issues,
and get some ideas about tools for staying clean and sober in the future.

Support her choice for inpatient rehab but hold your ground on finding
something you can afford -- that is already showing her your concern.  
Good luck and have courage.

Carol R Cann

Reply

  * ![Janet Chambers](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Janet Chambers

April 15th, 2009 at 5:21 PM

Thanks to all of you for your responses. They are so very helpful. I have
support in the family, but YOU know what I'm going through. I texted some
numbers of sliding scale and state funded rehabs to her. I think you are all
correct. That is all I can do other than provide the transportation to the
rehab. SHE has to do the work.  
Thanks again, Janet

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

May 14th, 2009 at 3:06 PM

I am seeking advice/support from all you warm, caring parents. My previously-
mentioned son is trying (for the second time) to detox with Suboxone by
himself. He doesn't want inpatient or outpatient treatment. The last time, he
says he was clean 8 months. He lives with his dad, and has pawned all his
belongings, and many of his dad's in support of his habit. His dad keeps him
as isolated as possible in a gated community, no car, limited phone.

My son now wants to come stay with me. He says a change of scene and location
(a couple of miles from dad's) will help, and he knows I will provide food and
pleasant surroundings. My HEART wants so much to bring him in and "help" him
detox, but my MIND knows that he probably wants more freedom to meet with
dealers, and that he is very likely to steal from me, which he has never done
so far. In a weak moment last week, I said he could come, and now I realize I
probably made a mistake. How do I tell him? I hear he is very excited about
coming to my house. I do not want to be co-dependent. But, the mom (and R.N.)
in me wants to provide an atmosphere of healing. Since I already said "yes", I
need a script to go back on my offer without making him feel hopeless or
unsupported. He is always very respectful and sweet to me. He always expresses
regret and shame about his oxycodone addiction. He is not rebellious or
argumentative with me. How do I talk with him?

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen and Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen and Ed

May 14th, 2009 at 4:47 PM

You're not in an enviable situation and there is much to consider. Frankly,
his father's "solution" of isolating isn't exactly helpful. That's assuming
responsibility for your son's behavior which makes it quite easy to return to
using.

You might want to consider a third alternative. A written agreement between
you and your son under which he can stay with you for a defined period of
time, contributing what he can (in chores if not cash), and that he will leave
immediately if he does this or that or whatever. Think very defined pre-
nuptual agreement with every detail spelled out and with his resonsibilities
and consequences spelled out.

There is usually a middle ground between being a chump and being hard hearted.
Think of help that supports progress in an adult, not those activities which
discourage growing up or reward staying drug abusive.

Adult help, adult expectations, etc.

And our best wishes to both of you.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

May 15th, 2009 at 2:08 PM

Thanks so much. On the way home from work, I was thinking of this very thing,
but wondering if I sounded like a naive fool to try. The thing is, he has done
nothing to me (so far). No stealing. I want him to live more as an adult, not
a captive child. He can't get a place of his own (yet), but how will he ever?

Just one big worry - is it even possible that he can detox AND stay clean on
his own? Is relapse inevitable? Should I make counseling or treatment one of
the items on the contract?

Has anyone out there had similar experiences?

Thanks so much.

Reply

  * ![Carol R Cann, MA, LCPC, CADC](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol R Cann, MA, LCPC, CADC

May 16th, 2009 at 8:30 AM

Dawn, you mentioned that your son is "detoxing" on Suboxone. There are a few
things about this that you might be interested in knowing. First thing,
Suboxone is available by prescription only (legally), so he ought to be
connected with a doctor who is certified to prescribe this. (They have to take
a special course and pass a test.) Suboxone is the brand name for
buprenorphine, which is something like methadone, in that it is a controlled
substance prescribed by a professional that replaces the opiod the person was
addicted to with something that also causes dependence but is less "abusable."
Suboxone is meant to be given as a part of treatment, such as counseling,
setting goals, learning to avoid triggers and situations where using might
take place.

Of course, there is no way to predict whether or not your son will be
successful in his plan (each person is unique and their ability to overcome
addiction is also a unique property); but generally speaking, his plan does
not sound as though it will maximize the potential for recovery. The agreement
spelling out responsibilities and consequences seems like a beneficial
structure in the present; however, if he is not involved in a treatment
program to help him learn tools to handle stress, emotions, and future
behavior, it sounds like a "set up" for him. Good luck to both of you.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen & Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen & Ed

May 16th, 2009 at 6:49 PM

It's important to also remember that people leave their abusive and addictive
bahaviors behind in many different ways. The most important components to
change are:

1) Believing that he can;  
2) Being self-motivated;  
3) Being supported by family and peers;  
4) Having access to good professional support;  
5) Having access to good medical support.

Good support is not what's available in most treatment programs. Good help
stresses self-empowerment, not "powerlessness"; does not adhere to a disease
model; and has actual trained professionals who use CBT, assertiveness
training, nutrition, relaxation, and the development of alternative coping
skills.

Regardless, people recover - fully - in unexpected ways all the time.

For your part, clear expectations and consequences are most important.
Remember, being the drug and alcohol "police" is a sure route to disater. He
is responsible - for developing the habit, and for leaving it behind. It was a
choice he made. He can also choose to quit.

Good luck.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

May 17th, 2009 at 4:08 PM

Thanks very much for your replies. My son has no insurance. This is a big
problem, but I could not afford his COBRA anymore, and he was using the
insurance to "doctor shop". We live in So. Fla, the HOTBED of oxycodone
addiction. The doctor who gives my son his suboxone is licensed and has taken
the requisite training, but he offers no support - in fact, he is one of the
doctors who supplies oxys to people. The type of treatment all of you
recommend is not available to us, as it is expensive. The free treatment
around here is based on AA/NA, and is full of parolees and street people. (New
connections!) I am an RN, and am very aware of what suboxone is - I don't like
it, but he is afraid of detox symptoms and feels he is not strong enough to do
it without it. Anyway, I drew up a contract, but he has not contacted me or
returned my calls. I think he might have relapsed, or he would call. I will
save your comments, Carol, Maryellen, and Ed, and refer to them 1) to help me
get through this and 2) in case my son gets serious and I am in a position to
try to help.

THANK YOU, THANK YOU for your time and knowledge.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen & Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen & Ed

May 17th, 2009 at 11:42 PM

You might also look for a "Smart Recovery" meetings in your area to refer him
to. Smart is research based and meant to be short term, not forever.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

June 10th, 2009 at 6:48 PM

An update for all you caring and supportive people out there, and especially
Mary Ellen and Ed:

My son came to my house to detox off suboxone (which he and I do not recommend
for others!). It has been a very rough two weeks, but he is now out of the
woods. It is his 18th day clean (from everything). He is feeling much better,
has been out with family members, got his hair cut. We found a Smart Recovery
outpatient facility nearby and he is going to call them. He is very
determined, hopeful, and excited about his future.  
His good friend was recently clean for 30 days, took one oxy and relapsed, and
he was very affected by that. He says that he will NEVER take the "first one"
again! I pray he can do it. He has a lot of loving family members, and says he
will get into counseling. He broke off all relationships with dealers and most
of all, doctors, who were supplying him.

I am actually very hopeful. He is back - his personality is restored, and he
is my son again. I am ever mindful that this will be a lifelong struggle, and
he may slip again, but he is very, very determined, and wants very much to
succeed. His birthday is tomorrow, and he says it is like his actual BIRTH day
\- he is starting over. PLEASE say a prayer for him and for all other addicts
- for their strength to fight this thing.

Thanks again to all of you.

Dawn

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

June 20th, 2009 at 7:36 PM

Dear Dawn and Son,  
My prayers for you both. If he doesn't cheat, he will never have to worry
about going back to that hell again. Have strength, you and only you have the
power to take the power back. Good luck.

Reply

  * ![Anon](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Anon

July 30th, 2009 at 12:39 AM

My heart tugged a little reading some of these posts. In the event it helps
anyone:  
I was addicted to pills. It started out with a prescription that was poorly
monitored and prescribed, which spun out of control into a full-blown
addiction to the drug and others. My family was at wits end for a year,
shouldered many unpredictable bills, and weathered many episodes of
withdrawal, relapse, and lying in that time. Two family members took me in at
different times, one for a week, one for the months when I made it through and
actually quit. More than 3 years later, I'm 'clean'. I don't think about
returning to the drugs. Sometimes people really do get better. But ultimately,
the addicted person has to be ready. You won't know when that moment comes,
and you may face many false starts and lies. I wish I could remember enough
from that period to tell you what happened to turn things around, but I
remember my family not giving up on me- and setting firm limits. Most cut
contact completely, one or two made very limited contact with me. They also
attended something like NA and NAMI to help themselves through it. I feel what
many of you are going through, best of luck.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

August 1st, 2009 at 7:55 PM

Anon, Hope you are still working for your sobritiy. I'm still suffering the
loss of my daughter and really need to know you are still trying to suceed in
overcoming the beast that took my child. I know it must be very hard. you have
my prayers.

Reply

  * ![Janet Chambers](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Janet Chambers

August 9th, 2009 at 1:46 PM

I have used this website as a help to me through my daughter's addiction. She
passed away July 31. The cause of death hasn't been officially determined but
preliminary tests indicate overdose. Jennifer was in rehab and clean for 3
months prior to her death. It was like having my daughter back. I'm so
grateful we could have that time. Thank you so much for the advice and support
you give others. Above all, NEVER give up.

Reply

  * ![MONIQUE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### MONIQUE

August 10th, 2009 at 3:05 PM

I am so sorry to hear of your loss…. I AM GOING THROUGH A REALLY HARD TIME
WITH MY YOUNGEST SON, HE IS 25 AND HAS BEEN ON AND OFF DRUGS AND ALCOHOOL
SINCE HE WAS 15. I RECEIVED A CALL FROM HIM SAYING THAT HE USED HIS CHEQUE FOR
EXTASY AND ALCOHOOL, AND NOW HE IS STAYING AT A SHELTER. I HAVE BEEN CRYING
SINCE. AS A MOTHER IT IS HEARTBREAKING TO KNOW THAT MY SON IS STAYING AT A
SHELTER. I REALIZED THAT THERE IS NOTHING I CAN DO TO HELP, BECAUSE I KNOW BY
PAYING HIS RENT HE WILL ONLY CONTINUE HIS ADDICTION. I PRAY THAT HE TURNS HIS
LIFE AROUND AND I HOPE THAT I DON'T GET THE CALL THAT I HAVE BEEN FEARING FOR
A LONG TIME. I WILL NOT GIVE UP HOPE AND WHEN HE CALL FOR THE HELP THAT HE
NEEDS HE KNOWS THATI WILL BE THERE.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

August 15th, 2009 at 9:41 PM

Janet, I am so sorry for the loss of your daughter.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

August 19th, 2009 at 10:50 PM

Wow,like so many others here, I could fill in my sons name for these stories.
He is 30 years old, and I honestly can't say "how long" he has been using. I
know at least since he was 17. He has had ups and downs, but he has really
gotten bad. I do NOT give him any money, or help, because I have read enough
to know that this would just enable him. But unfortunately, my husband doesn't
know this. He keeps helping him and it certainly puts a strain on the
marriage. We have 2 other children who are wonderful, and learned from seeing
their older brother, what a mess drugs have made of his life, and have
thankfully steered clear of them. I know he is doing heroine now. Again, I
read these posts and feel so many of the same feelings. I understand thinking
that maybe if he were dead, it would be better, and I feel terrible for
feeling this way. Or if he was in jail, that would be better. I can NOT change
my son, HE MADE these choices, and by doing so, not only ruined his own life,
but so many in my family have suffered because of his bad choices. It is so
frustrating because he had a promising future. But not anymore. I just wait
for the phone call that he is either in jail, or dead. And from reading all
these posts, I feel I am not alone. My pastor has recently told me that I
should start attending the Alanon meetings, and I think I will try this, cause
I feel like I am starting to go over the edge. I pray for my son every day,
and he will have to make the choice to want help and even admit that he has a
problem.  
Thank you for all of your comments and postings. It does help to know that I
am not alone in all of this.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

August 24th, 2009 at 6:42 PM

Wow. I needed a dose of this. I have taken this stand with our 29 yr old
daughter who has been a drunk since age 15. I have temp.custody of her 9 month
old daughter. She stayed drunk pregnant,had an accidenet drunk at 7 month
pregnant breaking her leg in three places and other injuries falling down
stairs. Drunk first week after baby born. Crashed car drunk midday last May. I
went before a Judge and took the baby away. She is a
hateful,manipulative,wreckless,vile,irresponsible,impulsive,wretched,white
trash person. My daughter. And guess what…Everything she has ever done wrong
is everybody else's fault. Everything. Before the baby was born I spent half
her life pulling her out of the fire. I am done and over her. She can hit the
wall now and I will not be there. Not now nor ever. My wish for Christmas is
that I will never have to see her vindictive evil face again. The County
Social Workers (Clowns) enable her and believe anything the pitiful little
drunk tells them including that her father,me, and our college educated other
daughter drove her to what she is. This sorry excuse of a daughter is in the
82nd Airborne! God help this country. Maybe there is room for her on the next
plane to Iraq.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

August 24th, 2009 at 6:49 PM

I forgot to add that she has been arrested twice since Easter for drunk
driving,wreckless endangerment,fleeing drunk driving arrest(chased in her car
after being stopped.) Had to be pepper sprayed to arrest her and restrained.
Pretty much drunk every day. Her car has been seized that she owes $18,000 on.
Crashed the car before that one drunk just a few months earlier. Drunk, drunk,
drunk, pretty much everyday and boy look out for the weekends. All of this is
my fault.

Reply

  * ![Janet](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Janet

August 25th, 2009 at 8:07 AM

Tracy,

I understand how you feel. Believe me, I understand. My daughter was addicted
to drugs, alcohol and gambling. I say was, because she passed away July 31,
2009\. It was probably an overdose, but we don't have the final report yet.
She had been released from a rehab (actually, kicked out) 10 days prior to her
death. We had reconciled somewhat while she was in rehab, but it was still a
bit rocky. Before her death, I was so angry with her.  
Jennifer wrote in journals a lot. I have been reading them along with her
worksheets from rehab. It has given me new insight into her problems. I'm not
condoning them by any means. Jennifer was a master manipulator and had been
all her life. Jennifer was bipolar and had she been properly medicated, I know
the circumstances would have been different. She was just diagnosed last year
and it takes so much time to get the meds and the dosage where it needs to be
for each individual. When she was 'in remission' as I call it, she was a
bubbly, loving, caring, lovely person. When she wasn't, wow, Dr. Jekyll and
Ms. Hyde. I now know for certain that she was a tormented person.  
While I agree that your daughter shouldn't have her child, you can never give
up that hope. Miracles happen. Our grandson (4 1/2 yrs)has been with his dad
for the last year and a half. We even wrote a letter on our son in law's
behalf.  
Basically, what I am telling you is that as my husband always said, 'while
they are on this side of the grass there is hope'. Because, once they are
under the grass, it is over.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

August 26th, 2009 at 10:17 AM

I am so very sorry that you lost your daughter. We have had the fear of this
happening someday to our daughter. This past weekend she spent drunk out of
her mind and says her husband beat her up. Lots of phone calls to me which I
did not take and my sister who barely listens to her anymore. She checked
herself into the army hospital Sunday saying that she could not live one more
day without her daughter and that is why she drinks! The only reason she
checked herself in is that her car has been taken away, her husband left,no
one else will have anything to do with her. No one to share her turmoil and
drama. So off to the hospital she goes for the attention she can get. And
sympathy. She doesn't have her daughter because she is a drunk and now I find
out a coke head too. I have not and will not accept her phone calls. She needs
to hit the wall at warp speed. She will stay clean as long as the doors are
locked. When she is out of there the drinking will continue. I hope she proves
me wrong. It will take a miracle for her to live a decent normal life. This is
my prayer,for the Lord to deal with her. Looking back, my daughter has had
problems her entire life. Never fit in or followed rules. Kicked out of every
school,grammar,jr.high,high sch.Ran away multiple times,fighting,arrested for
assault at 16.Could write a book on the hell she has put this family through.
Frankly at 29 yrs old I will not participate in her life anymore. Drunk or
sober I don't care. I feel nothing but distain for her. I guess she will miss
that plane to Iraq. Too bad.

Reply

  * ![LIN](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### LIN

August 28th, 2009 at 9:04 PM

gosh, I am coming to grips with how many families truly do deal with the same
problem. I wonder how many of the people who have commented, will have
positive outcomes. I am the mother of a 26 yr old, who over the past 9 years
has battled coke addiction, alcoholism, and just destructive behaviors. She
lives off of social security as she does have diagnosis of bipolar. she has
done the gamit of psych doctors, therapist, meds of all kind. none of it seems
to have helped. she was off the coke for awhile, but now back on. she doesn't
seem to be able to function unless she has a man in her life. both of her last
2 boyfriends are now in jail for one thing or another. I go to counseling
trying to detach, as I was an enabler, and now see the harm in it. I am at the
point, I don't think she will make it. It just seems endless. She does
nothing, not productive in anyway. She tried school, but quit, she tries jobs,
but quits. Theres nothing left to try, we just wait for the other shoe to
drop.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

August 29th, 2009 at 12:27 PM

I certainly understand where you are with your daughter. Our daughter is a
talented artist or should I say, was a talented artist. Dropped out of
college,quit or got fired from every job.(Never her fault) Joined the army and
straightened up as long as she was in basic training and no way to get
alcohol. As soon as she had some freedom- straight to drunk all the time. As
of yesterday she is in a 28 day facility for alcohol abuse. What a waste of
time and resources. She will be sober for 28 days. Unlock the door, turn her
loose and she will be waiting for the liquor store to open. I have totally
detached myself from her for good. Alcoholism is not a desease. Cancer is a
desease. Calling it a desease allows insurance to cover the cost of the
destruction that follows. Calling it a desease takes away the personal
responsibility from the drunk for being a drunk. An alcoholic can decide not
to drink anymore. A cancer patient can't decide that he wants to stop having
cancer. Alcoholism is a self inflicted addiction. I am raising her 9 month old
daughter. I have had her for 3 months. I have already spent $7,000.00 in legal
fees to remove her daughter from her and we haven't even gone to trial yet. If
it takes everything I have and the rest of my life, I will keep my
grandaughter away from her because she will ruin her life if she doesn't kill
her with her reckless choices. I just wish she would go to the other side of
the world and forget her way back. Forever. We too are just waiting for the
other shoe to drop.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

September 5th, 2009 at 6:53 PM

tracey, I know you are angry. It's o.k. I also was. Shanna is now dead. Her
kids are without a mom. My daughter, that was sick, cannot fix herself, is
dead. She would't or could't help herself. She still had a sweet heart. You
will also miss the times when she was around. You will probably out-live your
daughter. That is not a preferred option to being a mom. Reality is harsh. It
is for me. Try to remember a kiss, a hug, a scent. She will always be your
daughter. Sick or well, she is your offspring. I think this diease is like
cancer. I don't have it and i guess you don't either. Your grand kids may.
Hope not.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

September 11th, 2009 at 6:46 PM

Diane, I am so honestly sorry that you lost your daughter, Shanna, to
addiction. I will probably be next on the list to have lost a child to this.
Please tell me, what happened? Shanna had more than one child. Oh God. I am so
so sorry for you and her children.  
My daughter, Susan, also, way back had a sweet heart….. It turned rotten with
liquor. She turned into a vile,vicious,rotted human being. Not a person of
value, but a- from -the -core- rabid, worthless, parasite, useless,
destroyer,thing. This is a child I stood up for so many years. When everyone
was sick of me and washed their hands of me for sticking up for her. I was
there for her. No matter what. Fourteen years of it and a baby put through it
is "Enough" When she stayed drunk and pregnant and then drunk after her
daughter was born a "Switch went off in my brain that said " This Is Enough."
I am the hell done with her and her "Crap".  
Done I am. I have her daughter. It will take a Judge to tell me she has to go
back to her mom. In fact it will take an act of God for me to give my
grandaughter back to that piece of trash. I will be on a plane to the other
side of the world before I will give her back to that destroyer.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

September 11th, 2009 at 6:50 PM

Let me clarify one thing I just said. I will not be on a plane to the other
side of the world with my grandaughter. I just wish I could. Wishing is one
thing. Doing is another. I won't be as stupid in my decisions as my daughter
is.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

September 19th, 2009 at 1:45 AM

Tracey, I too, believe in turning your back on your daughter. I had too also.
Some day maybe she will hit bottom. Some people do. It doesn't mean you ever
have to forgive her. People don't realize, some of their actions can never be
forgiven. Keep your grandaughter safe, but always know if she ever cleans up,
there is a chance she can get her back. You may need to take that plane. Good
luck.

Reply

  * ![Tracy Smith](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy Smith

October 25th, 2009 at 9:26 AM

Forty eight hours after being released from a 28 day alcohol rehab center my
daughter was drunk. She "borrowed" a friends car, hers is impounded and will
be auctionsed off, bought her liquor and went joy riding while she was
drinking. Drunk, crashed the car. She has been in jail for 4 weeks awaiting
trial. She has twelve charges in three counties pending against her. Three of
them are DUI's , three are driving with revoked license, one resisting arrest,
two wreckless endangerment,on and on…………..more crap. She is going away for
some serious time. The army has her listed AWOL and is discharging her. So far
she has lost us,her family, her baby, her car, her career, her
drunk,stupid,husband,friends, her apartment and all of her belongings. She is
sitting in jail with drug addicts,prostitutes, her kind of trash. I spoke on
the phone one time with her and all I had to say was that she held the top
spot for the worlds worst mother and she was right where she belonged. No more
contact. I hope they send her very far away from here. Her daughter will turn
one year old next month. I have had her longer than her own mother. We will
have a birthday cake without her mother. So sad.

Reply

  * ![Peggy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Peggy

October 26th, 2009 at 10:09 PM

Can you recommend a list of some good treatment centers with long term (6 - 12
months) aftercare programs?

Reply

  * ![Tracy Smith](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy Smith

November 1st, 2009 at 7:16 PM

If you are asking to recommend a long term treatment center with long term
aftercare programs for my daughter I really would not recommend wasting the
resources on her. If this recommendation was not for my daughter then I
apologize. As a matter of fact she has been released with time served after 4
weeks of incarceration for crashing a car drunk ,again, with three DUI's
pending, includeing numerous other charges. They let her go! I am so
dissapointed. That drunken fool will driving again this week and pray God she
doesn't kill somebody in the process.Please, if anyone is listening to me, She
is facing 12 charges in threee counties which include three DUI's for drunken
driving, has crashed two cars drunk. They let her out because she hasn't yet
been "Convicted" of three DUI's! I pray she will not drive drunk and destroy
some family of a loved one. The laws are so incredibly unfair. They let this
piece of trash out to maybe destroy some innocent life with her drunken ass.

Reply

  * ![mdougherty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### mdougherty

November 11th, 2009 at 7:10 PM

I have fallen into the same hole again. Running around trying to make it
better. Telling myself everything is ok. But the signs are there. I feel all
twisted up inside. I feel dizzy, unable to digest my food properly, worry is
all I know. My daughter she is an addict and I have to accept and face the
reality of the devastation that is her life and the life of my two beautiful
grandchildren. One in a loving foster home and the other just a sweet newborn
and what chance does he have with a father who is a heroin addict, a gang
member, who has no job and he was just released from prison on a domestic
violence charge from his former girlfriend. This is what my daughter chooses.
So what do I do fade away, move away, accept this as a lost cause, Me who
believes in Miracles and the power of Positive thinking, Me who teaches that
prayer and faith are everything….but now what?! I feel so terribly alone and
yet I read others stories and my heart goes out to all of you.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

November 12th, 2009 at 4:11 PM

When I first encountered this site, I was looking for hope, like everyone
else. I was so scared by all the statistics and stories, and the fact that we
live in South Florida, the oxycodone capital of the world!

Anyway, In June, I reported that my son had detoxed and was doing much better.
I am happy to report that he is still doing great. He had a difficult time
finding a job because of his history of joblessness and the economy, but he
has found one: full time, with benes, low pay though. He is ecstatic! He had
several drug tests while job searching, and passed all of them!!!! He has nice
friends now, including a very sweet girlfriend (clean). He tells me that he no
longer has cravings, and would never go back.

Now, I am not the most naive person on the planet. But it has been 6 months,
and he has weathered some very bitter disappointments and not gone back to
drugs. I have hope, finally. My son is back! Not perfect, he is 23 and acts
about 18. But, he is making progress. He has crushing debt from his old days
and may have to declare bankruptsy, but at least he is healthy and happy, and
now productive.

I am not bragging, and realize that not everyone will be lucky to even have a
respite like I have had. But, I wished so hard for someone to give me at least
one happy, hopeful story. I hope you all find some hope in my story, and I
pray that we all have happiness in the future. Thanks everyone for the
support. We are all in this life together, and we have to help each other.

Dawn

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen and Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen and Ed

November 12th, 2009 at 4:23 PM

Dear Dawn,

We're extremely pleased for you and your son and would also like to note that
your story is not all that uncommon. Yes, we hear about the disasters,
failures, and unending dashed hopes, but the reality is that we don't usually
hear from the successes and triumphs - these folks are busy building lives,
not dwelling on the past.

In our work with families and clients we see well over half on them succeeding
\- about 10 times the rate of traditional treatment - and we do write about
what works, and what doesn't. And please don't forget that more people recover
\- really recover (not "in recovery")on their own than any other way.

So again, congratulations, to both of you and thank you so much for taking the
time to write what so many need to hear.

Regards,

Reply

  * ![Taylor](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Taylor

November 13th, 2009 at 3:39 PM

I just found this website, I have a 22 year-old daughter and just learned she
is not only addicted to pain killers, but also selling them, I am
flaberghasted to say the least. I live 2,000 miles away but noted that in the
last month her attitude had changed on the phone, she didn't want to talk for
hours like she did in the past and the nightly phone calls stopped. On Tuesday
of this week I recived a phone call saying she was being evicted on a ten day
notice and asking if she could come here, of course I said yes. then I recived
a restricted phone call from a friend of hers telling me that my grandchildren
were uncared for always with a babysitter who had no idea how to care for
children and that they were calling CPS unless I intervened. I made a few
phone calls to others who knew my daughter and everything, mentioned in the
phone call seemed to be truth. People had been giving her money to pay her
rent, bills and giving her money to pay for stuff that she needed for the
girls. She had never asked me for a single dime, but gifts I had sent the
grandchildren seemed to disappear always with excuses. So I stopped sending
material items. My daughter was anti-drugs, we had two family members killed
by dealers due to their own drug additctions so this totally floored me to
find out she is not only using, but also selling to make her rent persay. As a
grandmother I had no choice but to call the grandparents who lived in the area
and ask them to check on the girls, the girls were removed from the home that
night and are now in a safe place. My daughter is angry at me and won't talk
to me which hurts. I kept having dreams that my daughter was dead, but
couldn't put my finger on it, my intuition was always going off over the past
month, but due to the distance I couldn't just get in my car and go visit her.
The amount of phone calls I have made this week are more then any mother
should have to make to get to the bottom of her activites. But to know hat my
grand children were suffering because of her addition really angers me. We did
send money to the other grandparents so they could buy the girls the things
they need, but I know it is not enough when they need everything. I just don't
understand how a mother who loved her girls so much could just change like
this. It's frusterating and confusing, and I will not support her or her
addiction and have asked others not to. All I can do is pray and hope that one
day she will wake up before it's to late.

Reply

  * ![MONIQUE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### MONIQUE

November 14th, 2009 at 5:07 AM

Hello, I haven't written anything lately, I have been so depressed. My
youngest son, who is 25 is living on the streets. I cry myself to sleep every
night, I don't know what to do. He is an alcooholic and drug abuser. The last
I heard from him was in an email saying that he had nothing left and there was
only one other thing left to do. I love him so much but I can't let him come
home. I have a 17 year old daughter and I have to think of her. I am also so
afraid of getting that call. Please if there is anyone out there that can give
me some advice I would appreciate it…….

Reply

  * ![Sharon](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sharon

December 2nd, 2009 at 12:44 PM

I also have a 28 year old daughter who is addicted to pain pills and probably
a lot more. Her father died from the same thing 4 years ago. Since then, she
has spiraled out of control. I had a total meltdown last night. I went home
and she had crawled thru a window to get into my house. Reading these letters
and comments have helped me so much. I know I must save myself. I cannot help
her at all. She has cursed me and blamed me. Told me I am a terrible mother
although my other daughters are calm and loving. But her statements have held
me hostage for these last years. Thanks to your letters and comments I feel
the strength to get tough and save myself.

Reply

  * ![Maria](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maria

December 2nd, 2009 at 2:31 PM

I have a 22 year old supposedly recovering addict daughter who I know is back
to her old ways. She still lives at home and doesn't make enough money to move
out. I am sick all the time just being around her- I literally cannot stand
the sight of her anymore- she is nothing but a manipulative, lying, good for
nothing. I want to chnage the locks so that she has no access to getting back
into the house. Unfortunatly this will kill my 90 year old father but I can't
survive one more minute with her in my life. Any suggestions? This has been
going on for years. She went to rehab in April and was good for about two
months but back came all of the behavior. I know this is sick- but there are
days I wished she had died in that car she crashed while drunk. The thought of
going home now is sickening.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen Barnes, PhD](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Mary Ellen Barnes, PhD

December 3rd, 2009 at 10:59 AM

Maria:  
That is just a horrible situation you find yourself in.

I would go ahead and change the locks. In reality, it really won't kill your
father. He won't be happy, but he will survive. You do need to think about
yourself and your own well being. Your daughter has no reason to change. By
giving her a roof over her head and food, etc, she doesn't have to make any
more money than she is currently making. Why should she? Her basic needs are
being met and she has enough to buy her drugs. She is legally of age, change
the locks, kick her out and let her fend for herself.

If you don't take care of yourself first, who will? And who will care for your
elderly father? Your daughter has made her choices. When she gets tired of
living in a car, maybe she will change, but she sure isn't going to when there
is no good reason to change.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

December 4th, 2009 at 7:46 PM

I have been looking for a support like this blog for years . I have a manic
depressive daughter who has hd issues for the last 17 years drugs, alcohol,
self mutilation, suicide bulimia ect ect and now my younger daughter is an
alcoholic. I never thought this could really happen to one couple. Our lives
have been hell every weekend, holiday summer vacation ect ect for years. I
realize I am rambling on and on. I am even too tired to look back on this
entry and look for mistakes it just helps to know that others have made their
adult children leave home. We hardy see our girls any more and the last few
years have had no holidays. My heart goes out to all of you mothers and
fathers alike that walk around each and every hour with a hole in your hearts.
Please keep writing as I know this helps all of us.

Reply

  * ![MONIQUE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### MONIQUE

December 5th, 2009 at 5:48 AM

Hi Lynn, I am one of those mothers. This year I will not be seeing my Son
during the holidays and it breaks my heart. He is living at a mission by his
own choice. I love him so much, but he has to do this on his own. We where
willing to borrow $4000.00 last month to help him get clean, but his answer
was no that he did not need to be in rehab for 4 months. We now know that his
addictions are more important to him. We have all tried for the last 11 years,
but we have decided to stop enabling him. As a mother that went through
surgeries after surgeries to keep my son alive this is heartbreaking. I cry at
the drop of a word. I also love this site, because it lets me talk to people
like you that know what I am going through. I pray that someday that my son
will get clean and come and give me a big hug and say that he is back…..

Reply

  * ![Ed Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed Wilson

December 5th, 2009 at 9:09 AM

Your sitution is very sad and difficult but you don't have to go through the
rest of your lives forgoing holidays and, yes, even joy. There are tens of
thousands of children and families you can "adopt" to varying degrees, places
to volunteer, lonely peoploe in your neighborhood.

I am not writing this without experience. Without the old men who took a bit
of time for me, the neighbor woman who listened occasionally, I would have
been, well who knows?

So, celebrate what you can, when you can, and with whom you can.

Your "family" can be far bigger than just your children. And you don't need to
continue to punish yourselves for their choices.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

December 6th, 2009 at 7:33 PM

Hi Monique, thanks so much for writing to me. I also cry at the drop of a hat.
I have always been very senstive but now it is embarrasing. Movies, stories
most things set me off. I too hope that you son comes home to you. I also
dread that phone call. Today I watched a movie where a mother was called to
the hospital and her adult son was in an accident (drinking) and died minutes
after she arrived. I sat there and pictured this being my daughter. I hope I
didn't do the wrong thing telling you this it's just that I am so prfoundly
sad, it cames in waves. I always thought it would be my older daughter that I
lost b/c she is the one who attempts it. Now the thought of losing my baby
freaks me out. She has high blood pressure and blew off the second half of a
physical that I sent her too, so I never know what will happen to her. I'm
sorry for rambling.  
again thanks so much for writing to me.

Lynn

Reply

  * ![Harriett](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Harriett

March 4th, 2017 at 9:48 AM

Thank you, thank you for this site and comments. It helps me to know I am not
the only one. My sleepless nights, guilt, waiting for "the call", me wanting
to believe the manipulators lie because that would be easier than what I know
in my "gut". On thing I STRUGGLE with that noone else has mentioned is
bitterness and jealousy. I pray about it daily. I'm so jealous and resentful
of families all around me with "perfect" children, they have no idea what this
misery is like. I catch myself being so envious instead of happy for them. My
second child is perfect, freaking perfect. Yet, bc my first born is a disaster
I have no joy. Am I supposed to thing that one out of 2 is ok???? I can't
because a mother's love is too much. Again, thank you for all of you parents
sharing. It has really helped me. All my friends and coworkers just don't have
kids like mine, and I feel so alone and angry.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

December 6th, 2009 at 7:42 PM

Ed,

I know you are right there are many who can use a bit of love and
understanding. I work with the autistic students and I know people have it
worse than I do. I always try to be the kindest to all people always have. I
have to say both of my girls are have kind hearts. I am glad someone reached
out to you. I will consider your suggestion, we are just very tired. Every
life impacts another doesn't it?  
Hope you are ok and continue to be.

Lynn

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen and Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen and Ed

December 7th, 2009 at 8:45 AM

Dear Lynn,

I do understand the exhaustion on top of everything else. My adopted son, 40,
has FAE and while he is artistically brilliant, he will never make the sort of
emotional connections I wish for him. My adopted daughter, 36, Is "okay" but,
again, the damage done by her birth mother and a couple of other women, is
irreperable beyond a certain point.

My relationships with them will always be distant but that has not prevented
me (after years of mourning and bitterness)from becoming the sort of older man
who nurtured me.

We cannot force change on others, but we can change our own behaviors and
thoughts and feelings and create a good life for ourselves and those around
us.

I hope you find that for yourself.

Ed

Reply

  * ![MONIQUE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### MONIQUE

December 8th, 2009 at 2:46 PM

Hello, Lynn, you are not rambling on. I am happy to get your emails, it helps
me a lot to know that someone cares and I feel for you also. I know that Ed
said not to be unhappy about not seeing my son during the holidays, but it's
not only not seeing him it's wondering if he will be alone for Christmas.
Christmas has always been such an important time for me because we would go to
Ottawa at my other son's house and spend it together with my kids and
grandchildren. This year my other son is not having him over because he does
not want him around his children, he is always high and the kids don't
understand. I hate thinking of not seeing any of them. See it is me rambling
on now. I am trying to get into the Christmas spirit but I am having a very
hard time. Thank you for listening and please keep in touch, have a great
holiday and talk to you soon…  
Monique

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

December 9th, 2009 at 7:59 PM

Monique, I know what you mean about the holidays. I have always loved them
since I was a kid, me more than my sib, not the gifts b/c we were not from a
family with money at all just the whole feeling. I feel for you not knowing
where you son will be. Are you not seeing your other son? I probaby wont see
either of my girls and that is most difficult. I am getting used to it, I just
cant wrap my mind around the fact that I have 2 girls and dont see either of
them. we loved them to death. today was such a hard day I could hardly get to
work, but that has been going on for years, I know you dont mind but I am so
depressed and have been for since my 28 year old daugher started all this when
she was 14. I kept waiting for it to end, never thinging that this could
really go on and on, that there had to be an end, and now my other one is an
alcoholi, I keep saying this cant be. Wow was that a run on sentence, too
tired to correct the grammer. How do you get though the days? Is the mission
near you? That was very generous of you to offer that money to help him. It
does sound like in spite of his problems that you have a good relationship
with him.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

December 9th, 2009 at 8:01 PM

Monique, It was me Lynn who wrote you and forgot to sign.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

December 9th, 2009 at 8:09 PM

Ed,

So you also have two adult children that have broken your heart or whatever. I
don't know what FAE is. What a wonderful person to adopt 2 children. My mom
was an orphan and was in an orphanage (but she told us it was fine) later they
put her in a not so great place, until her aunts took her out at 16 b/c then
she was able to work. My point is that you did a wonderful thing.  
I just dont know how to get past the grief and worry.

Lynn

Reply

  * ![Monique Cousins](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Monique Cousins

December 10th, 2009 at 12:05 PM

Hi, Lynn, I don't know if I will be seeing my other son and grandkids yet, he
just started a new job, so he does not know if he can come. I am on lunch
right now so I will sign off nad talk to you later. Monique

Reply

  * ![Allison Johnson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Allison Johnson

December 22nd, 2009 at 1:16 PM

Reading your posts today makes my heart ache. My brother is 2 years younger
than I and an alcoholic/drug addict. He has been this way since high school
and is now 28 years old. In addition, he is bi-polar. THe saddest part as a
sibling is that I suffer twice thru the loss of him and watching his demise
and thru watching my mother suffer the pain and worry of not knowing how long
he will live. If we get a late night call - we are afraid. If we don't get one
\- we are afraid. He was just sentenced to prison yesterday and I am almost
relieved to be able to know where he will be for a few years and to know that
he will be fed and clothed during that time. As a mother of two young
children, I share the concerns of the first poster that I want to prevent this
from happening to my beautiful children. I watch them play and wonder what
makes one child an addict when another is fine. My brother was my best
playmate and now he is gone - the person he has become is a stranger to me.
How do you stop that from happening when there are no signs until it is too
late?

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

January 1st, 2010 at 6:19 AM

Allison, I just wrote you a long response and lost it when I went to send it.
I will write again.  
Lynn

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

January 15th, 2010 at 7:02 PM

Monique & Ed, was wondering how the both of you were. Have checked many times
and no one seems to be writing. Hope all is well.

Lynn

Reply

  * ![Ed Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed Wilson

January 15th, 2010 at 10:00 PM

Mary Ellen and I are fine, busy with our practice and except for answering the
ongoing threads are not posting new articles here. You can read our weekly
postings at our website by clicking the Newsletter tab.

Thanks so much for asking and for your continued interest.

Warm regards,  
Ed

Reply

  * ![MONIQUE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### MONIQUE

January 15th, 2010 at 10:41 PM

Hi, Lynn, all is well with me. My son is now living in Toronto with his aunt
and waiting for a place in rehab. He calls me evrery week and sometimes twicw
a week. I went to see him during the hilidays and he looked so good. His aunt
has set the rules and he abides by them. He actually called me tonight and
told me that he is seing a cardiologist on the 29th of March. I don't remember
if I told you that he has had heart surgeries and wears a pacemaker. He will
be 26 on Sunday and told me that he wants to go to rehab for himself and not
for anyone else, that made me feel so good. He said that when he gets out he
wants a better life than what he was doing. He also said to me that he has to
get rid of some heavy chains that he has been carrying with him and he need
professional to help him. My son has a big heart and tends to take a lot of
peoples pain on himself. He has a great soul and I hope and pray that this is
it for him. I love him so much and want him to be happy. Lynn thank you for
keeping in touch, this site has helped me a lot. Just writting things down is
a healing thing. Take care and I will keep in toch with you. Monique

Reply

  * ![Dr. Copper](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dr. Copper

January 30th, 2010 at 4:17 PM

Two weeks ago my son was locked up the Washington, D.C. jail for drug
possession. He is 35 years old and has not really worked a day in his life. He
no sooner got into jail than he was caught with a pill and tossed into
detention. I did get one letter from him and it was full of the usual excuses,
i.e. a lying cop, a judge that could not read body language, lack of
progressive drug laws in the district, etc. He is trying to make me believe
that he is only in jail for a minor marijuana violation. My former wife called
me and read me his charge sheets which she found in his pile of unopened mail.
I did reply to his letter and told him I know how he got into jail and that I
will no longer enable him and his drug habit. He was caught with heroin,
cocaine, and various other illegal drugs. He was in a state funded rehab
center but was expelled for a bad attitude. My ex spouse feels guilty and may
continue to finance his drug habit when he gets release in June. Regardless of
what happens he will not use me again.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

January 30th, 2010 at 6:29 PM

Monique, so nice to log on and see the note from you. That is such good news
about your son. I can almost hear the joy in your voice being a mother. He
sounds ready and that is 90% of recovery. I wasnt aware about the pace maker
at 26 wow, but seems like he wants to take care of himself. 26 sounds about
right for maturity to kick in for some so it really sounds promising. I only
wish the best for the both of you. I will also keep in touch.  
Lynn

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

January 30th, 2010 at 6:31 PM

Ed, Warm regards to you too. I will look at your threads.  
all the best to you.  
Lynn

Reply

  * ![Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Marie

February 11th, 2010 at 9:14 AM

I have a 23 year old daughter who is addicted to heroin. She has two children
ages 2 and 4 that I am most likely going to take custody of. I am currently in
therapy with an addictions counselor to help me stop being co-depemdent. My
counselor is wonderful. The problem I am finding more and more difficult to
bear is my fear of burying my daughter and knowing what she is doing is
putting her in harms way. I have been snowed in the last two days and although
I am not the crying type all I can do is cry. The emotional pain I have feels
like I am dying a slow death. I have been taught ways to deal with this but
for some reason can't get to that point. Could this be a grieving process? Is
this something I must allow myself to do in order to move forward? God bless
all of you and me in hopes we can find solutions to this growing problem.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen and Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Mary Ellen and Ed

February 11th, 2010 at 10:11 AM

Dear Marie,

What you describe isn't an uncommon response to a nearly intolerable
situation. You are having to deal with a situation that none of us envision
when we contemplate becoming parents and grandparents and we grieve not only
for what is, but for the loss of our own imagined future. Yes, you are dying a
slow death, the death of expectations which will now go unrealized, and
replaced, for now, with only terrible decisions to be made and the dread of
what your daughter is doing.

Eventually you will begin to replace old expectations with new ones and you
can choose how to feel about the changes. A good CBT therapist can provide
good short term help.

There is also the possibility that your daughter may recover from her
addiction as do most who are her age, but that's not something to count on and
wait for. Just know that it is a possibility and hope that she eventually gets
help and that it's real help, not what passes for treatment here in the U.S.

Yese, grieve, plan for an altered future, educate yourself about Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy, do some assertiveness training to off set the enabling,
research effective treatment options in case she ever asks.

Mary Ellen and Ed

Reply

  * ![Lynnie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynnie

February 28th, 2010 at 11:16 AM

Hello - A friend sent me the link to this site and I saddened to hear all your
stories, but reassured to know I am not completely alone. Two days ago, my
husband and I had to kick our 23 year old son out of the house. He has a
history of alcoholism and drug abuse,including crack cocaine, pot and xanax.
We thought he had been doing better, in November he got a DUI and we brought
him back home to live with us, we thought to help. He has been attending AA
meetings and seemed to be on the road to recovery. Last week, we went out of
town, leaving our son alone for the first time since November. We returned to
find my husband's rifle missing. I had noticed my son's behavior and attitude
had changed the past couple of weeks, but assumed he was just depressed/bored
whatever. I am now firmly convinced he is using again and stole the rifle to
pawn or trade for drugs. He completely denies it. My heart is breaking because
if there is the smallest possibility he is innocent, I will never forgive
myself for what I have done. But logic tells me he has done this horrible
thing to us, again, we thought the days of lying and stealing were over. I
can't eat, I can't sleep, I cry all the time. I picture him cold and hungry,
angry and confused. Please someone tell me I did the right thing.

Reply

  * ![Ed Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed Wilson

February 28th, 2010 at 1:26 PM

Sad though it is, you did the right thing. The sad part is that you are
questioning yourself over the possibility that there is a grain of possibility
he didn't pawn the gun. Reality is that he is the one who needs to prove he
has changed - he's the one who needs to accept that he is on "probation" - not
you or your husband.

That's the trouble with AA/NA/CA/ etc.programs and treatment - the main thing
they teach is how to be a better con artist, how to guilt and exploit family
members, and how to avoid responsibility.

So, though horribly hard, remember, your son's alcohol and drug abuse were and
are his choice. You didn't cause it, you can't fix it. You shouldn't support
it.

He's made choices and he can make new ones.

Regards,  
Ed

Reply

  * ![Monique](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Monique

March 2nd, 2010 at 4:10 PM

Dear Lynnie

I was at the same place you are at now. we have a 26 year old son, that put us
through the same thing. It was an ongoing thing for 13 years. I cried myself
to sleep and I was a walking Zombie. The last time he went back to his drugs
and alcohool, I used what tehy call though love. I said no more money, if that
is what you want to do with your life, then I won't be part of it. I told him
the only way that I would help him is when he was ready to go back to rehab. I
will say is was the hardess thing I ever did as a mother. i also learned that
they do not go hungry and that they always find a place to stay. I learned
this through therapy, that when you are a user you always have friends. The
therapist also told me that when he calls and says that he is hungry to bring
him food and never give him money. I am happy to say, my son is waiting to get
into rehab, he is clean since before Christmas and he even quit smoking. It
has been a long and difficult time for all of his family, and yes I was afraid
to lose him and I pray and hope that he will stay clean. do not give hope and
stay strong and please do not let him come back home, they are the best liars
and they do steal fro mthe ones they love, because it is the addiction doing
this and not the person who you thought they were. I hope that all works out
for you and stay on the site, it really helped me through some difficult
times. Monique

Reply

  * ![Ruth](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruth

March 17th, 2010 at 1:54 PM

I have been looking for a good website for my ongoing problem with my 31 yr.
old daughter. I am hoping that you can help me.

Reply

  * ![Ruth](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ruth

March 17th, 2010 at 2:08 PM

Hey,

I thought I submitted a comment. Oh, well, my comment is: "What do you do
about an adult addicted child?"

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

March 20th, 2010 at 7:24 PM

Ruth I just wrote a long message and lost it. I have problems with a daugher
about the same age and it is on going and always will be. If you would like to
share Im sure I can relate. I have had it all, not to sound like a martar,
sorry to say it is true. A horrible heart breaker. A hole in my heart that
will never heal

Lynn

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

March 21st, 2010 at 10:02 AM

The question is always a variation on the same theme: "How can I force someone
else to change their behavior?"

The answer is always the same one nwe all hate to accept: "We can't!"

The best we can do, and 95% of parents refuse, is to stop REWARDING bad
behaviors!

At lesst when you quit rewarding the behavior you calim to hate, the child (of
any age) will have less reason to continue the behavior. It isn't all that
complicated.

Yes, you'll have to give up your illiusion of control, but it's pretty obvious
you don't have any anyway.

So, give up pretending you can change her/his choices and at least you can
also stop feeling respinsible for those choices. You arenh't. They are.
Respond accordingly.

Reply

  * ![sue wilkerson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### sue wilkerson

March 23rd, 2010 at 3:24 PM

Hello all, I was searching the web looking for some support for myself as I
have a 23 year old son who has struggled with addiction since age 16. He was a
victim of a stabbing at 16 and not wanting to receive therapy for this,chose
to do drugs.He is real bad.He has been to detox 2 years ago and also been on
methadone for 2 years- 115mg per day. He relapsed about a month ago and I
asked him if he wanted help. fortunately he did and he is now in a detox and
then a 10-20 day inpatient program after that.I will attend a family meeting
on thursday with him at the facility and he has also expressed a desire to go
on to a longterm care facility after that. I hope he follows through with
that.I feel for all of you on this website and all the stories sound just like
mine. i no longer support my son financially, his grandmother will. i called
her today and told her that it must stop. he relapsed this last time after he
met a girl that was also addicted to drugs and has since been arrested and is
in jail for at least 90 days. my dilema is that he wants to try to contact
this girl in jail and wants money to use the phone at the detox to call this
girl's uncle to get her id number. i'm afraid to piss my son off by telling
him that i will not give him money for that but i do want him to have money to
call me and let me know how he is doing. i'm also hoping that as he starts to
get better that this drug addicted, stripper will not look so appealing
because i feel that she will hinder his recovery.

Reply

  * ![Melinda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Melinda

March 30th, 2010 at 7:44 PM

It's all just so sad. I have a 23 year old son who has been addicted to
marijuana since he was 16. He is very intelligent and can be so kind. He chose
to steal money from me when I told him I would not pay for his phone bill
(again). I have given him over $5000 in some way or another to either pay
bills, food, debts, or cash. I have recently come to know that the money has
got to stop. He quit his job 5 months ago and has made little attempt to work
because he can't pass a drug test. He lost his driver's license over a year
ago because of the drugs. My question is how do I deal with essentially not
having my son in my life? I don't trust him in my house and honestly I am
angry and so sad about the whole deal. He refuses treatment and continues to
life with 2 friends. I feel so guilty that I have money and fun and a
successful life when he is telling me he is starving.

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

March 30th, 2010 at 9:30 PM

Sad as it all is, it is just a bit easier when you remember that his drug use
is his choice - no one is forcing him to choose that life, nor are you or
anyone else required to fund his selfishness.

As for living your own life? You've earned yours as he is his by the choices
he's made.

Perhaps some day he will make a different choice - but don't reward him for
his terrible choices by financially supporting him.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

March 31st, 2010 at 6:57 PM

Melinda,  
I am so sorry for what has happened to your son and to you.  
But PLEASE listen to Ed's comments and BELIEVE that he is right!!!! I have a
23 yr old son who was addicted to oxycodone (consider that your son is doing
more than pot).  
He finally detoxed and has been clean for almost a year now!  
He has a good job and a nice girlfriend. I DIDN'T DO this for him. He did it.
But, he did it when I finally stopped helping him and giving him attention. He
came to my house, asking for drug money, and threatening to "do something
crazy to get money", and I deflated his tires, called the police, and had him
committed overnight to a mental health center. He had withdrawals there, and a
very miserable night.

When he was released, he got high right away, but a few days later, he decided
that he was done with it all. He broke his drug ties, and came home. He holed
up in his room here and detoxed with my help (I don't necessarily recommend
this part, but I am an RN, and I felt able to do this). He had a VERY rough
time, but has not relapsed since then.

This is an unusual outcome, I know. I also know that there is no guarantee
that he will remain clean. But, I know FOR SURE that he would still be
addicted if his family had continued to support him.

I have my son back - he is the old kid I remember. He is a good worker, very
responsible, and fun to be around. I pray every day that he will stay that
way, but then all parents pray every day that their kids will be safe from all
sorts of dangers. Remember that this danger is avoidable, and is ENTIRELY his
choice - not yours. It is not like a car wreck or cancer - he is NOT a victim.  
Please live your life happily, and enjoy the comforts you have earned. When
your child sees you happy and comfortable, he will want that, too. When he
sees you miserable, he will justify his drug use with, "The adults in my life
don't use drugs, they do all the "right" things, and they are still miserable.
I might as well get high and get some enjoyment out of life". Show your son
that a drug-free life is FUN.

Sorry this is so long. Good luck to you, and to every parent who is suffering.
And please listen to Ed and Mary Ellen - they are RIGHT!

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

April 1st, 2010 at 9:24 AM

Thank you, Dawn,

And we're glad yours is looking like a happier ending than many, but the odds
are still pretty good that most young adults will come back to life if they
get the right sorts of encouragement and support.

Too bad that there is so little access to what really works to increase the
odds. That's whywe spend ao much time working with families before, during,
and after the treatment process.

Thanks too for helping us.

Ed & Mary Ellen

Reply

  * ![Nancy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Nancy

April 3rd, 2010 at 9:20 AM

Good Morning. It's the day before Easter and my 55+ year heart is very sad for
all of you, and myself, who are struggling with an adult addict. My daughter
started using drugs and alcohol when she was 14 and, although she is married
and has three children, continues to "binge" when she's upset. I have been a
single mother since my youngest child was 3 months old and they're all in
their 40s now. Looking back, I realize I should have sent my daughter
somewhere else when she began to challenge my parenthood but I felt so guilty
about all I hadn't "done" for them that I thought it was my fault. She
basically took over our house with her bad behavior. Over the years I've let
her move back in with me, sometimes with my Grandkids, to help her get back on
her feet. She's back on her feet and I've been emotionally and financially
bankrupted three times. This time I'm going to take care of myself.

As with many addicts, she is a very friendly, outgoing person. VERY
manipulative. My sadness now is that she has convinced my sisters and brother,
as well as my other two kids, that it's all MY fault and because of that and
other family problems having to do with my aging mother, I don't see any of my
family. She has her sister, and my oldest and youngest sisters, "enabling" her
now. It's a tragedy and I'm appalled that a child will work so hard to destroy
her mother, who worked so hard to provide a good life for her, rather than
overcome the addiction. My spirituality tells me to leave it in God's hands
but it isn't easy, especially during holidays.

Thank you for sharing and listening.

Reply

  * ![Melinda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Melinda

April 4th, 2010 at 9:35 AM

Nancy, I think it's human nature to blame ourselves. My supportive husband
tells me all the time that I am a good mother. I grew up with an alcoholic
mother and my first husband was a drug addict and now my son is addicted. I
went to mass today and silently repeated to myself to "let go and let God". I
tried to force my son into change by making him to outpatient treatment when
he was 16. I realize now that I should never have continued to bail him out
financially. He must change himself

Reply

  * ![Sara](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sara

May 10th, 2010 at 4:56 AM

I find myself barely existing day to day in a life filled with addiction. I
have 3 adult children all of which are addicted to prescription medications.
My oldest son is 27 my daughter 25 and my youngest son 22 years old. We have
faced near death auto accidents, legal charges, stealing from our home, and
the daily verbal abuse from them. Most days I don't even want to get up and
face another day of this tormenting life of dealing with their addictions.

I find when I "cut them off" they cut me off. My oldest son went for almost a
year without speaking to me because I stood up and said no more help unless
you get help! He didn't get the help and is now back in our home no better
than before. My daughter was in an accident and will never be able to have
full use of her leg after 13 major operations on it. She has depleted 90k
dollars in about 3 months which was money from the accident. She also lost her
auto in a drug raid that she had just paid cash for.

There father committed suicide 9 years ago because of a drug addiction. My
biggest fear is they will do the same, and they know this. I have allowed them
to ruin my mental and physical health to the point of having no meaning or
direction of my own life. I am seeing a counselor but not much seems to help.
I know I'm not the only parent to face this awful situation I just wish I knew
how to deal with it better!

Thanks,  
Sara

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

May 10th, 2010 at 8:07 AM

Your situation is certainly a sad one, but you seem to know that you have only
two real choices. First, you can stop rewarding your adult children for their
self-destructive choices and behaviors, or, you can continue to protect them
from the logical consequences of their choices, as it appears you did with
their father, and have them follow the same path to the same end that he did.

I know. You keep thinking there must some some third choice that will allow
you to force them to change.

Sorry. There isn't. The only person you can change is you, and it appears you
are at least as unwilling to change as they are.

Remember, you are the one who taught them how to treat you, with help from
their father,and you can retrain them as you retrain yourself.

They are adults, their choices are theirs, but you can still influence them by
you own example. So far, it appears you'd rather go down with them than take a
chance on an unknown outcome.

Our suggestion? Take care of yourself and let them do the same and see what
happens.

Need help doing that? That's what we do.

Dr. Ed Wilson

Reply

  * ![Adele](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Adele

May 13th, 2010 at 8:08 PM

I feel as though I have lost my parents and my children have lost their
grandparents due to my brother's drug and alcohol problem. My uncle alcoholic
uncle committed suicide and had warned my dad that he'd do this; so, my
brother now uses suicide threats as a means to control my dad. My brother is
bleeding my parents dry, as they raise the son whom was taken from him and his
girlfriend years ago by DSS. They are no longer interested in anything but my
brother and my nephew. I know that they have a lot on their plates, and I try
to understand, but it'd be nice to have them there for me at important moments
in my life and my children's lives. They are letting my sister and her
children down in this same way. At this point, I feel like I have to give up
and realize I have lost my parents to my brother's problem; they are still
people in my family whom I love. They just won't function as parents any
longer. This is the only way I know to rationalize this and go on with my own
life. We have tried to talk to them about how they are only hurting my brother
by continuing to support his behavior, but they simply will not stop. They
will not even admit out loud that he has a problem, despite numerous arrests
and mountains of evidence.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

May 21st, 2010 at 1:47 PM

My son is 23. He has spent all the money in his college fund and is still 41
credits short of graduation. He has loans to pay back (we are paying back the
ones we cosigned early on) and they will come after him after 6 months. He has
no money to continue in school.

He is the oldest of four children. We still have 2 in high school and another
in college. The others all work, contribute around the house, have plans and
goals and pay their bills. This one lived off a college fund his grandfather
set up for him. He went to Europe, paid the leases for new cars and moved away
to college, only to come back with few credits the last two years. He really
never left home. Even though college was an hour away - he would come back
every weekend and extended it more and more. He always had some sob story
about how awful his roomates were and how he couldn’t be with them.  
\  
This story could be so long. We have suffered with his borderline personality
disorder and his severe depression since he was little. He never complied with
treatment - he refuses to take the drugs "we are trying to stuff down his
throat." He has caused terrible property damage - he is an alcoholic now, he
is abusive to everyone in the house. He blames his "genetics" and his lack of
a proper "skill set" for why he can't work or finish school.

He has only had one job for a summer at a pool as a pool attendant. He laid on
his butt and surfed his laptop the whole time. Now, he tells us he has jobs
but we go to where he is supposed to working and nobody has ever heard of him.
All the talking, pleading, trying to get help, giving time and space, making
him uncomfortable etc. - none of it has worked. Last fall - he tried to hang
himself and was hospitalized for a week. I don't know if it was a serious
attempt or just a bid for attention but it has scared me to death. He stopped
seeing his shrink and he constantly tells me he is going to kill himself if we
don't back off. He is using this for emotional blackmail. Since he is 23 I
can't talk to his doctor or anyone about him - HIPPA laws. I tried calling
suicide crisis hotline and they sent me pamphlets.

He says he is moving out in a couple of days and he is going to spend the rest
of his college fund and then kill himself. We can only call the police if
there is an immediate threat (i.e. we find him unconscious or with a gun). He
has a 160 IQ and he can talk in such a way - we look crazy and not him to
doctors and authorities.

This is the biggest nightmare I can even imagine. It has torn me apart (I just
had major surgery a month ago). It takes away from my relationship with the
other children and always has. My husband's brother committed suicide at 20
and he just says that I will have to learn to cope as he did. He just can't
see a way out. He always said that this kid puts us in no win situations -
damned if we do and damned if we don't.

This sick adult man-baby just told me I am getting what I deserve for giving
birth to him and not using a hangar when I had the chance. I really have
always spent so much time with him trying to nurture his interests and gifts -
he is so bright but now all I see is the horror of his mental disease and
addiction. I am heartbroken and lost. Thanks for listening.

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

May 22nd, 2010 at 6:46 AM

Your situation is, as you say, a parnt's worst nightmare. Still the question
remains, since he is going to go wherever he is heasded, how many of the rest
of you is he going to take with him? It appears his father isn't going, but
you are ambivalent.

Your son is not a child and he can only hold you hostage to the degree you
allow. Yes, it's tragic - but so is allowing him to rob you and rest of your
family, and for you to aid and abet him.

Really, it comes down to the fact that you can't save him and he isn't
interested in saving himself. So, who do you reard? The blackmailer or the
children who are growing into responsible adults? Can you see that so far you
are rewarding him and punishing the others?

Please, smart borderlines, if that diagnosis is correct, are not "fixable".
Even early interventions are only effective in training a few of the less
capable ones.

He is a master manipulator - as you know. He is not an addict, that's a choice
and a role that he has learned to add to his cast of charactors. Don't be
taken in by treatment industry hogwash.

Your husband is right, it's time to say goodbye, wish him well, and turn your
attention back to your family. You can't know what he will do, but you can
rest assured he will destroy you and your other children if you continue to
allow and reward his behavior.

Sadly,  
Ed

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

May 24th, 2010 at 9:56 AM

Thank you for your reply Ed. Like the name of the blog "Freeing the Parents of
Adult Alcoholics and Addicts", I need to hear that from someone. Everyone in
my life feels bad but is pressuring us to "do something for him." We've done
everything within our power and within the limitations of our resources.

We've offered him treatment, paid for doctors visits for meds,
psychiatrists,etc. We let him live here, rent-free, so he had time to "pull
himself together." We've taken a hard line and told him to go to school and
stay there - make a life (that's when he attempted suicide).

He had every opportunity in life. He had financial backing for school (a
generous trust from his grandfather) that he blew on booze, trips, cars and
living expenses that he should have had a job to cover. This is not a sad tale
of poverty, abuse and lack of real opportunity.

He is a master manipulator. He goes to my mother and gets $20 bills from her
because he needs "gas money" and of course we won't give it to him. She keeps
thinking that if she gives him money like this, he will use it to go get a
job, school etc. and of course he never does. But, she keeps giving, because
she feels sorry for him and is afraid he will hurt himself again. I think his
attempt was his way to buy time and sympathy and certainly to back us off -
because we had completely had it by that time.

Now, he was able to drop out of school again and move back home. As I write
this, it is 1pm and he is still sleeping in his bed - in a room he has totally
ripped up - dirty clothes, dishes, bottles, trash everywhere. I told him he
had to clean up his mess if he is going to live here he told me to "F off".
When I got angry about that treatment, he started crying and pleading to be
left alone, because his life "sucks" and he just wants to go to Zurich and be
euthanized. Nice. You are so right. While all this is going on, his siblings
are at school, going to after school jobs and activities and doing chores in
the house.

I am just so tired of fighting this. The thing is … he really has no money and
no where to go if he leaves. If he does kill himself, I don't know what that
would do to everybody. We still remember the extra bright, active boy he once
was. Because he is an adult now - nobody will talk to us about this. He has to
do it - but he has no interest in doing so. We thought about going to court
but I don't know anything about that process, how much it costs, and I'll bet
he'd walk away - he has fooled a lot of therapists so far. One told me I had
the problem and asked me about "all the drugs I took in the 70's." Laughed
when I told him "none." This is supposed to help my son?

thanks for listening again, I think I'm going out of my mind with all this.

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

May 24th, 2010 at 10:50 AM

Since Mary Ellen and I started this blog a couple of years ago it has
engendered a lot of stories of anguish as well as the sad truth - it is
impossible to force someone else to change.

The difficult companion to that reality is that most people don't want to
change - especially when they are succesful at manipulating others to assume
responsibility for them.

But that's not a cure - merely a postponment of the logical consequences for
everyone - with everyone the worse off for the delay.

Yes, there is guilt associated with wondering what we did wrong, though the
answer is usually, "nothing". It's harder, but more productive, to keep your
attention on the offender, and what he/she is doing wrong, or not bothering to
do at all.

While I'm not given to Bible citations, I do occasionally note that the
"prodigal son" was welcomed home AFTER he cleaned up his act. Seems like a
good plan.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

May 24th, 2010 at 1:57 PM

Amen to that Bible quote - a lot of wisdom in that story and along with the
realization that the story I tell is ages old apparently.

Reply

  * ![Mya Nameo](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mya Nameo

June 7th, 2010 at 4:59 PM

I don't know if telling the Reader's Digest version of our story will help,
but here goes!

Our daughter went to a college with an open drinking policy, and promptly
dropped out after 3 semesters. She then found a series of level-entry retail
jobs, then joined the military. She came home with a broken military marriage
to an alcoholic, a toddler, and another baby on the way. Things went downhill
from there.

She wanted $$, and would use the kids, even at one point threatening to kill
them then herself if we did not capitulate. This was the point where we
started collecting our evidence in an effort to save the kids. In their
innocence, the children were extremely helpful.

Once we had enough evidence, we literally took the kids from her, presented
our evidence, asked for temporary custody and gave her and her ex-husband time
to get their lives together. They chose not to do so.

Long story short, we decided to adopt our grandchildren. Both parents did not
wish us to reveal our evidence in court and signed away their parental rights.
Our attorney guided us through the process. The children have been doing well
for over 6 years and have no signs of fetal alcohol syndrome. Our ex-son-in-
law has not come back to attempt to claim the kids. He married somebody else
and had children with her as well as several out-of-wedlock children. Our
daughter is living with a man and has another out-of-wedlock child. As far as
we know, she is still drinking and does casual labor. She has threatened twice
to try to regain custody. We moved out of the area.

It hurt a lot to have to resort to this. I know my husband would much rather
be Grandpa instead of Daddy all over again. I would love to see my other
grandchild. But it is a relief to choose not to be held hostage to our
daughter's choices, and it is a blessing to know that the grandchildren we
adopted have a second chance at life.

Dr. Barnes makes a great deal of sense. It's nice to know somebody with the
authority to back up her opinions thinks we did the right thing.

Reply

  * ![Ann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ann

June 7th, 2010 at 8:54 PM

I am just so fed up I could scream. My 32 year old sister-in-law is a drug
addict fully supported by her parents. She started dabbling in street drugs at
14\. My husband, her older brother, repeatedly attempted to address the
situation with his parents, to no avail. By the time she was in her 20's, she
was arrested several times (had to change her major in college because of her
arrest record), had totaled more cars than most people I know have ever owned
(all provided by mom and dad!)and had a child (It took several DNA tests to
deduce who the father was). Yes, she was using while pregant. After money
spent on lawyers, cars, record expungement, etc., she has now traded her
illicit drug addiction for a more "socially acceptable" prescription drug
addiction. AND THE STATE PAYS FOR IT!! That's right, medicaid pays her "Pain
Doctor" and for her morphine, oxtcontin, xanax, etc. She has been feigning a
back injury for years and now that the MRI shows nothing is wrong, her next
move is "I'm mentally ill." If she gets disability then everyone will get off
her back about getting a job. MOney will roll in every month and her meds will
be free. She lives at home with her parents and stays stoned all day. Her
parents raise her son, pay her bills, feed her and absolve her of all
responsibility. She has convinced them she is truely in pain and not an
addict. The only job she's had in the last 5 years was used to pay for her
other pain doctors and all the meds they prescribed. This way she could get
twice the meds; one paid out of pocket, one through medicaid, no one doctor
knew about the other. Different pharmacys. It was a science. As you may guess,
being high on twice the meds didn't leave her employed long. Finally, after 17
years of addiction she agreed to go into detox/rehab a few months ago. Mom and
Dad picked her up after a week and all she came out with was the phone numbers
of new drug contacts she met in rehab. Within 3 months of getting out of rehab
to meet with these new "clean and sober" friends, she has totaled one car,
cracked up 2 more and gotten arrested (I suspect she was going to sell a few
oxys to get the money to obtain another prescription). I get angry because
everyone exists in such denial. My husband had talked till he's blue in the
face about what her addiction is doing to her, her son (who sees his mother
like this all day and is already supervising her vigilently to ensure she is
okay), his parents. Nothing! He has finally reached his breaking point. After
my children and her son witnessed her assault my father-in-law, we have
decided we will not be around her. Unfortunately, because she lives with my
nephew and in-laws, this includes them. It has caused a rift, but we will not
back down. It is not out of spite or anger, but the realization that no one
involved in the situation is willing to do what it takes to improve it and
it's just too hard to watch and be unable to force the change. The old "you
can lead a horse to water" scenario. We have talked to them sooooo much over
the years, supported them in encouraging them and her to get help. They'll
waver a bit and move toward help but then suddenly stop. We realize, they do
not want it, so we will not be a part of the insanity any longer. My husband
is feeling such a loss now. He grieves his sister, who has been lost to drugs
for 17 years. He grieves over the loss of connection he had with his parents
because ALL they can focus on is her. How can you have a conversation with
someone who is always looking past you to the addict? How do I explain the
sudden change to my two gradeschoolers? I have found so very little on the
effects drug addiction has on the siblings of drug addicts. My husband has
always prided himself on being the best person he can, hard working, family
oriented. But even as an adult, he still seeks after his parents love and
attention and their response is "well, you're so together we don't have to
worry about you". It hurts him deeply. He hasn't just lost his sister, the
addict, but his entire family. It hurts him to know they are aware of how he
feels but cannot break their addiction to the addict to give him the love,
respect and attention he deserves.

Reply

  * ![Mary Ellen Barnes, PhD](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Mary Ellen Barnes, PhD

June 8th, 2010 at 10:10 AM

Ann: I am so sorry you and your husband have to go through this. I know how it
feels since I went through a similar but less severe, situation with my
brother and our parents. You do lose your parents and your sibling and there
is little that can be done until the parents are willing to stop what they are
doing. I know you realize this and that it doesn't make you feel any better.
But until they are willing to change how they relate to your sister-in-law,
nothing will change. She certainly isn't going to change - it is working too
well for her to do that!

I don't know of any research or books about the effects of addicts/addiction
on siblings and families. That doesn't mean there isn't any, but I just am not
familiar with any. Maybe someone else reading these posts will know of
something helpful.

It is a terrible loss that your husband has experienced - he has, in effect,
lost his parents and his sister and it is worse than if they were dead,
because they are there but he is invisible to them. And it is terribly unfair.
He is being punished for being "the good one" and his sister is being rewarded
for screwing up.

I think you are doing the right thing. If you join the family in their
craziness, it will just make you two crazy also. Save yourself and your
children and try to be the family your husband needs.

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

June 22nd, 2010 at 7:09 AM

I am so glad I found this website. My story is like so many I read here. My
daughter is 25, and is right now sleeping in her bedroom- in our home- drunk,
unemployed, just dropped out of college-- again--- and can't seem to get her
life together. I thought we were 'helping' her by providing her a place to
live while she got her life together yet again. She is an alcoholic, and has
been told she could not drink in our home. We just found that she is again
drunk, drinking alone in her room. She has no money and we do not give her
money- so I don't know how she got the vodka. My suspicion is that she either
stole it, or more likely- spent yesterday when she said she was job searching-
begging for cash.  
It is so sad- like others, she is/was a good person, but began drinking in
high school, lived through several car crashes, has rarely held a steady job,
refuses help, lived away from home from time to time with one deadbeat friend
or another- and when she couldn't pay rent, moved back home. Today, she said
she would just become a prostitute so that she could get her own place and
live without us coming in to her room. She said she gets drunk every day and
we need to leave her alone and get out of her business. She owes money to who
know where- including court costs for DUI's that have now gone to collection
and doubled.  
Needless to say, we paid thousands in the past for lawyer, fees, phone bills,
cars, college, medical help, psychologist, and on and on. We quit paying about
5 years ago, as it was obvious our financial help was not saving her from her
own bad choices. She refuses to see a counselor or a doctor to get treatment
of any kind.  
My husband has told me over and over that she is making her own choices. I am
the one that feels the guilt. If only I had been a better mother, had not
worked so much, what did I do wrong, etc etc etc.  
My daughter recently went back to school, had a job--- then got a financial
aid check for 'living expenses', and with this money she started hanging out
with her deadbeat friends, drinking, partying, and then…… the inevitable
started all over again- dropping out of school, quitting her job, now back
doing nothing but sleeping and watching TV.  
My husband has said 'at least we know where she is'. He goes to work each day
and as I work at the local high school, I have the summer off. I am her with
her sleeping, doing nothing, treating me with contempt, and watching her
continue on this path of self destruction.  
I will talk to my husband (her father) tonight about what we need to do now. I
think we need to save ourselves-- but how do we get her to leave without
destroying herself? She has nowhere to go. She can't live in her car as she
has no car and no drivers license for the past 4 years due to 2 DUI's, unpaid
court costs, and 2 totaled vehicles.  
It is sad and I live with a constant pain in my heart.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

June 22nd, 2010 at 3:52 PM

Sandy,

I so relate to your story because as you probably read I have the male version
of this in my home. He also drinks alone up in his room, sleeps to one or two
and treats us all with contempt (unless he's getting his own way). He has also
dropped out of college and tells us he applied for loans to go back but I have
not seen any evidence of this. He has other loans out and they will be looking
for him soon. We are paying back some earlier ones we cosigned because they
will fall to us anyway.

I don't know about your daughter but he will not work. He told me he would
rather die than do menial work. He thinks he is above usual college jobs like
waiter or laborer. He is quickly running through all that is left of his
college fund and he will be at least 1.5 years short of a degree. He keeps
telling us he is out looking for work but we suspect he is sitting in a bar.
My favorite is when he tells us he is working at a job and then we go there
and they have never even heard of him. He lies like this all time. Or, he
tells us he has been hired but there is a hold up with his background check.
Anything to buy time and keep us off his back for a while.

He just keeps telling me if we kick him out he will kill himself. He has
already attempted once - when we told him he could only come home one weekend
a month last time he was up at school. He told me he will get a stronger rope
this time. It's so horrible. I have three others who need me and need our
support and so much energy and resources are going to this one. I feel so much
for you. Maybe we should get them together. This is such a heartbreak.

Reply

  * ![Amy Chambers](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Amy Chambers

June 29th, 2010 at 3:16 PM

i'm so glad i found this site! my story is alot different but all the same
painful. and i hope i bring someone just a little hope for thair addict child
to return to them. i used drugs for 15 yrs myself. i used meth. i did
everything to my mom that i have read on here and i do mean everything. i
worked my way through nursing school and when my husband left me for another
woman i started spiraling down and just wanted to be comfortably numb from the
pain and it took over my life. i went from being a charge nurse, having my own
house, a nice car, and supporting two wonderful boys by my self to being
homeless and then in prison for two years. and through it all my mom and boys
never turned their back on me. my mom tried the tough love but was not very
good at it probably b/c i'm an only child and she has never been married and
she loves me so much…by the grace of God i was set free of this burden on
7/5/07. please don't get me wrong i take full resposibility for all my actions
and choices. i had every opportunity to get clean both by my family and by the
state of texas and i chose not to. but the reason i'm so glad i found this
site is b/c my youngest son has chosen to follow in my foot steps. it is
breaking my heart to watch him make the choices he is making and i just needed
to know someone else was out there going through the same hell i am and my mom
for the second time. i know i have to stay strong and protect the rest of my
family but it still doesn't make it any easier on my heart. i pray for all the
people on this site and their families members.

Reply

  * ![jenny](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### jenny

July 12th, 2010 at 11:25 AM

My husband is the adult son of a recovery alcoholic and addict. His father is
currently living with his parents after losing his apartment, a suicide scare,
hospital and outpatient recovery stay. His father now says he is all better
but his only therapy now is attending AA meetings. He is not seeing a
therapist. He has hepatatis c and severe asthma and had to retire from his
post office job last year. My husband wants him to ensure he can stay clean by
getting a part time job, volunteering or finding a hobby and he wants him to
see a therapist at least once a week. Until he does these things, my husband
doesn't want to see his father or let his father see our daughter. This has
been an ongoing issue for most of my husband's life. My husband was mostly
raised by his father's parents and they are now turning their back on him
saying that he is hard-hearted to be so tough on his dad. It's so painful for
my husband but he has been hurt so many times by his dad before - he can't get
his grandparents to understand. Any advice?

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

July 12th, 2010 at 4:59 PM

Hard as it is to manage, you husband is right in this case. In this instance
it's less important for the grandparents to understand than it is for you and
you husband to be clear yourselves.

Think of it as a case of two separate familes, the grandparents and their son,
you, your husband and daughter. They are, perhaps, defending their "child" and
also, maybe, easing any guilt they feel about the situation. You on the other
hand need be concerned primarily about the welfare of your daughter and
yourselves.

Your husband's requests are quite modest and reasonable. Remember that
attending AA has less than a 5% "success" rate even for a year. Staying sober,
for almost everyone, requires far more time, effort, and attention than merely
attending meetings that usually lead straight back to drinking.

In the meantime, focus on your family and avoid getting sucked into the no-win
situation that the grandparents are trying to lure everyone into.

As always, keep you attention on the most vulnerable person - your daughter.
That'll make it much easier to remain firm in what are, I repeat, really
modest expectations on your husband's part.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

July 15th, 2010 at 4:03 PM

I am so heartbroken today. I have written about my 23 year old son. He is an
alcoholic and we know he is mentally ill as well. He has been diagnosed as a
Depressive with OCD tendencies and it has been suggested that he borderline
personality as well. He has a 160 IQ so in his mind -he is smarter than anyone
trying to help him.

Things have just been getting worse and worse at our house. He ran out of
money and now he won't even get out of bed. He drinks NyQuil at night because
he can't "sleep". He has bashed himself in his head and face and has a black
eye and a gash on his forehead. He is starting to look psychotic and the other
kids are afraid of him.

I made arrangements for him to be admitted to a very respected addiction
program in our area. They said they would work with his depression and other
issues concurrently. My insurance will pick up 100% of all of this. He was
supposed to go in tomorrow and we are playing hardball now. We told him he
either complies and goes into the hospital tomorrow or we are putting his
stuff in boxes and he has to leave our home immediately. He also has to stay
the course in the program or he can't come back here either.

All week he told us he would comply. Then, today he slept in til 4:00 pm. A
friend of his came over and he flipped out on me in front of him. He told me
he wouldn't go to the hospital now or ever and that we would never see him
alive again. He said he will live out the rest of his short, miserable life at
his friends house. I held my ground and kept repeating that he needed to keep
his appt. tomorrow but he just got angrier and angrier.

I asked for a phone number he could be reached at (he has smashed so many cell
phones) but he refused to give me one. His grandmother is very ill and I told
him I wanted to let him know about her. He asked why should he care? I
reminded him how much she has done for him. She always gave him money when he
went over to see her and she helped finance several trips. He said "She didn't
support me when it really counted." He just wants someone to give him
thousands of dollars - which he would probably just drink anyway.

I need to know I am doing the right thing. He is destroying our family and he
is destroying me physically and emotionally. I have three other children and I
can't stay in this sick circle he has had me in for so many years now. I feel
like this is some kind of endgame and it is so frightening and devastating. He
said we never gave him any support and that is such a lie. He always had
everything he wanted and we have given him so much time and space to work on
his issues but all he did was lay there and bitch and complain and drink.

Thank you for listening and let me know if I am doing the right thing. The
program I have him set for is an inpatient hospital setting, very old, very
renowned. It is not some dump. He has already attempted suicide once, but it
seemed like a bid for attention more than a serious attempt. He has told me
since then that he would kill himself at least four times a day. It horrible
when your world spins out of control like this.

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

July 15th, 2010 at 5:15 PM

You're doing the right thing. Yes, he's smart, but simply using that to
manipulate you and others and avoid growing up and assume responmsibility for
himself. No, you do continue to reward him for his behaviors, or to punish
yourself or the rest of your family for being appropriate responsible people

He may kill himself. It's possible. But "supporting" him will only delay that,
not prevent it. If he is going to go that aggressive way - and that's what it
would be, an act of aggression, not depression, then that what he will do and
it's his responsibility, no matter how sad.

The hosp[italization may help, it may not, but at leat you will have the small
comfort of knowing you did what you could. Now it's time to turn to the rest
of your family and wait and see..

.

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

July 15th, 2010 at 11:20 PM

Thank you so much Ed. I need to hear that. My husbands sister keeps calling
here with more "suggestions" on what to do. She has spent years in al-anon and
Adult Children of Alcoholics even though her alcoholic mother has been dead
for 22 years. She has discussed our situation in her meetings and they have
advised all kinds of interventions and steps that we either have already tried
or we know won't work or we can't afford.

She has indicated that we are not doing enough for him unless we tase him and
take him into an emergency room or call the police to do the same. He has said
he would not cooperate with another hospital behavioral medicine program and
he would fight the police, which could end very badly. All her "help" is doing
is making me feel inadequate and helpless and I need the strength and courage
to stick to my guns right now. I think I made the only reasonable decision
based on the individual circumstances in our case. I just need some of this
"help" to stop and some quiet support to take its place.

She is so afraid history will repeat itself (her alcoholic brother killed
himself at 20 and he was living with her at the time). Her mother blamed her
and it's like she's trying to go back and right a wrong now. It's all such a
mess and I can't believe my son would put everyone through this again.

Reply

  * ![Ed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed

July 16th, 2010 at 5:01 AM

Hang in there - your sister-in-law obviously has her own separate problems,
and Alanon is a very poor place to find help, as is ACOA - both usually
suppoort whining rather than fixing, unhappily and also the debunked "disease"
and "powerless" models that your son exploits.

Remember too that even if he could be forced, outcomes are not good. Even the
"best" programs have success rates below 5% even with willing clients (the
stats they cite are creative in the extreme, too).

Your son's behaviors are choices, his choices because they have "worked" for
him so far. He is manipulative and abusive and that may never change. But you
and your other family members can best cope by maintaining a united front and
hope that at some point he makes other choices.

As you have seen in the past, detachment and firmness results in escalation
but that will only work for him if you give into the escalation. Otherwise
he'll have to do something else and, yes, that unpredictability is
frightening, but the predictable results of continuing are even more
disasterous for everyone in the long run.

Again - our sympathy over a very very painful situation.

Reply

  * ![DIANE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### DIANE

June 16th, 2014 at 9:06 AM

Dear Ed, I was reading your story and that is pretty much where we are.
However, I am seeking counseling for myself at this point and don't really
know where to start. This is how I ran across your story, because I am trying
to find a counselor here in Phoenix or Tempe Arizona to assist me. I am no
longer looking for counseling for my adult children.

Please help if possible.

Thank you very much.

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

July 16th, 2010 at 8:56 AM

Diane- I am certainly no expert as my daughter continues to have problems with
alcohol- A few years ago, however, my son was immersed in smoking pot. He has
thankfully now moved on and is living a productive life. At that time, we were
at our wits end as he had quit school, did nothing but get into trouble, etc
etc etc. We did call the police at one point as my son continued to bring pot
into our home and refused any thought of rehab.  
Long story short, the police came out and arrested him for possession, which
then led to a whole new layer of problems. It did not 'shock' my son into
quitting drugs, and he still refused rehab. Getting the legal system involved
on top of everything else was a nightmare.  
I know you are going through your own nightmare. You are in my thoughts.  
Sandy

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

July 16th, 2010 at 10:35 PM

Sandy,

Thanks for your advice - it helps to hear other people's experiences. I
suspected as much with the police. The police in our area don't seem very
helpful at all. They are very authoritarian and my son is oppositional-defiant
so I can't see where that would end well at all.

It's terrible that they would arrest your son and put your family through all
that when you asked for help. They seem almost robotic anymore because of all
these "zero tolerance" laws. I'm glad he was able to come out of all that and
each time I hear a success story it gives me that much more hope that we can
get through this. I rescheduled his appt. for Tuesday and I hope that he comes
back by then and is willing to try it. He wanted so bad to go out with his
friends this weekend and since he has no money and no car right now - they
will soon tire of him anyway.

We are sticking to our guns - go to the hospital, give an honest effort to get
help and we will talk about letting him back in until he can get a job and
another situation. If not, he needs to stay out there because we can't do this
anymore to ourselves and our kids. You are in my thoughts too, as is everyone
on this board.  
diane

Reply

  * ![Melinda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Melinda

July 22nd, 2010 at 8:03 AM

I posted back in March 2010. I followed Ed & Mary Ellen's advice & stopped
giving my son money. He had quit his job & when he got evicted he moved to a
small town to live with his Dad. He was isolated with no job, car, money or
friends. He went fishing, running & soul searching & spent 2 months getting
clean for the first time in 7 years.  
I would never have had the courage to cut him off financially if I had not
read this page. I am someone who is always fixing things. I really needed to
back off & let him find his own answers. He has a job & desire to pay back his
old debts.  
I tell him that I am proud of what he is doing. Sometimes he looks at me like
I am a stranger & I don't understand it. He has actually said that he feels
weird around me when he hasn't seen me in a couple weeks. I talk about mutual
friends, family, books & movies we both like. Is he unconfortable because he
is coming out of his fog?

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

July 22nd, 2010 at 9:41 AM

Basically the two of you have to develop a new relationship with each other
and this will take time. "Children" always have trouble not regressing around
"parents" and the two of you now must create a new relationship that doesn't
have either of your reverting to your old destructive patterns.

Yes, it'll be weird for awhile - as is the case with any significant
behavioral change.

So, give yourselves time and see what develops and don't expect things to
evolve to a new "normal" for a year or more. After all, what's important is
that he is finding a new way for himself that doesn't involve self-destruction
and that should be enough, especially for now.

Reply

  * ![CR](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### CR

July 22nd, 2010 at 11:13 AM

My 74 & 80 year old parents live within 60 yards of my 48 year old alcoholic
brother. He has begun stealing from them (alcohol that they have for cooking
and/or unopened xmas gifts of port that are around and other items that he
just wants for himself). He is prone to rages as well and smashed his own
computer, cell phone and regular phone the other evening. He also frequently
calls them on the phone or yells at them in person. So they are frightened of
him - but they also still help him by taking him to doctor appointments ( he
is not allowed to drive, thank goodness, due to DUI conviction) in addition to
everything else. What do you recommend they do to protect themselves if they
decide to take a stand and cut him off - they can't move from their home. My
suggestion was to call the local crisis center but they are more geared toward
family with teenager abuse problems. Would love a starting point.

Reply

  * ![Sue](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sue

July 27th, 2010 at 8:44 PM

I have a 31 yr old daughter. She held a good job for many years and was also
three months from becoming a nurse. She has a 11yr and 3yr old daughters. Then
she almost died from heroin. She was in rehab for heroin for 6 months (I had
custody of the children) and appeared to do well for almost a year.  
She also has type 1 diabetes and possibly lupus. I get so frustrated because
she blames everything on her illnesses. Such as she lives in filth and does
not take good care of her children. Our family have tried so hard to be
supportive (not enabling). She is selfish and will buy cigarrettes and things
for herself instead of the children. I found out she actually left the kids in
the middle of the night to run over to her boyfriends house. She doesn't
follow through with anything and most of the time lays around on the couch.
The 3yr old doesn't get her hair combed or clothes changed.

Four days ago I told her I wasn't going to take the children home because they
deserved better. I told her when she wanted to clean up her act and start
acting responsible, the family would be supportive, but until then I was
keeping the kids and she could set up visits. She hasn't called yet. I know
she probably will soon. She loves her children (or at least she once did). I'm
so confused. I'm not sure what to do at this point. I guess I should get an
attorney and take legal action. She would probably sign the children over so
she wouldn't have to deal with court. The whole family misses the woman we
once knew, who was thoughtful, caring, loving and responsible. I'm starting to
think we will never get her back. Does anyone have a good story of their adult
child who finally overcame addiction? Any advice would be appreciated also.
Thank you.

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

July 27th, 2010 at 9:01 PM

The best advice we can give, and it runs through this entire blog, is to
remember that your daughter is making choices. Addiction is a choice, not a
disease, and she will continue to choose that as long as the short term
benefits outweigh the short term costs. So,me will choose that life style
until they die. Others tire of it and change.

It seems you are doing what you can, protecting the children but not her, and
refusing to be manipulated. We know that that is very hard. But it all you can
do.

Someday she may make another choice -

Ed and Mary Ellen

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

July 28th, 2010 at 5:08 AM

Sue, I understand your need to read at least one "happy story". You are in a
heartbreaking situation, and you are doing the right thing to save your
grandchildren. If you look backwards in this thread, my letters numbered 57
and 79 tell my story. It is a hopeful one,and I hope it helps.  
My son continues to do well. He has a better job now, but it is a hard one, in
sales, and it requires a lot of self-motivation. He has had some personal ups
and downs, and is still drug-free. I still worry about him daily (but I don't
tell him that). There have been no signs of him returning to his old ways, and
he feels grateful to be back to a "normal" life.

What worked for him, I think, was two things: 1: he decided that the lifestyle
he was in was too much to maintain, that he couldn't stay on the rollercoaster
of trying to find drugs. When we completely stopped helping him with money,
that was a big factor in his deciding this. 2: he did have a very nice
childhood, with a good family, like most of the people I read about here. He
remembered that, and saw others around him enjoying sober lives. He wanted it
back. The old, "normal" life was a target for him. That is why I think
instilling values early is so important. It gives the person something to come
back to.

Anyway, that is our story for now. No one knows what the future will bring, we
all just do our best.

Best of luck to you. Enjoy your grandchildren, and keep them safe if you can.

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

July 28th, 2010 at 1:51 PM

I wrote the comment about my daughter comment to me are welcome. to my email

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

July 29th, 2010 at 11:53 AM

I wrote a comment about my 18 year old daughter it is posted on another page
for some reason. She is addicted to herion.. I have horror stories from when
she lived with me. I too had to kick her out of my house two years ago. her
being a juvenile then she went to live with her dad till she was 18. While she
lived with me which was all her life..she started using herion when she was
15\. I had her in rehab, couceling and also had her live with friends away
from our neighborhood that she was getting the drugs. Nothing worked .. she
went back to the drugs over and over. She now lives with a guy and he has the
same problem. I have remarried and have alot of support from my husband.. My
daughter is not allowed in our home as long as she uses drugs and lives this
lifestyle. I do talked to her but she blames me for her bad life and tries to
make me feel guilty for her bad choices in life. she never finished high
school because of her choices. it has been one heart break after another. If
there is alternative help for her other than rehab. please let me know.. I
don't have the financial means ,but she does have a medical card. I would
refer her to anything different if it would help her, if I can get her to
listen.. Please comment back…

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

August 14th, 2010 at 10:11 PM

Patty,  
I don't really know much about heroin addiction except my kids tell me it's
the new cocaine. It's seeing quite an upsurge and when my son was in rehab the
younger people seemed to all be addicted to it.

I really don't think it matters what the substance of choice is -it's all a
heartbreak. We love our kids so much and spend so much time trying to keep
them from harm and then they make these horrible choices. They back us into a
corner where we are damned if we do and damned if we dont'.

We sent our son to a rehab hospital for alcoholism recently. He went and they
released him after ten days. He was supposed to comply with an Intensive
Outpatient Program where he went back for twelve hours a week. He did say he
procured a job and for about two weeks we were hopeful. Then, last night he
started acting his old self again. He was obviously drunk and very angry and
violent. He knocked me around a bit and just went back to his old mantra of
blaming everybody else and screaming about how empty his life is. He told me
he just wants to die- he has attempted suicide in the past.

We found four new bottles in his room and he told us he chooses to drink and
we can't do anything about it. He said the program was a joke and he feels
justified in drinking because he has nothing but the alcohol. He railed about
not having a girlfriend like his friends. He is good looking enough but he has
such a horrible personality -who would put up with him? He has been diagnosed
with Borderline Personality Disorder - even a lot of therapists won't work
with this. They let him out of the hospital after the minimum time - they
couldn't stand him either.

I feel so trapped with him. He screams and drinks and blames everybody for the
fact that he now finds himself penniless, friendless and hopeless. He never
did work and he never finished school and he alienated all his friends. Now we
feel trapped with him and he with us because he has no other option. He is
getting physical and suicidal again. The help he got was only a temporary
reprieve.

My husband and I are going to see a psychologist. We need help to deal with
all of this. I suspect one day he will kill himself and he hangs it over our
heads every day. He left tonight to go to a bad neighborhood and do god knows
what. He told us he hopes he gets shot there. I know now I have done
everything and I have to let this play out for all our sakes. It sounds
terrible but if he kills himself, at least I will know where he is. We all
need to heal now - and I am going to concentrate on that and hold on to that
little glimmer of hope that something will hit him and he will come back,
changed.

I hope you have better luck with your daughter - you are not alone, get help
for yourself so you can be strong.

diane

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

August 15th, 2010 at 3:16 PM

Diane- I am so sorry to hear how things are going with your son. Things with
my daughter are no better- We got calls from her twice last week to come and
pick her up- she was drunk and said she was planning to 'just sleep in the
park because you don't want me at home', but she got scared. We rescued her-
again. She refuses medical help, counseling, and rehab. In addition to her
drinking, she has an eating disorder, so I know her general health is
declining.  
I am where you are- I know I can't 'save' my daughter. She has to save
herself. My husband, however, isn't there yet. And keeps trying to talk to her
and encourage her to 'get her life together'. Those talks have been going on
for a couple of years now, and things are no better- in fact they are worse.
She is miserable, hurting, self-destructive, and almost daily gets intoxicated
for whatever reason.  
I don't have any answers.  
Sandy

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

August 16th, 2010 at 6:42 AM

Diane,

Wow, I know i'm not alone. I know about all the abuse. My daughter used to be
very verbally and physically abusive to me when she lived with me.. Still to
this day sometimes when she calls me i hear the same thing ,,either she is
dying and I don't care or she wishes she was dead .. The guilt she tries to
lay on me.. That all her "bad choices are my fault" I don't care and I won't
help her ,,That I am not a mom I have abandoned her . wow this has been going
on for a while. I pray everyday that she will get the help she needs. She is
supposedly going to a methadone clinic, seeing a councelor 3 times a week..
She tells me her councelor feels sorry for her and understands why she does
drugs.. because noone especially her mom doesn't care about her.. wow this is
what she tells me now.Trying the guilt thing again, because she needed money
and I refuse to give her any. She got a waitressing job recently, so we will
see. she never has been able to keep a job. She is only 19 and has totally
ruined her life. I only hope she can find the help and get better. I have done
all I can fore her someday I hope to have a relationship with her. Right now I
can't even have her at my house . That part really breaks my heart. But I am
standing strong on this . Thanks to my husband. As I say all I can do right
now is pray everyday that she gets help..  
I don't have any answers either . I just take one day at a time. I have faith
in God. It hasn't gotten any easier not having her live with me or being at my
house . except i don't live with the abuse anymore.. I'm still her Mom and I
still love her and It still hurts everyday that things are the way they are.  
Patty

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

August 17th, 2010 at 10:07 PM

Sandy and Patty,

It's a terrible mess we all find ourselves in, isn't it? As Patty said, we are
all mothers and we all still love our kids. That being said, some days I just
hate him. I hate him for not trying, for putting us through this hell and not
trying in spite of everyone who is trying to help him.

I went up to his room today to retrieve some things that he had
"reappropriated" from others in the house (laptop, ipod, clothes, money). He
was in his bed at 3:00 in the afternoon. The blankets were over his head, he
obviously hasn't showered in days or shaved. The room was oppressively hot and
he didn't bother to open a window. The room smells like hot urine mixed with
body odor, wet towel and stale whiskey. He has dirty dishes piled all over and
trash on his floor. The carpet is ruined. He just threw stuff at me until I
left his room. All the time he was yelling how I "hassle him" and "emotionally
abuse" him and "belittle him." He really expects us to put up with him not
working, not finishing his education, his drinking binges, his rages, property
destruction, abuse of family members etc. etc.

He had the nerve to go to my parents home and tell them that I was a
"menopausal shrew" and that I needed to go on some hormone therapy. He told
them I scream all day at him for nothing. My mom actually bought all this. She
told me to go to the doctors and get some hormones. The day he did this he was
wearing a suit and tie and he told them he had procured this great job. He
asked for some money to "tide him over" until his first check. She gave him
money and he ran straight to the bar and the liquor store. I told her there is
no job and that he refuses to even look. She is having such a hard time with
all of this. He was always her favorite.

We are all in the same boat. We keep rescuing them and believing this can all
change. The thing is.. I believe it can but I don't believe it will any
longer. I have had those long talks about his life with him and have come away
feeling so much better, just to be pushed off the cliff when he goes right
back to his old ways and I realize I've been had again. Something has to
change. My husband told me tonight he can't put up with this for much longer.
I worry about where all this could lead in terms of my future with him. We
were happily married once, but this is taking a horrible toll.

Mary Ellen and Ed have given me great advice. I put some of it to use when I
gave him the ultimatum about going into rehab. Now that he is out, and already
relapsed and we can see he doesn't WANT to change, I need to find the strength
to put the rest of the plan into motion. He has to go. We can't keep allowing
this mess in our home.

Good luck to you all in your struggles. I hope someone will have some good
news soon.

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

August 18th, 2010 at 8:07 AM

Unhappily there are no good solutions - just the necessity to choose between a
number of really difficult and unsatisfactory choices. But it is important to
remember that your child's choices are just that, choices. He or she is not
"powerless" or "diseased" - on this point the research of the past 40 years is
clear- and as long as these choices are rewarded, and the logical consequences
averted, your child has no reason to change.

Equally unhappily, most "rehab" programs do little to change the behavior -
indeed, in most case, they will simply teach you child to be a more skillful
manipulator.

There are, however, roughly a dozen programs in the U.S. which do have better
success at changing behaviors than the 5% or less rate of AA/12 Step based
programs. There are good reseidential programs in N.Y, Iowa and S. CA and good
outpatient programs here in CA. Look for ones that encourage family
participation so you too get the help and relief you need and deserve.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

August 18th, 2010 at 11:19 AM

To Sandy, Patty, Diane, and all the other moms and dads:

My son was an oxycodone addict and very much like you all describe in your
posts. He has now been clean for 14 months, and has a really great job. He is
living in an apt. we own, and gradually taking over the bills (I wish he would
take them all over, but he is paying off debts that are mountainous). I have
no guarantee that he will continue on this path, any more than I know I will
not develop cancer, or he will not be in a car wreck. I just live with the
happiness that recovery IS possible.

I DID NOT cause his recovery, but I stopped allowing his addiction. As soon as
we cut off his support - especially money - he found the motivation to change
his life. One big factor, according to him, is that he had a very happy
childhood, and we are regular middle-class people. He wanted to get back to
those happy, secure feelings and the lifestyle he used to enjoy. It was
complicated, because I am divorced, and his dad did not want to stop taking
care of him. He moved in with me to detox. After that, he was still a slob,
and did not clean his room or help me in the house, but he got a job and
stayed clean. He was like a typical teenager but in his 20's. He now takes
very good care of his living area and has a better job (like going through the
growing up period late).

I don't want to give you false hope, but it is very important that you STOP
supporting him/her, and STOP letting them abuse you!!!!!! You and your
husbands need to focus on what makes you happy and building your
relationships. If you make your lives happy and serene (appearing), it will
give your children something to aim for, like a beacon. If you allow them to
destroy your life, you just reinforce in them the feeling that it is all
hopeless, anyway, might as well get high.

Sorry this is so long, but we have had to take this road with this son, and to
a lesser extent, a daughter, and it works! Some people will never get help,
but that is not your fault. Enjoy your memories of your children when they
were little. Then, think of this "child" as someone entirely different. Build
your life and provide an example of what can be.

Dawn

Reply

  * ![Sue](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sue

August 18th, 2010 at 4:53 PM

It is so nice to read all of your posts. Not that I would wish any of this on
anyone, but it's good not to feel alone. My daughter continues having her ups
and downs. She does get random drug tests which come out clean. I wish she
could come out of her depression. I will continue to be supportive, but I will
not enable her!

Oddly enough…I am also a social worker. I was working with a mother last week
who is doing very well turning her life around. She used alcohol, heroin,
cocaine, uppers, downers, etc… She lost her childen and is now working to
regain custody. She is working, attending college, taking "Getting Ahead"
empowerment classes, and counseling.

She said, "you know, when I was using, not working, and laying around, one
little appointment seemed to overwhelm and stress me out. Now that everyday is
filled with appointments/work/classes I feel I can handle everything". I asked
her what was her turning point and she said it was when everyone quit helping
her be an addict. Her family quit paying her bills, lending her money, giving
her rides, giving her a place to sleep,they took custody of her children, and
quit paying for attorneys. Eventually she didn't have money to get high and
didn't like being in jail. Once off the drugs, she was able to think clearly
enough to make better decisions. Eventhough she is doing good, they still are
not financially helping her. She walks or rides a bike everywhere. She still
has scheduled visits with the children. Instead of cursing her family as she
did in the past, she says she understands why they are not helping her and she
respects and appreciates them and wants to work harder to earn back their
respect. I just wanted to share this story with all of you. They have to be
accountable for their actions and suffer the consequences - when we get in the
way of this process, we are only making it easier for them to continue their
destructive path.

I try hard to be strong. I don't care of the excuses of, I lost my money,
someone stole my perscription, someone stole my foodstamps, someone broke into
my house, I need cab money, can you buy me ciggarettes, I need shoes, I need
asprin, my electric is getting disconnected, I need cellphone for safety, I
need a place to sleep, bla bla bla… I do not give her a penny or buy her
anything. It's hard. I love her.

Each of you are in my prayers. I pray that God take care of his children. They
are His before they are ours. I pray God give us strength, knowledge and
wisdom to go forth each day.

Reply

  * ![Sue](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sue

August 18th, 2010 at 5:19 PM

I had one more comment to share. The best nights sleep I've had is when my
daughter was in jail or rehab. I knew where she was and that she was safe. I
was calm and relaxed-she was stressed out and upset. (hmmm, there's a switch)
I did everything I could to help the process of arrest. I didn't bail her out.
I also requested to talk to the judge and asked him to make her unbondable and
give her the max time in jail. She was charged with a misdemeanor but spent
more time in jail than the seasoned criminal. I didn't get her an attorney. I
let her go through detox in jail. I didn't give her money in jail, When she
called me, I would hang up anytime she talked disrespectful to me or raised
her voice. I trusted God to get us all through it. It may sound like I'm
heartless, but I wanted her to hit bottom so she would start to re-think her
life. If I have to, I will do it again (because I love her and I want to also
keep my sanity). If you are working harder than your child. STOP Turn it
around! Good Luck to all!!

Reply

  * ![susan nickey](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### susan nickey

August 30th, 2010 at 4:44 AM

As they say, misery loves company. The comments I have found here have been
helpful in giving me the strength to use the Marchman Act to involuntarily
commit my 28 year old daughter. It truly is a matter of life and death for her
at this point. Unfortunately, she left the treatment facilitly after 24 hours,
but the sheriff is actively looking for her. We intend to cut off all personal
contact and financial assistance with her after she has had this last
opportunity to make some attempt to change her lifestyle. She has chosen not
to accept the life line being offered and we have chosen not to subject
ourselves to her downward spiral and self-destructive behavior. The daughter
we once knew no longer exists, our family is broken, and I truly believe that
she will not find peace until death.

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

August 30th, 2010 at 7:11 AM

Yes it is true what you say Susan , well everyone's stories have something in
common. I too cut off my daughter . She is only 19, but I had to do something
when nothing was working.. She is so abusive to me. That I could not take or
the pain of watching her distroy her life and try and distroy her family too.
Our family will never be the same, but we are strong and must move on. after
so long I started excepting phone calls from her only to find out nothing has
really changed. I just don't need to put up with her constant guilt trips when
I know none of this is my fault. three years of pain.. I am remarried and my
son who is nothing like his sister (thank god) is a senior in high school. You
would think she would want to change to be a part of our good lives. but it
has been two years almost and she hasn't changed.. so we keep strong.. I pray
one day she will change and can be a part of our lives again.. only time will
tell . Only she can take this pain away, by changing how she lives.. I will
always be her mother and always love her, but I cannot watch her distroy her
life knowing she is hurts bad enough..

Reply

  * ![Melinda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Melinda

August 30th, 2010 at 5:38 PM

My 23 year old son turned things around 4 months ago. Yesterday one of his
friends died in a reckless accident involving 2 of his other close friends. We
are both so stunned because he could easily have been involved if he wouldn't
have changed. I feel for everyone & I am so thankful that I still have my son.
He has a new outlook on life & he has a good job & most important he seems to
be happy. We are rebuilding our relationship & I am at peace. I will not dwell
on the past or the future but enjoy the good moments that we have right now. I
will say it again that the main turning point was when I got on this site &
stopped giving him money to buy drugs. He had to change. Words cannot express
how grateful I am for this advise.

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

August 30th, 2010 at 8:42 PM

We are always, of course, pleased when someone writes to share good news about
a child's decision to make a different choice.

But please remember, you can make another choice for yourself and your other
children, regardless of the outcome for the abusing - and abusive - child. It
vis their choice after all despite 75 years of propaganda to the contrary.

Yes, if you don't support the abuse, he or she may choose a differnt life.
They may not, but you don't need to become as self-destructive as they. Don't
let them take you with them.

Ed and Mary Ellen

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

August 31st, 2010 at 8:49 AM

Susan, I can relate so much to your last comment - that you believe your
daughter will not find peace until death. I have come to believe this about my
23 year old son and it is certainly something he screams at me every night in
his drunken rages.

The update on my son is that he got an excellent job a couple of weeks ago. As
I mentioned he is very high intelligence and when sober, amazingly articulate.
I thought this would give him a huge boost - the success he needed to stop
being so depressed and using his "miserable" life as an excuse for his drunken
binges.

He now tells us that he has proven that he can drink like he wants to and
still hold a great job in management. I guess my point is that he just got the
job - he hasn't held anything for any amount of time. Last night was another
fight (3 in the am) because he wanders the house most of the night with his
"insomnia" and his fifth of whatever. I try very hard not to answer him - but
he gets in my face and screams and accuses us of everything from abuse (so not
true) and now abandoning him, leaving him with nothing in his life.

He is angry because he has been evicted. I found some apartments for him, gave
him the info - am willing to write a check for the security deposit (I'll
never see that back the way he lives). We told him to choose. If he was
working (his job is about 50 hours a week) he had the option to stay until mid
\- Oct when the apt. he wants will be ready. However, he is still drinking,
destroying my home and my peace in spite of his great job. Now, he has to
leave after his first paycheck by renting a room by the week. That will be
this Sunday. I just can't watch this anymore. We highly suspect he will screw
this job up and I want him out when he is still getting paychecks.

His drinking is so bad that my husband says it is at the level his mother was
at before she died. I told him he will soon have the liver and heart of a
person twice his age and he said that was what he wants -to hasten his death
so he doesn't have to live in this world longer. He won't continue to see the
therapist he was assigned in rehab - he stopped going to his outpatient
therapy appts. He keeps saying just what Ed and Mary Ellen say on this blog -
he is drinking because he chooses to. He considers this all a very valid
lifestyle.

I am glad to hear Melinda say her son seems to have been shocked back to some
sort of reality. I hope and pray that mine lives long enough to snap out of
this. We don't hold a lot of hope that someone with his lifestyle will be able
to function in a position of responsibility for very long. I read that
Borderline Personality Disorder (his diagnosis) will often burn itself out by
the time the patient is 30 or so. Since he is not yet 24, but this bad off
already, I don't know if he has that long to wait.

Hopefully, being on his own will teach him some things.

diane

Reply

  * ![Kathy Fox](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy Fox

August 31st, 2010 at 11:41 AM

I just got back from trying to pick up my son's few belongings from some
terrible Motel. He has been arrested  
again - this time for theft. He is 23 and is a Heroin  
addict. I love him so much and will never give up trying to  
help him but I can no longer pay for the drugs, attorneys and fines. I am
working two jobs and barely able to pay  
my bills at this point. I really believe I had to get to this point because if
I had it I would still give him money -I just no longer have it. I really need
a lot of reassurance because I want him back so badly. Before the arrest, I
offered to let him come back home for a short period ( a week or so) until he
could get back in a rehab. We argued about the choice of rehab and he said it
had to  
be the one he wanted - The one I had chosen was too long. He wanted to be out
so that he could hook back up with his addict girl friend. I feel so angry and
upset and any other emotion you can think of. Thanks for any advice or help
you could offer.

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

August 31st, 2010 at 12:47 PM

Kathy I can relate to you… I know everyone's problem's are bad, but my
daughter 19, is a herion addict too. It is one of the most dangerous
addictions there is . well if they are iv users. You just never know when they
will get a hot dose and overdose and die. That is what I lived with for three
years. She hasn't lived with me for 2 years, but that doesn't stop me from
being heartbroken and worry. when she does call it kinda relieves the worry
for that moment.. I donot support her in anyway and haven't for years. She
hasn't changed her life, but I donot put up with her constant disrespect and
abuse anymore . She is supposidly going to a methadone clinic and counceling
and has gotten a waitress job. only time will tell me if her life has changed
. She is still with a guy that also has the same problem. They both have stole
things , she used to steal things from her family when she lived with us and
sell them. Her and this guy stole , just haven't gotten caught yet. He is no
good for her if she wants to be clean. So when she is free of those type .
Then I will start to believe she is serious. It is so heartbreaking knowing
she lives this way, but I am trying so hard to keep strong for my son who well
in my eyes is perfect. and I have a new husband who supports me alot and keeps
me from caving in where she is concerned.. I will always love my daughter ,
even if she says and tells the world I don't care someday I hope she
understands. until then I stand strong.

Reply

  * ![Kathy Fox](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy Fox

August 31st, 2010 at 1:25 PM

My son is such a sweetheart - almost never disrespectful but  
is very determined when he needs money. But there has been alot of theft and
forgery and the list goes on. He has only been out of the house a short time
and lived with his brother. His brother could be a great role model for him
and loves him and wants to help him as much as I do. He said he couldn't stay
there anylonger and moved into this motel - Wow what a place. Can't imagine. I
am trying to stay strong though the only thing that keeps me strong is that I
know it wouldn't help him if I caved in. I am so worried that it is never
going to change - he is an IV user. I feel so hollow inside - apart of me is
missing!

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

September 1st, 2010 at 8:48 AM

Kathy,  
We can only pray as you know they have to want to change and it is such an
awful drug to get away from.. I have watch my daughter distroy her life
because she chose to use . She never finished high school. I told her it would
be a start getting her GED, while she says she is going to get it, time just
keeps going on. I want her to get better. I wish I could help her, but like I
said she is very disrespectful to me at most times. There are a few times I
talk to her where we get along ok, but not many. She blames me for everything.
Yes I feel the same way, like apart of me is missing I pray she recovers and
gets clean I want to have some kind of relationship with my daughter,but as
long as she lives this horrible life I cannot . I pray for her everyday, It
just seems like alot of days have went by and nothing has changed. Keep
strong.

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

September 7th, 2010 at 2:29 PM

Thankyou for this great resource to share. I can really relate to many
situations that people are going through, particularly those feelings of
hopelessness and despair. Although, dealing with a parent who is not in
recovery is still a challenge I'm not totally swamped with those feelings like
I used to be.

I guess maybe I don't understand the negative view of recovery groups. I have
been in Alanon for 23 years and my spouse has been sober for 26 years in
AA.(we've been married 22 years) Obviously our experience with recovery groups
has been good, although honestly things have changed a great deal over the
years, and not always for the good. The PRINCIPLES of the program have not
changed and they really work…..however, our culture has changed, which has
affected the fellowship part of the program.  
My experience is that the Alanon program has absolutely helped me so much….I
can really say I think if I had not changed my behavior I don't know how I
could have continued the way I was going. I am the youngest of 4 children. My
mother is a drug addict and I was her chief enabler…however, through the
principles of the program I was shown how to turn loose of the situation and
start living again. (however, I had to do the work, they couldn't do the heavy
lifting for me)  
I don't really have a question, but I did want to give a plug for the
principles of the 12-step program. Also, powerless was never meant to mean
helpless. If anything, a person who is recovering (at least in my experience)
has more accountability, not less. Powerless means that to continue the way
one is going is never going to work. Surrender and change are the only way out
for the person with the addiction. This also applied to me. I had to quit
allowing myself to feel sorry for my mother and to quit being lazy
emotionally, which is what I was. She could wrap me around her little finger
with a combo of tears, threats to harm herself or either me, and lots of other
tricks. Changing the situation was probably one of the most difficult things I
have ever done in my life. The flood of emotions and guilt really felt like it
would destroy me at times….but it hasn't and it hasn't destroyed her either. I
can't say she has changed except she doesn't dump on me anymore (and she is
very bitter about my stopping that behavior in her towards me) but i don't
have the emotional hangovers I used to have, or the waves of depression I used
to have from the anger of letting her use me. One thing that helped me was to
realize that I was exaggerating what would happen when I started saying no to
her….it was ugly, BUT the world did keep on turning:) and the sun came up and
each time it got a little easier, and I got a little stronger.

I must say I am so glad that I got my life back because I truly believe that
God never intended me to live my life that way. Sometimes when I think about
how things were, I can't believe that I lived like that or put up with that
stuf. I guess the further I get away from it, the stranger it seems. I know
that today I would never allow those things to be done to me. Today things are
healthier for me and I am growing and I know that the Alanon program has
helped me to get strong and start living a more positive life no matter what
other people choose to do.  
Thanks for letting me share.  
Gracie

Reply

  * ![diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### diane

September 7th, 2010 at 9:53 PM

Gracie,

Thanks so much for sharing your story - I found it very helpful and it comes
from a place of so much experience. We have Al-Anon meetings close to our home
and I have been wanting to check them out. This gives me the impetus to do
that because you described the very result that I need in my life.

I need to stop feeling so guilty about changing my behavior toward my son and
he is a master manipulator trying to keep me feeling guilty and responsible
for his choices. I could so relate to the part where you said you felt that
this could destroy you or destroy her - that's where I have been living for so
long. I have made a lot of changes to how we handle this situation but he is
still living in our house.

He has a very good job now, works a lot of hours, but he still has a bottle in
the freezer which he comes home to at night. We don't know how long the job
will last if he keeps this pattern - we are desperate to get him out of our
home and out on his own. Thank you for your post, it made a difference to me.
I will check out the meetings - he won't continue to seek treatment and help
but I need the support and camraderie that is offered there.

diane

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

September 8th, 2010 at 9:35 AM

Diane,

Our group has many parents with children of alcoholics/addicts and there is
alot of support there. Even though I have found much support and comfort with
many of the members of Alanon, it is wise not to expect too much. They are
people like you and me who are not perfect, and doing the best they can. I see
many people who expect the people at Alanon to have some magical formula and
fix their problems without them having to do anything.

What has really helped me is to focus on the literature (especially the older
literature which has the undiluted program) as well as other resources that
are phychologically sound. Alanon is just a part of my program of wellness. I
have worked (and continue to work) especially hard with many cognitive therapy
books as well as a small group of people from my church who are dealing with
this same issue. My spouse is a Master's level counselor, so we spend alot of
time and energy in the growth and healing process and that has been what has
worked for me. Change takes alot of work, but it is SO worth it. A good
counselor who will guide you in a healing, growing process is invaluable. But
even with much support, you must do the work. I look at it as if I were taking
a class in school. If I don't prepare, do the work, etc. I'm probably gonna do
lousy. Its not exactly like that, but kinda :)

I see alot of people in Alanon and other places who are miserable, but they
are unwilling to invest the time that's necessary to change. In other words, I
guess I'm saying to find what works for you. When I first came into Alanon it
was very different than it is now. Many of the ladies (and occasionally a
male; there weren't many men back then) had a different mindset. They were
very solution oriented. And obviously they would do what the program would say
and it worked. I think this was when people used to think Alanon was magic….it
seemed to be because it worked so well. That was my experience. However, many
times nowadays, people come in the program and they know everything and then
they start telling you why they are different and the rules don't apply to
them, and obviously they don't get good results and then they leave and tell
everyone, "well I tried that and it doesn't work".  
I just had to go on and do this without my parent ever wanting to get into
recovery (My husband and I took her to several AA meetings, introduced her to
people, bought her the literature, etc but she wasn't interested), but am I
ever glad I went. My oldest sister has joined me (which I never expected) and
we have re-established a friendship which has been a true joy. So even though
I didn't get exactly what I wanted (sober mom) its ok, cause life is good.  
And your life is good, you just have to go and get that good life for
yourself. Just believe that there is a solution that will work. It may not be
easy to find. You may have to try something and re-try many, many times, but
it is there. Believe me, I did not see how in a million years I could ever
solve this problem, but its working out.  
Best Wishes,  
Gracie

Reply

  * ![Charlotte Potter](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Charlotte Potter

September 21st, 2010 at 5:08 PM

I have a stepson that is 22yrs old that is an addict to pot and probably more.
He has been arrested 4 times all for possession. He currently lives with his
grandparents because my husband and I kept too close an eye on him, as my
stepson said. While he lived with us, I made him sign a contract agreeing to
our expectations and if he failed a drug test, he would be asked to leave. I
feel his grandparents are enabling him by letting him live with them, giving
him money, providing food and place to do laundry. He has not worked for over
a year nor does he show any motivation to do so. My husband and I constantly
disagree on the next step in dealing with his son. It is putting a strain on
our marriage to the point I feel like walking away. My husband is in denial
that his son has a PROBLEM. I do not know what to do except keep my mouth
shut. It is tearing me up inside and maybe my marriage. Any advice for a step-
parent of an addict?

Reply

  * ![Edward Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward Wilson

September 22nd, 2010 at 5:49 PM

As a step-parent I do appreciate the difficult position you find yourself in.
However, over the years Mary Ellen and I have consistently offered the same
suggestion: stay out of it.

Again and again we note that we step-parents are not in the child's life by
their choice and it is important that we do NOT assume parental roles. This
just makes us scapegoats and we end up being the target for children, parents,
and grandparents alike as they use us to avoid dealing with problems.

Yes, it often gets to the point of walking away and is, at times, the only
thing to do - but for your own health, not with any hope that it will leverage
anyone else into doing something different.

Again, detatch and focus on your own life and let the others deal with their
own problems. Refuse to engage in what's obviously a "family" problem and
don't end up being a distraction, diversion, and/or the "bad guy".

Dr. Ed Wilson

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

September 23rd, 2010 at 10:17 AM

I got a phone call from my daughter yesterday .. She was threatening to kill
herself and saying her messed up life is my fault.. well this is nothing new.
She recently got picked up by the police and she was so high they took her to
the hospital I'm not sure of any charges.. she wasn't even going to tell me.
My husband works in the same town as she lives in I live about 40 min away
from her. I guess i am in need of advice.. if anybody has any.. It hurts me so
bad when she calls and says all those things to me all my wishing and nothing
ever changes.. should I quit answering when she calls me I don't know what to
do her birthday is in 2 weeks and I am refusing to go see her Is that wrong??
boy I think she has done laid a guilt trip on me again.. I know this is not my
fault.. but It hurts so bad to hear her talk like that over and over.. she
won't get the proper help.. any advice?????

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

September 23rd, 2010 at 6:55 PM

Hi Patty- I totally understand- You don't say how old your daughter is, but I
take it she is an adult. As such, she is making her own choices, no matter how
self destructive they may be. That isn't your fault. We have to take a stand
and not let our children's poor choices ruin our lives also. We can't MAKE
them stop drinking, using drugs, etc.  
My daughter also has been picked up by the police. Once taken to detox (drunk
tank), and another time to the hospital as she was too drunk for detox to take
her. I guess no 'charges' were filed against my daughter by the police, but
she has received bills from ambulance, hospital ER, and ER doctor. I found out
about it only because the bills were sent to our house, where she still lives
off and on. My daughter says she doesn't intend to pay the bills as she would
have been fine if they had left her alone--- she doesn't get it that you are
not 'fine' if you are passed out alone and unresponsive in the city park.  
It is all so sad. I am finally to the place where I do not blame myself, but I
do feel sadness. What a waste of life-  
I hope your daughter doesn't follow through on her suicide threat, but again-
that is her choice. I hope my daughter doesn't die before she accepts the help
(counseling, rehab, medication)we have offered. Her excuse is that rehab
doesn't work. Well, sleeping in the park and being taken to detox or being too
drunk to be taken to detox and taken to the ER instead isn't working either.
Sandy

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

September 24th, 2010 at 9:13 AM

Hi Sandy  
It's nice to have your support. My daughter is 19. She dropped out of school
when she was 16. I have had her in rehab well as much as I could , when she
was living with me she stole hundreds of dollars from me and her brother that
we worked hard for , stole items and sold them for herion.. When I got the law
involved she went to rehab because she thought she had to by the judge. she
got out and she stayed with a family that was trying to help her, she was
clean for 8 months, she wanted to come home so I let her , a month later she
was doing it all again would not listen started stealing again and took off to
stay with the guy she is still with today, being under age I threatened to
call the police so she went to live with her dad, she wouldnt abide by his
rules either and snuck out of the house all the time.. when she turned 18, she
moved in with the guy who she is still with, they are supposidly going to a
methadone clinic and getting clean, but after the other day I will never
belive her she lies to me and is very mean to me when she calls… typical of a
herion addict. I cannot let her live with me I will not go through that pain
again, she tells me I have abandoned her I don't see her very often, It is too
painful to see her while she is like this.. It hurts so bad to see her waste
her life.. I'm sorry if that makes me a bad mother but I can't enable her or
see her.. I honestly pray somedays that she would go to jail it could save her
life.. I am tired of the endless worry. I want to live my life…Patty

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

September 24th, 2010 at 2:00 PM

Thanks, Patty - I really appreciate your comments - I had a little trouble
getting back -sorry for the delay in responding!! I just read your response to
Sandy!! I really hope for you, Sandy and I that peace will come. My son is
still in jail - more charges have been added to what they charged him when he
was arrested. When I go to see him - He looks like his old self and sounds so
full of hope but I can't help remembering the times in the past when he
sounded the same way. I still can't help hoping that this will be the time
that he makes it!! It sounds terrible but I don't worry as much - I know he is
safe!! and not using. I wonder is jail the only place that keeps him on the
right track????

Reply

  * ![susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### susan

September 29th, 2010 at 5:05 AM

To Patty and Others: I understand completely how much it hurts to have contact
with your daughter due to the lifestyle she has chosen. I recently made a
decision to cut off all contact with my daughter after offering her one last
chance for recovery. I borrowed thousands of dollars from family, raided my
401(k) account, so she could be admitted to a private detox/rehab. She walked
out after six days. We had a long conversation before she left treatment, and
I warned her that if she did not stick it out, her family no longer wanted
anything to do with her. While she was choosing to return to her life as an
addict, we certainly were entitled to choose to move on without being
subjected to the pain and drama she creates on an almost daily basis. She
attempts to contact us by phone constantly, but we do not answer. We have
instructed security personnel in our gated community that she is not permitted
to enter. I have only seen her once in the past three weeks, and her physical
appearance and behavior was heartbreaking. I am finding some peace and
stability in my life since I cut her off. I probably should have done it long
ago. She is no longer a topic of discussion between family and friends. She no
longer dominates my thoughts. She is an adult and is finally suffering the
consequences of her behavior. She has no job, no money, no telephone, no car,
and in two weeks she will be homeless as we stopped paying her rent. She is
the only one who can control her destiny. I finally got off the roller
coaster, and she is free to do whatever she pleases without family
intervention. It gets to the point where you have to save yourself, and I'm
there.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 29th, 2010 at 9:59 AM

To Patty, Sandy and Susan,

Hang in there. I have also hit the wall with my son and he finally moved out
last weekend. He does have a very good job now and he has been going. But, he
also is continuing his drinking (we have cleaned out so many fifths) and he
has a fifth of gin and a fifth of Tequila in his freezer right now. But, at
least it is now in his own freezer and he is no longer turning our home into a
sideshow with his behavior.

No more 3 am fights that turn physical, no more listening to him smashing the
walls and furniture downstairs, no more listening to him wailing at the top of
his lungs about his "shit life", no more of his chasing the other kids out of
"his space" (which is our family room), no more worrying about the house
burning down (he smokes pot as well), no more listening to his lies, no more
putting up with his interference with the younger boys and his poor influence
in the house.

He signed a year lease and we helped him set up - gave him some stuff etc. We
are now done. He gets no more. He has taken far more than his share and I can
now concentrate on the others. He works long hours at his job and he hates
every minute of it. He goes to work hung over every day and he may not last.
But, there is a glimmer of hope that he will learn what it takes to live in
this world after all. The last time we tried - he tried to hang himself. I try
not to think about that and I know it could happen again.

But, it is time to reclaim our lives and to finally have some peace. He has
taken so much from our family and from me especially. He is a manipulative,
depressive person who has decided that alcohol is the way to handle his
problems. Rehab didn't work - but it did give him and us a "time-out" and we
used that opportunity to make another plan and truly end this cycle. So, even
though he is still getting drunk every night - some good came out of it. We
now know we did everything we could and he is now an adult who needs to take
responsiblity for his own decisions and actions. Hugs.

diane

Reply

  * ![Connie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Connie

September 29th, 2010 at 11:01 AM

Susan and others,  
I keep you all in my prayers. I know how difficult it is seeing our loved ones
deteriorating mentally and physically. I keep praying to God. They are His
children before they are ours. He loves them and I pray He takes care of them
and gives us all strength, wisdom and knowledge as we continue to live our
lives.  
Hugs to all of you, Connie

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

September 30th, 2010 at 8:57 AM

Upon reading several comments, it just reminded me of how hard it is to take
these actions. It just is NOT easy. Anyone who has dealt with loving someone
and worrying yourself sick about them, knows it.

Some days I would just find a slogan, prayer, something to help me get through
it. "This too shall pass" was helpful alot. [also "Easy Does It" was good for
me on days I was blaming myself, or someone else, or trying to force a
solution] plus my own private prayers and scripture that was personal and
helpful (and encouraging) to me. The main thing is to find what works for you.
I have found for me I need that extra dose of spiritual encouraging words and
I have learned that it is good and healthy to take care of your needs. I used
to feel almost embarrassed that I needed this. Now I know that I have a right
to a good life. I also have a right to remove myself from a constantly chaotic
environment. It took me a long time to really believe and act on this, though.

I also found journaling sometimes saved my sanity. (this doesn't work for
everyone) Sometimes I could talk to people, but not always….those times I used
journaling, reading uplifting and encouraging material really helped me to
relax and quit (? maybe lessen is a better word than quit) my worrying and
obssessing. Getting involved in activites that I enjoyed was important too.
When I first started making these changes I was overwhelmed (mad, sad, etc)
about how I let this one person and their daily soap opera become the center
of my life.

Some days were worse than others, and bad news would always send me in a
tailspin. But it has gotten better…so much better. I just applaud everyone for
having the courage to move in a positive direction.

My thoughts and prayers are with everyone who is hurting.  
Gracie

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 30th, 2010 at 11:43 AM

To Connie and Gracie,

Thanks and hugs to you as well. It helps to hear from everyone else here on
how they cope and how they are staying strong.

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

September 30th, 2010 at 8:05 PM

Diane, Connie, Gracie, and many, many others: I so appreciate you sharing your
stories, as it helps me realize I AM NOT ALONE.  
Right now, my daughter is back living at home, and she is aware that this is
her last chance. She is on some anti-depressant medication that she has need
to resume for years. She has to come home every night, and find a job. She is
to give us her paychecks, which we will put aside so she can have enough money
to move out. As long as she is here, and required to come home every night,
she will not be drinking. It is great for now, as she is happy and healthy and
not drinking. She doesn't yet have a job, so no money for alcohol, and she
knows that if she doesn't come home- even for one day- she is out.  
I pray she stays on the medication as that seems to help, but I suspect that
as soon as she is out of our home, she will go back to drinking. She has made
that much clear. She refuses counseling or rehab.  
The week before we allowed her back home, she was taken to the ER by the detox
place as she as 'unresponsive' and sleeping in the park. The didn't take her
to detox as she was too far gone. I guess they don't want people having
cardiac or respiratory arrest while in detox, so if you are that far gone,
they take you to the ER. My daughter has no insurance, so now has a $1500 bill
for that visit.  
She has that, along with many other bills and collection notices as she has
quit every job she has ever had and ended up at those 'Quick Cash' places to
get $$ for alcohol.  
It is all so sad- she is pretty (so far), intelligent, and funny and happy
when she is mentally stable, but going off the meds just leads to drinking
daily, ending up in the park or at some new 'friend's' place for days/weeks in
an alcoholic stupor.  
What a waste of life.  
Thank everyone for sharing their stories. It is a solace to know that we are
not alone. Sandy

Reply

  * ![Connie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Connie

September 30th, 2010 at 9:37 PM

My Daughter is not acting right again. I am so tired. Sometimes I feel and
think the unthinkable, but I'm going to write it. It's not all the time, but
sometimes, I feel if my daugher would overdose, peace would finally come…for
her and her children and our family and friends. Gone would be the worry,
fear, stress and the roller coaster of emotions that we keep riding on. She
would be at peace.

Sometimes I feel my daughter died several years ago and a demon inhabited her
body and keeps toying with my emotions. Waiting until I am at my breaking
point and then cruelly dangle glimpses of "the daughter I once knew" in front
of me to tease me to continue this journey from hell.

I feel guilty when I have these thoughts. They are not thoughts a loving
mother should have. They are not words I can say out loud, especially to
people who do not understand the level of pain addiction has caused our
family. I pray and confess my thoughts to God. I ask His forgiveness. He helps
me most when I am at my weakest moments. Connie

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 1st, 2010 at 9:31 AM

Connie,

Please don't beat yourself up over these thoughts. I live in that place. My
son tried to commit suicide about a year ago. I was in shock because I didn't
think something like that could ever happen to us. He got so drunk and was
taking prescription drugs at the time. My life has never been the same since.
He was placed in a behavioral medicine ward of a local hospital and spent a
week there. But, he came out and said it made him worse.

I was shook to my very core. But, sometimes, during this last year, I have had
these terrible, creeping thoughts that maybe it would have been better had he
succeeded because at least it would be over and we could move on. He spent the
next 9 months threatening me multiple times a day that he was going to do it
again. I had nightmares every night about it. My younger kids were afraid to
check on him in his room (where he would sleep to 5 pm and not respond when we
knocked) because they were terrified to find him dead.

My husband's older brother committed suicide at 20 and it was just devastating
to their family. This child of mine is so like his uncle - he is an alcoholic
with an addictive personality. He also has been diagnosed with Borderline
Personality Disorder. He has an extremely high IQ and over time, has chased
away almost all of his friends. He is very good-looking but considers himself
ugly. He tells us over and over that he does not want to live.

I have actually visualized his funeral in my mind. I am struggling so hard so
I can cope if the time comes and some days I am convinced it's just when. I
have three other children and a husband and I don't want to let him take me
with him. After my husband's brother died, his mother became a terrible
alcoholic and she died 10 miserable (for everybody) years to the day he did.

He also sometimes has glimmers of his old self. He moved out recently, but now
I am tortured because the last time he did, he attempted. He lives close to
us, and one day seems fine, the next very depressed. He is still drinking,
going to the bar every night - but he refuses any kind of help or medication.

I know what you mean about feeling like a horrible mother/person. But, I think
we are just trying to prepare ourselves for what could happen so they don't
take us down with them. The most helpful thing anyone told me thus far was to
separate the memories I have of him as the child he was from the the adult he
has become. He is not the same. His life choices and dispositions have killed
that bright, eager beautiful child I raised and this addict, a shell of a
person really, is what has taken his place.

I have hope now for him. He has a good job that I pray he can retain and he
says he is looking for an even better one. He signed a year lease and I am
hoping he finally engages in his own life and finds a reason to live. We will
continue to support him in a way that is appropriate for parents to an adult
child. He lives close to us so we can try to keep tabs on him in some way.

I know what you mean by what you said but I think only someone who has lived
this could possibly understand. We get extended family who are full of advice
and always butting in about how we have to "do something" and "whatever it
takes." They just don't understand how much we have already done, risked and
suffered and the pain it has taken to get to this point.

You and I are terrified, exhausted, heartbroken, and becoming resigned. It is
a self-preservation mechanism and we crave peace in our lives and in our minds
and hearts. If something happens, at least we would know where they are and
that they are not cold, hungry, tired and hurting anymore. That's the point
and it's a fine line on the edge of a cliff that we walk every waking moment.

Hugs to you and I hope we have better days ahead.  
diane

Reply

  * ![Connie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Connie

October 2nd, 2010 at 11:32 AM

Thank you Diane. I know people on this site understand each other. This is
something you must live through to fully understand. That is why I appreciate
everyone who posts and share their intimate details of their pain.  
I hope your son will continue to do well. I will keep everyone in my prayers.
God Bless

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

October 10th, 2010 at 11:43 AM

Connie, Dianne, Sandy & others,  
My thoughts and prayers are with you. These are some difficult moments to go
through. I have another family member who is going through this with an adult
child and I try to share my experience with them. There are many similarities,
but the main one is we love someone who is self-destructing and we can't
change that.

Lately I've been reading a book about how to get this train wreck (me…lol)
back on track…..well, basically that's what the book is about. Its really
helpful, but its written for parents with adult children. I just change it to
fit my circumstances, but the principles are the same. I love it, cause one
thing is says is…."Don't be quick to blame yourself, even if you spoiled this
person. You have the right to make mistakes and your not a parental failure if
you made some mistakes.  
You have the right to make mistakes the same as everybody else. Behavior is
learned! Your child (or anybody else) can learn to develop self-control in his
or her life as well as avoid it. Most of the happy, productive people we know
today are that way because they worked at it. They overcame. "….

I am hanging onto this because it gives me hope when I continue to get really
bad news. This week has been hard. My oldest sister and I are trying to stick
together on this, but it is hard. My mom is really in bad shape, however,
nothing is really new about that. What is better is ME. She has a choice, even
now. That is true and it will always be true, even though she blames her
problems on everyone…it doesn't change the fact that her problems are of her
own making….no one has done this to her, she did the whole thing to herself.  
For me, I am doing my life and actually things are going good. My hubby had
back surgery and everything went very well and he is doing good. You know,
life goes on and even though addicted people think they are the center of the
universe, they aren't. I am still having to teach myself that my life can be
good, even if her life is lousy (she thinks). That nagging guilt is a little
better, but still lingers sometimes.  
thanks for listening,  
Gracie

Reply

  * ![Charlotte](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Charlotte

October 10th, 2010 at 4:25 PM

I am a stepmom responding to what Ed said that I should stay out of the family
problems. I know I am a step-parent and that my addicted stepson did not
choose me to be in his life. I helped care and raise him since he was 10 yrs
old. I feel like I have a say in what goes on in our family and that involves
my husband's son. Why do you say to stay out of it? I have been involved in my
step-son's life for over 13 yrs. Why shouldn't I have an opinion, because at
this pt I am the only one that is NOT in DENIAL that this kid has a problem.
Every family member thinks that this kid does not have a problem. You tell me
that an adult of 23 yrs of age that has been arrested 5 times in 4 yrs all
drug related. Has no job, no home, no money, no motivation, no skills. He
claims he is always THE VICTIM. He always makes bad decisions and is selfish
and does not even see what he is putting the family through. The addicted
step-son thinks that smoking pot and taking RX drugs is OK. His friends are
all losers and probably do drugs also. He parties all night and sleeps all
day. He seems to find money for partying and drugs and cigarettes. He
currently stays with his grandparents because we keep too close an eye on him
and he wants to be closer to his "friends". It seems that each time he gets
into trouble with the law, he is with his loser friends. We are just waiting
for another phone call, that he has been arrested AGAIN!!!!

Reply

  * ![Lou](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lou

October 14th, 2010 at 6:35 PM

Tonight I met with friends, planning a weekend away, after working all week
and planning this time away I felt very happy. Then, an hour after getting
home, my son calls, from jail, telling me he needs me in court tomorrow
morning. He's been arrested, and of course, it's not his fault.  
Should I leave him in jail? This isn't the first time this year. I helped him
in March.  
I know this isn't a good bio for all that has happened in the past, but he's
37 and he should be working, in a home of his own and not calling me from
jail.  
Thanks for listening.

Reply

  * ![Ed & Mary Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Ed & Mary Ellen

October 14th, 2010 at 8:48 PM

Why would you want to rescue him from the consequences of his choices? An if
you do, why would you expect him to make different choices in the future?

No, you can't make him change his choices, but you don't have to validate the
ones he's making either.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 15th, 2010 at 9:46 AM

Lou,

I didn't have to deal with jail in my situation but I can tell you that the
only time I have seen progress with my son is when I stopped stepping in and
helping him out of his bad choices and decisions and started treating him in
an age-appropriate way.

We ended up telling him he had to move out and he couldn't come back to live
here - now he has a steady job and he has signed a years lease (so he can't
just quit because he doesn't like working). He has plans to finish his degree
and he seems much better all around.

I suspect he is still drinking every night but I stopped worrying about it
because I can't change his behavior, only mine. If he is, he will live with
the consequences or he will have to figure out how to drink and do what else
he has to do. I don't like it - but I won't have to watch it and let it eat
away at me any longer.

At 37, I would say that your son has to live up to his responsiblilites and
consequences as an adult. You can try to support him in ways that are age-
appropriate for a father to a grown son. If it were me, I wouldn't be able to
afford all the legal bills that something like this would cause anyway. Maybe
you could bring him court clothes and show up for his court appearances. But,
it's not up to you to rescue him from this situation. Maybe if he knows he
won't be rescued - he will stop making these self-destructive choices. I hope
so.

I know this is hard. We walk on the edge every day - but you need to be freed
of this by the time your child is approaching middle age -that's for sure!

hugs,  
diane

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

October 15th, 2010 at 6:06 PM

Lou- I understand your pain and indecision- however, if you keep rescuing your
son, he will keep expecting this. My daughter only began to move in a (mostly)
positive direction when she came to realize that we will NOT rescue her again.
She is an adult, and her life is her own and is the result of the sum of her
choices. We will not bail her out financially, or bail her out of jail. We do
not give her money. At present, she is living with us, but she knows that this
is it. If she becomes unemployed again, or if she gives us any reason to
believe she is drinking again, she will need to move to a shelter. We are
finished with the rescuing, and we are at peace with that decision. All the
fixing, rescuing, etc did nothing but caused her behavior to continue and to
escalate.  
Of course, it is your decision whether or not to rescue your son again. Once
you take control of your own life and make your son take charge of his own
life and be accountable for his decisions and choices, things may improve.  
In life, there are no guarantees- but continuing on the same path of rescuing
will likely mean he will continue to be helpless and expect to be rescued.  
Sandy

Reply

  * ![Edward Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward Wilson

October 16th, 2010 at 6:24 AM

These are all excellent points, Sandy, and I would only add that the son isn't
helpless - but merely playing at being helpless because it's how he's avoiding
growing up. We work with many clients in their 20s and early 30s and their
families and the issue is always the same one - "I shouldn't have to grow up".

There are several excellent programs (and hundreds of dreadful ones) in the
U.S. that can help. At least 3 are reasonably affordable. But the key remains
\- as long as you rescue them, why would they choose to grow up?

Ed

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

October 18th, 2010 at 11:14 AM

Hey, Lou -  
You have gotten plenty of good advice - I went to court to support my son this
morning!! There is no bail but I wouldn't pay it if there were. I felt sick on
my stomach after leaving the courtroom. The court process is going to be a
slow and long one. I expected it but still have so many emotions.  
This is such a tough situation. Just wanted you to know you are not alone and
let us know what you decide and how it goes.

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

October 20th, 2010 at 5:03 AM

my 32 year old daughter is in jail for the third time, its an example of the
level of disfunction in her life. She is an addict, and has been for the last
8 years, its been a long walk in hell. Of course nothing I do has helped, I
have had custody of my 13 year old grandaughter, her loyalty to her mother is
unbelievable,after a year I let her return to an unsafe and totally
inappropriate household, she kept emotionally fighting me to return to her
mother, it was a no win situation.  
In the last 10 years I have experienced suicide (of my grandaughters
biological father, yes drugs involved) I experienced fraud of a large sum of
money, and eight years of addiction from my only child, an adult child. My
confidence in myself is shattered, I feel isolated and alone. Thank God for
this website. Amen

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 21st, 2010 at 8:53 AM

Maree,

I think it's wonderful that you took custody of your grandaughter, you tried
to do the right thing for her. At least now, she will know that she can turn
to you if she needs someone. It's not your fault that she was so loyal to her
mother - addicts can be so manipulative and so charming. Your grandaughter is
probably caught up in taking care of her mother. When she is a little older
she may come back to you.

I'm sorry you have to go through all of this. You have to let go of the idea
that there is something you can do about it. Your daughter, at 32,knows that
her life is a mess. She also knows what is causing it. All you can do is be
there if she ever comes to the realization that she has to change. She has to
decide this for herself. The more we struggle and step in, the worse it gets.

I hope that things get better for you. Don't lose confidence in yourself, you
are not the addict, you are not dysfunctional, you are not the one going in
and out of jail. This is so hard - these are our children. We can stop them
from making self-destructive choices when they are young but we quickly lose
that leverage - and all we can do is hope and wait for them to truly grow up
and take responsibility for their own actions and choices.

hugs,

diane

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

October 21st, 2010 at 2:17 PM

Thank you so much for you support Diane, I feel like at least there is one
person in the world that has heard me, thank you. My daughters lifestyle is
only the centre of the tangled web, it also inpacts on my physical health,
high blood pressure, I can no longer cope with stress in the workplace, I am a
nurse, unfortunately the two go hand in hand, I am considering down grading to
do anything that gives me peace, obviously that will impact on income but that
has been pretty shattered in the last 8 years anyway. Do other parents find
that their lives become shadows of what they once were, or is it just my
circumstances.

Reply

  * ![Susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan

October 21st, 2010 at 4:07 PM

Hi Maree. You've got plenty of company, not to worry. My husband just turned
60 and I am close behind. We have been emotionally and financially drained by
our 28 year old addict daughter as well. I swear she would take our last dime
and drive over us on her way out to get a fix and not look back. As you
mentioned, eventually our children's behavior causes us to be physically ill
from the stress of the day to day BS they subject us to. There are no children
involved in our situation, and I am thankful for that. It must be terrible to
have to worry 24 hours a day not only about your daughter, but your
granddaughter as well. We own a business with our daughter, a joint venture
entered into during a time when she was in recovery. What was her dream has
become our nightmare, and makes it very difficult for us to cut off all
contact with her. Since she has abandoned the business leaving us holding the
bag, we cannot even take a vacation. Our lives are a mess!

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

October 22nd, 2010 at 2:56 PM

Susan, what is this universal joke we are caught up in, through no intentional
choice of our own, there must be something wonderful waiting for us somewhere
somehow. Recovery is a scary place it seems, yes there has been small windows
of clarity and self recovery for my daughter, however the fall from grace is
cruel and has left me gasping for breath and sitting on the toliet for the
day. Yes the long term stress certainly crucifies. You have given your
daughter complete faith and love in following her dream, and what parent whos
child is in recovery wouldnt, to return to a sane life and have our children
back, the way they were before the drugs twisted their personalities we would
give away all possessions, and we virtually do. Thank you for writting to me,
I feel strength and support, the best gift.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 23rd, 2010 at 2:17 PM

I've had such a rough day today. My almost 24 year old son, is a long and
complicated story, that I have told on here. I have mentioned that we put our
foot down, supported him while he was in a treatment center for alcoholism,
and then let him move back in to get his life together.

Well, that didn't work because he started drinking again the first day back
and he became impossible for us to live with. The screaming, property
destruction, refusing to work or contribute anything to the household,
bullying the younger kids etc. We kicked him out of the house and thought that
he had secured himself a decent job. He signed a year's lease and we did some
survellience and he was working. He even had printed business cards.

Now, it seems he either quit that job or got fired. He told us he just
switched jobs and was making about the same money in his new job. We found out
today that this is just another of his "fake" jobs - he has had so many. He
has been saying strange things on his facebook and not answering his phone. We
went to his apartment and buzzed and buzzed and even though his car was there
he didn't answer.

We feared the worst and used a key (he didn't know we had an extra) and his
father and I went in. He was in the apartment and it was a terrible scene. He
has completely trashed it in less than a month. He obviously has been kicking
his tv, stereo equipment and computer which were in pieces on the ground.
There were clothes, bottles and trash everywhere. He never opens the blinds
just sits there in the dark. It was horrifying but this is what he was doing
in our house when he lived there.

He was so furious that we had a key and let ourselves in. He was screaming at
us and irrational (I'm surprised that nobody called the cops - walls are
thin). He told us he is living off his "investments" and he cut back his hours
to part time. All lies and we know it. He looked a mess. I tried to calmly
talk to him - tell him how afraid we were for him. He told us it is his life
to live or die and we needed to leave him alone to do it. My husbands brother
committed suicide at 20 and this one has already tried once.

I realized that he is right. It is his life. We have done all we can. I can't
keep trying to keep him alive as it is taking everything from me and from the
rest of my family. We really didn't have a right to come into his apartment
and if he had called the police (he threatened to) we would have been in the
wrong.

I told him that I was done. If he wants further contact with us - he will have
to initiate it. I won't be calling him (usually he won't answer) or texting or
IM him to see if he is ok. I won't be cold-calling him anymore just to be
ignored and I certainly won't be coming into his apartment without his
consent. I won't keep asking or wondering if he is ok because I iknow the
answer - he isn't and he won't do anything about it. I told him he could come
over when he wants and ask if he needs anything. He can come over to watch
sports with us or his brothers and sister. He came in last night to our house
and wouldn't even talk to his sister - she said it was like he was looking
right through her.

He won't stop drinking. All rehab did for him was introduce him to drug
dealers whom he has befriended. He won't work. He won't seek any kind of help.
We won't be part of it anymore. I am very sad today and have a social function
to go to this evening. It's the last thing I feel like doing but I will forge
ahead. I want to live, I want to have a normal life, I want to look ahead. I
want to enjoy my other kids. I am so tired and sick of all this.

Thanks for listening,

diane

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

October 24th, 2010 at 10:41 AM

Diane- I'm so sorry to hear this about your son. After I wrote my last post,
my daughter also 'fell off the wagon' and has again been drinking. We had made
a deal with our daughter that if he began drinking again, she would have to
leave.  
She called drunk one night after work, told us she would not be home, and
would be back in a couple of days to get her things. She knew that this was
the consequence.  
When she came to get her things, we asked her plans. She said she had met a
guy who lived in an apartment downtown (meaning sleeze low rent apartments for
druggies/alcoholics in our town). He was 'older' and was going to 'help' her.
She didn't know his last name, just that he went by Dwight.  
She didn't know where he worked, or IF he worked. Our daughter kept saying she
would have her own room and would not have to pay rent for awhile. Dwight was
her friend.  
Well, this was just too stupid- our daughter is 25, attractive, and seemed to
fall for this guy Dwight's line. To us, it sounded like he was some kind of
drug dealer, pimp, or some other kind of perv.  
My husband couldn't take this, and to some extent, I couldn't either. We told
her she could come back, and my husband made the deal she could go out and do
what she wanted once a week. Not my idea of a good deal, but I couldn't say
no. My husband was so devastated, and if something horrible happened to our
daughter if she moved in with this guy, he would blame me. I probably would
also.  
So, we are back on the merry-go-round.  
My daughter came home yesterday after he 'day off' where she can do what she
wants. She came home drunk, smelling horrible- like old booze, and she slept
all day.  
She is working, and we are saving her paycheck so she can move out. I don't
see any solution to this nightmare at this point. She is making spending money
giving plasma twice a week. We have tried to get her to stop this, but since
she will only work part time- says she 'can't find' full time work, she gets
$$ from the plasma center downtown.  
I am able to kind of compartmentalize her now, and not let thoughts of her sad
life consume me. But-- it is all such a waste.  
Sandy

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 24th, 2010 at 12:40 PM

I like what you said Sandy, compartmentalize. That's a good word and a very
good philosophy. Otherwise this crap just takes over your whole life. We are
left to sit and wonder what will happen to him when he maxes out his credit
line and can't pay it back or pay his rent and bills. That is coming.

My father has offered to pay for a family attorney to help us figure out what
to do. We know other people who have adult kids on some sort of benefits
because they are addicts and mentally ill. I know my son is mentally and
emotionally ill. He has been in double depression for many years now and is
borderline personality and perhaps bipolar. He simply can't function in the
world.

I hope things get better for you very soon - I am going to see what I can do -
he is paid up til January on rent so I don't have much time. I would rather
see if Social Services works with this kind of thing - otherwise he will just
be sitting on my doorstep in January.

diane

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

November 1st, 2010 at 2:15 PM

Just wondering if anyone saw the study that came out describing alcohol as the
most dangerous drug. For those of us that have experienced the ravages of
alcoholism this is hardly a surprise. I have watched so many just in our
circle of family and friends that have struggled so hard with this demon and
several that have lost their lives. My son is the latest casuality as he
chooses this "socially acceptable" addiction as his primary drug of choice.

I always find it interesting when they are trying to analyze things of this
nature - all the drugs are devastating and it just goes to show you that an
addict is an addict whatever their preferred method of destruction may be. The
article on this study can be found at comcast.net/articles/news-
general/20101101/NEWS-US-DRUGS-ALCOHOL/

Any thoughts from the experienced contributors here?

Reply

  * ![Dale](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dale

November 26th, 2010 at 3:22 PM

I am going through a situation with my older daughter (42) mother of five; she
is out of control, blames me for every problem she ever had and I am afraid
she will die of an overdose or acute alcohol poisoning. This article was of
some comfort because it reinforced what friends have been saying: that she is
choosing the behavior. I raised 4 children and thankfully the other 3 are non
abusers; but my son has cancer and between the two issues and a distance of
3000 miles, I am riddled with anxiety and tension all the time, to say nothing
of depression. Thanks for the opportunity to view this situation a different
way.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

December 11th, 2010 at 8:19 PM

So ironic, the last time I posted, I told of my son who had been clean from
oxycodone use for 14 months. Around the time I posted that, he relapsed! I
gradually realized what was going on, but he finally told me last week. He is
currently at my house, detoxing. (I am an RN, but I don't recommend home detox
in most cases). Anyway, I always tried to be the voice of hope, now I feel
fairly crushed. He still has his job, but it may be dependent upon his being
able to work on Tuesday. He is on thin ice for poor performance (sales job).
It is so difficult for the non-addicted person to understand how a person who
is free of the physical part of dependency could even THINK of using again! He
was depressed over a breakup. I know that many more depressing things are
going to happen in his life, so now I wonder if he will ever be clean. I still
stand by my belief that we should not help our loved ones be addicts, only
help them do positive things. He was great during those clean months! I am
pretty devastated right now. Hope my next post will be more positive.

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

December 12th, 2010 at 12:04 PM

Dawn- I so understand your pain. Since my last post my daughter has been taken
to the ER for drinking and being found passed out in the park. After that, she
went to rehab at our insistance- she left after 3 days. We took her to a place
300 miles away thinking she wouldn't be able to call a friend to pick her up,
but she ended up calling a cab from the rehab place and her first stop was the
liquor store. Some lady (an angel) found her passed out in the bushes behind a
Taco Bell, and took her home and called us to come and pick her up. We made
that trip, brought her home, and she again left our home after a week and
moved in with 2 guys she met ?? who would buy her vodka and cigarettes and let
her stay at their place for free. Writing and reading this saga it sounds too
incredible to be true, but it is. We are nice middle class people, married, no
fighting or abuse or anything in our family, we weren't overly strict or
anything weird, so this is something we just can't fathom. Our daughter is 25-
never held a job more than a couple of weeks, went to college and dropped out
on two different occasions due to alcohol and not making to class, she is
attractive, intelligent, etc etc etc. So much potential just going to waste.
Last night, a dear friend of hers again talked her into 'coming back home' to
get her life straightened out. So…… she is here again, asleep and no doubt
hungover. She will have alcohol withdrawal as she has been drinking a fifth of
vodka a day. It is tragic that these young people are throwing away so much.
They have to be in pain, but how to save them if they don't want to be saved?
I just hope my next post is not worse. I keep thinking things can't get worse,
that she will have hit bottom, but her lows just keep getting lower.  
I think my daughter may be suicidal at this point as she believes things are
so awful she has too far to climb out. We offer love, rehab, medical help,
counseling, etc but so far she refuses. I think if we fear she will harm
herself, we can get her admitted to a locked in hospital situation, but that
is only for 48-72 hours, and we would have to get her there. It is a sad
roller coaster. I am going to go to counseling myself to try and at least save
my husband and myself from being sucked under also.

Reply

  * ![Edward Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward Wilson

December 12th, 2010 at 7:17 PM

The really hard part of these stories is that these children are making
choices. They aren't diseased, or powerless, or dumb, just making awful
choices which, to them, seem preferable to growing up. That is, after all, the
alternative.

Happily there is one program in the country which has excellent success rates
with young adults. That is the Jude Thaddeus program in up-state N.Y.
(soberforever.com) and we regularly refer parents to them.

They also have an excellent home based program which allows you to understand
what's going on and how you can at least save yourself.

Dr. Ed Wilson

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

December 12th, 2010 at 8:06 PM

Thanks, Sandy. I am so sorry for what you are going through. My mother was
like your daughter: beautiful, intelligent, accomplished, and alcoholic. I
hate so much to see this play out again with my son. He is now finishing his
third day of detox, and feels much better. I have to go to work tomorrow, so
we will see. He has to go to work Tuesday. His dealer has already been calling
him, lowering his prices, etc. How can I help him avoid temptation? I just
wish scientists could figure out what turns "on" and "off" the addiction part
of the brain.

Reply

  * ![Diana](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diana

December 13th, 2010 at 8:17 AM

Hi, to everyone  
I have been looking for a long time for this kind of site. People whom i can
relate to. I have felt so alone. I have adult children who are addicted to
drugs and alcohol. My daughter, who is 34 and a half is in jail now and has
been since june 21 of this year. She has been sentenced to 10 years, of which
she has to do 5 inside and 5 probation. She pulled out in front of abunch of
motorcycles in spring of 2009 and killed a woman. She had been a functioning
alcoholic and then got addicted to pills. I now know where she is and that she
is not going to overdose. Thats not my only problem. I have a son who is 26.
He works hard everyday. He is a waterman. He drinks daily. Smokes pot. He
lives in a mobile home his step dad and i fixed up for him on our land but
away from us. He has lived there for over six years. He is destructive when he
drinks. Blacks out and does not remember things. I have been living a
nightmare. I have gotten so many phone calls in the middle of the night
because of fights during a party at his house. He calls and is screaming,
crying, crazy. It is heartwrenching, and scary. It is worse on weekends. Thats
when there are more parties. I had to resort to unplugging my phones so i
could stop my heart from racing. I have been doing this for about 2 and a half
years on friday and saturday nights. Now i have to do it on sundays. Cause
sunday is a drinking day for the people he hangs with. It has even creeped
into the week. I am so startled by the ring of a phone. My heart seems to
never stop racing. I feel there is no end in sight. I have enabled him. He
makes good money and blows it all. I am so tired of all the worry. It is
causing great problems with my life. My marriage. I have depleated our savings
doing just that, trying to save them. He had a wonderful girlfriend one time
who after two years had to walk away. The drunken rages got to be more than
she could take. Ihave wished i had the ability to walk away… But how do you
walk out of your childs life? His dad is a drunk as well. 55, and lives with
his 88 year old mother. He buys food. thats it. So my son has NO support
system except me. He is my heart. But my heart is broken. I am down in the
dumps, would rather be alone with myself. It has taken a toll on my marriage.
Sometimes i just want to walk away from them all. But i have no financial
means to do that. And i am not working. I suffer from migrains. I just feel
like i am sinking and there is no way out. I don't want to go on like this. I
am missing out on my own life and making myself sick. But, i am glad i
stumbled upon this site this morning. People to share with. Thankyou..

Reply

  * ![Edward W.Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward W.Wilson

December 13th, 2010 at 9:57 AM

Unhappily, it isn't the "addiction part of the brain" that needs turned off …
it's the myth that these people aren't making choices, choices whose short
term rewards they have decided to substitute for those of the long term. They
have chosen, and continue to choose, self-medication over getting a life and
living a life.

But don't be mislead by all of the propaganda out there that passes for help -
and don't excuse or accept behaviors based on false ideas like "powerlessness"
and "diseases", both have been debunked repeatedly over the last 40 years but
both keep coming back, pushed by those who will do anuything to prevent people
from recovering.

You adult children can recover - but they have to want to, and they have to be
willing to put in the effort it takes to actually create a life. You can help
them best by not helping with anything other than acknowledging actual
measurable progress.

Reply

  * ![Linda mcdonald](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Linda mcdonald

April 5th, 2014 at 9:30 AM

I don't believe my 32 year old daughter can"recover" from
lying,cheating,manipulating,pitting people against each other for
entertainment,addictive behavior and abuse…..arrogant,sense of entitlement…she
was born that way….yes,drugs and alcohol make it worse,but it doesn't make it
go away…..she is in her ninth month of Recovery….from alcohol…and drugs….now
her brilliant mind is even sharper and better able to play" God"……she plays
games with her P.O.,her counselors, dr.s…others in her groups….and enjoys
it….she loves the attention…of coming clean and recovery ect…..she thinks she
is the best story ect….and people are entertained by her…I don't really know
how much she suffers…she is a little sad sometime. That she hasn't used her
intelligence and education to make herself appear successful…..and money is
very important to her…..not just the stealing and pawning…and taking support
money for drugs and alcohol…she's not doing that any more…it's the power and
control money gives…..I have people in my family with head trauma,war related
PTSD …including two sons….mother and another daughter bi polar,…social anxiety
disorder…panic attacks….true alcoholism….depression …there have been varying
degrees of success and recovery…..but this daughter is different….how can you
"recover" from something you have always been …..and just comes natural to you
and you like it? I have empathy for everyone here….my daughter has torn apart
any relationship I've ever had….I don't enable….and she knows I won't….plus I
am an honest person…she hates honest people and thinks they ate stupid….so she
try's to punish me for that.I DONT BUY INTO IT…IT JUST MAKES HER MORE
HATEFUL!!!. I take care of her kids,because otherwise she would leave them
with users and a abusive people….otherwise we have no relationship. When I
accepted there could be no recovery in this case, things seem less rocky…I am
a positive person and have my hope and faith. This daughter does not like
goodness and truth…..she believes they are weaknesses ….so why waste it on her
.?

Reply

  * ![louise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### louise

October 17th, 2016 at 3:29 AM

Dear Linda, your daughter sounds very much like my son who at 18 was diagnosed
with ASPD or antisocial personality disorder. You can look up the Hare test
for this on google. It unfortunately did explain a great deal to me.
Sometimes, however just some measure of understanding can help.

  * ![Connie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Connie

December 14th, 2010 at 8:58 AM

Diana,  
I feel your pain! We just want responsible adult children! I stuggle a lot due
to my daughter having a 4 yr old. It's hard not to enable my daughter while
making sure my grand-daughter is ok. I buy all my grand-daughters clothes and
toys. I want her to have as normal of life as possible. I won't allow her to
go to preschool without clean, proper clothes. If my daughter didn't have
children, I think it would be so much easier. I also have my grand-daughter as
much as possible. I don't give my daughter any money and I don't pay her
bills. If utilities get cut off - they stay off until she figures out a way to
pay the bill. I don't give her any money. She seems to be drug/alcohol free.
She is constantly tested by the probation officer. But I think now it is
depression and her brain is not the same. She still needs to make choices. She
could get a different Dr. or take better care of herself (she has type 1
diabetes). Whatever the reason - she is not making good choices - and it is
CHOICES!  
We all have to make choices. I get depressed, pissed off, upset, angry, sick,
tired, etc… but I choose how to deal with these emotions. EVERYONE makes
choices - Sadly most addicts don't make the RIGHT choices. As long as you keep
making it possible for him to continue his lifestyle- he probably won't
change.  
I know it's hard. I have to work hard everyday to detach myself from my
daughter. I hope one day she can be happy again but it is her decision. I know
if I choose to make life easier for her, it will help her not to become
responsible. If there is a day in the future that she does something against
probation - I would turn her in immediately. If she would ever cause a
disruption around me or at my house- I would have her arrested. if she called
and harrased me- I would press charges.  
You deserve a life - Put his choices back on HIS plate. You should fill your
plate with enjoyable fun things :) and start enjoying life:)

Reply

  * ![Connie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Connie

December 14th, 2010 at 9:19 AM

Diana,  
One more thing…you are not his support system. You are just someone he uses. A
support person is someone who is there to support good choices and encourage
them when they are progressing. You can let him know you love him and are a
support person when he makes the right choices. You are not leaving him…you
are just not going to enable bad choices.  
If you want him to be strong and make better choices - YOU must set a good
example by making better choices yourself, by not enableing him.

I'm not saying it's easy - I have stumbled a few times myself, but I get right
back on track. I have support people who help ME make better choices when it
comes to her.

My daughter knows I will have her arrested if she makes a wrong choice - but
she also knows I love her and support her when she makes right choices.  
I will keep you in my prayers!! God Bless.

Reply

  * ![tina](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### tina

December 30th, 2010 at 7:30 AM

I know everyone's pain as well. We have an adult son with a drug problem. He
has been arrested and is now off of his 2 years no more legal problems. He has
went to outpatient rehab daily and as a family we went on family day. We had
an intervention and it went surprisingly well. he went no problem and was gone
for 7 months. now he had issues in treatment but he did well. Then he came
home and was fine for a while but soon went back to sneaking and smoking and
using occasionally. we did drug test him randomly. We asked him to sign his
self in for help and he didn't want to do this until after new years eve. if
he was telling the truth he would go now and not have to wait. we kicked him
out and it is very hard. it has only been 24 hours. he has called and texted
us several times. he has no car and is now needing rides from "friends".
Hopefully no home, food, car, money, job will wake him up to get the help he
needs. I believe after witnessing this that the craving is there and the
seeking for this is an illness or disease. it does change the way the brain
works. i am very sad and scared. i would not wish this on my worst enemy. we
have 2 other children who are great. he compares hisself to them. we dont do
this he does and we tell him to stop doing that. i think he is jealous because
they have boyfriends or girlfriends and a job and a home. he wants a
girlfriend so bad. we tell him to fix himself then he can get a job and he
will find a girlfriend later. not to rush into things. all of our children
were rasied the same so who knows why one person becomes an addict and the
others dont. our children were involved in sports we as parents are involved
with them. we gave them love and support. i had 3 kids within a year and 3
days. Twins in case your trying to figure this out my oldest was 1 year and i
had twins. my son with the problems is a twin. it hurts his sister deeply.
well thanks for letting me vent.

Reply

  * ![Lori](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lori

January 3rd, 2011 at 2:06 PM

This site has saved me today! Our 22 year old is an addict and has been
verbally abusing me and our lives for over 2 years. On any given day I will
receive texts that I do nothing for his life, I suck at being a mother, I
never should have had him, he needs us to pay for his truck to get back on the
road and lawyers fees for a hit and run (I am sure he was high or going to get
high), etc. He will say "you will be sorry if you don't help me..you will see
how depressed I was and you will have to live with it, I will kill myself,
etc"

We have tried and he has been in detox, outpatient rehab (dropped out after 3
days) and I even called police to meet me at the house when he threatened to
hang himself because I was going to shut cell off for badgering me while I was
at work. I begged them to keep him for 5 days (which they did) I don't know
what else to do except to save ourselves. I don't want him living with us any
more. I cannot watch this go on. He ruins every holiday, every birthday, every
cookout, every event. I am just soooo done with all of this. Thank you for
making me know I am not alone!

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

January 5th, 2011 at 9:40 PM

Lori- I so understand your pain and your being fed up with your son's abuse of
himself and of your family. My daughter is 25, and has moved out, back in, our
again, back in, etc etc. A few weeks ago, she left again, and we are hoping
that it is for good. We keep giving her an opportunity to 'get things
together' and to live with us until she is on her feet again, but that never
happens. She moves back to take a shower, do her laundry, eat, watch cable TV,
and get somewhat healthy. After a week or 10 days, she decides to leave again.
She always says it is just 'for a night out', but then she is gone for
days/weeks and we don't know where she is or who she is staying with. She is a
severe alcoholic, and drinks to the point of passing out, she is then found
somewhere unconscious, taken to detox or taken by ambulance to the emergency
room, etc etc. She has thousands in unpaid medical bills for ambulance, ER,
etc as people find her passed out and call 911. It is a seemingly never ending
cycle. Meanwhile we worry, stress, feel guilty, put up with her free-loading
on us, etc. On the other hand, we see her potential, want to save her from
ruining her health, dying, being molested or murdered when she is found on the
streets……. It is horrible. She has no job, I do not know how she gets money as
we do not give her any. I know she donates plasma for money 2x a week. Not
sure what else she does. We don't ask anymore.  
So- you are not alone. Sounds like your son knows how to push your buttons- He
is old enough to be on his own, and should be. Maybe time to tell him he needs
to get his own place- he is an adult. No longer your responsibility to pay for
his sell or his vehicle or anything else for that matter. Time to step back
and realize he is making his own choices and as hard as it is to watch, it is
time for him to deal with the consequences of his poor decision making.  
The tough love thing is tough for the kids and the parents. Heartbreaking to
watch- but we are able (after years of living with our daughters poor decision
making) to live our lives separate from her. It is a relief. Finally.

Reply

  * ![Lori](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lori

January 6th, 2011 at 8:59 AM

Sandy….

Can you give me some ideas on how to remove them from the home? I really think
that would be the best thing for us..and could possibly be for him. He will
leave after a blow up and then just waltz back in when the time is right
(usually when we have company over or are not home) and then he will charm his
Dad and the cycle starts all over again. I know he is depressed and quite
possibly he COULD really commit suicide..but aren't they doing that each and
every day slowly but surely any way?

Thank you for showing me I am not alone. These blogs help sooo much. He keeps
calling himself "my child..you should do more for your child, you don't help
your child" well…I have said - you are not a child any more..you are an adult.
You are responsible for yourself. He has worked approximately 10 weeks his
entire life. I am sure drug dealing was his way of life and now I think he is
completely out of resources (besides selling Suboxone that I pay for) I just
don't know. My husband and I often say that work is a relief just to get out
of there (but then again I get the texts all day long - not my husband..he
knows better with him)

I read last night that a rehab counselor once told a parent that not following
through with your threats/promises to these addicts (like I will shut off
phone, pull section 35, you will need to leave, you cannot use car anymore,
etc…I have done it all!) is the #1 reason for readmittance/relapses in this
age group - that was sooooo enlightening for me!

Thank you for posting!!!!!

Reply

  * ![Edward W.Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward W.Wilson

January 6th, 2011 at 10:31 AM

Removing an adult child from you home is no different than removing anyone -
you call the police and have them removed and, if necessary, you get a
restraining order.

And the counselor you mentioned is correct - the biggest problem in effecting
change is that parents, spouses, children, etc., don't follow through while
also rewarding the self-destructive behavior choices with free housing, food,
cars, and cover. Why would anyone change their behaviors when they are being
rewarded for them?

Remember! You child's behaviors are choices! Not some mythical disease!

Reply

  * ![Lori](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lori

January 6th, 2011 at 11:59 AM

Thank you Ed! We definitely do provide free housing, food, cars and cover. In
fact, just recently I was horrified at the requests coming to me for SPECIFIC
food in the house..including Mike and Ikes and Sour Patch Kids- Sure…let me
get the food you crave when consuming opiates!!! That was a huge eye opener as
well…this is INSANITY! You are correct..the behavior was a choice…and now he
is trying to put blame and responsibility on US! Just today, texts he hates me
and needs to get to the doctor and its MY fault he has been sick without subs
for 4 days. The abuse is endless. Will the police remove him without cause?
Can we have it done from the proof of the abuse via text alone? Will this be
sufficient?

Reply

  * ![Edward W.Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward W.Wilson

January 6th, 2011 at 1:33 PM

He is trespassing and you have asked him to leave. When he doesn't, call the
police and ask that he be removed. They will ask him to go, if he refuses they
will remove him IF you agree to press charges. DO NOT DROP THE CHARGES!

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

January 6th, 2011 at 8:09 PM

Hi Lori- Ed, as always, has great insight.  
I am not expert, however, in our case- we gave our daughter a date- like 'the
end of the month', or 'in two weeks', and STUCK WITH IT as far as providing
money, support, transportation, cell phone, a place to live, other 'help',
etc. That was years ago. She still has issues and her problems are not solved,
however, now her issues are not (mostly) our issues. Her choices put her in
the situation she is in, and there is nothing on this earth we can do to make
her change or help her change until she makes the choice to help herself and
quit drinking. Right now, she has made it clear to us she does not want to
quit. So, her life is what it is.  
I would say tell your son that you will not have your phone on at work, and
stick to it. You can tell when he is texting or phoning you by the caller ID,
so if you want to leave your phone on, just don't look at or respond to him
while you are at work- or anywhere else where you don't want to be bothered.
His 'emergency' is not necessarily your emergency. His need for money, to tell
you off, or to nag you is not anything that needs to be handled while you are
at work. Let him know that while you are at work, with friends, or whatever--
is time that you will not be accepting communication from him. Let him know
ahead of time, and STICK WITH IT!!!! Don't let his behavior and choices drag
you down and have such a negative effect on your life. Right now where he is,
giving him money isn't helping him become independent.  
Just my thoughts on all this mess we find ourselves in.

Reply

  * ![Myra](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Myra

January 14th, 2011 at 11:43 AM

I have been reading all the posts today and I can relatye to them all.My son
is 29 and he is an alcoholic and a drug abuser.He is in denial when it comes
to his drinking and blames me with everything that is wrong with his life.I am
the one who needs help he says because I "project" my inadaquacies in my life
on to him.He has been abusing alcohol and drugs since he was 17.He moved out
at 18 but has never been able to support himself for more than a year at a
time because of his choices.He cannot hold down a job.He has been back at home
now since June of 2010.He lost his job and could not pay his rent and we
allowed him to move bacj home.I wish that we had said no.My husband and I have
asked him not to drink or do drugs in our home and we refuse to give him any
money,but he still gets drunk.Last night was bad.I hate the fights and the
cruel words that come from him.I hate hearing that we are the problem and that
we don't respect him when it's the other way around.I am afraid of him,afraid
that he will attack me when he is drunk.It's awful to be arguing with a grown
man in your kitchen at 6 a.m. in the morning because he is drunk,loud,and
reeking of alcohol.His dad and I are supporting him right now..feeding and
sheltering him and we get nothing in return.He has no job and no car.He has
been arrested a half dozen times and convicted of one DUI.He lost his driver's
license because of his arrests and has to get a ride everywhere.We refuse to
take him to the store to buy alcohol,so he rides his bike.He keeps telling us
that we are trying to supress his creativity and we have no idea where he is
"coming from".My husband and I both feel that he needs to be in some type of
rehab,but he feels that he does not have a problem.He is in denial.This young
man is so smart and gifted,but he chooses to throw it all away on alcohol.He
was fired from the last part-time job he had because he went to work drunk.He
is truly pathetic when he is drinking.  
we have a 31 year old daughter who is very responsible with her life.She is
married and works full-time and she and her husband are raising a beautiful
little boy.She keeps telling me that we are enabling him and we need to kick
him out.I don't know what to do,but my home is not a haven of peace
anymore.Sometimes I wish he would go away and not even tell me where he
is.Right now,I don't think I would miss him.I feel so bad about thinking such
thoughts,but I'm so disappointed in him.He hurts me so much.

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

January 14th, 2011 at 12:31 PM

Myra,  
your situation is really tough and my heart goes out to you. I had to make
some changes in my behavior before things in my situation started to get
better. It was so hard to do, but things are so much better today.  
You do not have to live like this….you and your husband have the right to a
good life. however, in my situation I kept waiting for the alcoholic/addict to
change and that was NEVER,EVER going to happen. It wasn't pretty, but looking
back I thank the Lord I just went for it and took the steps to change the
situation. If I hadn't I would still be stuck in that pit I was in with no way
out. Its really hard to do, but you will be so glad you did.  
take care,  
Gracie

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

January 15th, 2011 at 1:41 PM

Gracie, I have arrived at the same place as you, understanding that it is only
my behaviour that can be changed, none of us are perfect, even if we are
totally sober and drug free we all have our faults. I had a huge break through
with my daughter who is a I.V. addict this christmas, I wrote her a long
letter and acknowledged the weaknesses in my parenting skills, I acknowledged
how I was so hurt when she was sexually abused as a child I didnt know how to
help her with her pain (her alcoholic father did this to her)I gave her the
letter as well as sat with her and told her what I had written. I endeavour to
stay as nuetral as possible with any dysfunctional behaviours. Yes things have
settled down alot over the 8 years this has been happening, there is still
alot of emotional work that needs to be done ongoing.

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

January 15th, 2011 at 2:04 PM

I didnt finish my blog but must of clicked something I shouldnt of. In essence
we can only change our behaviour and although I have known this all along, its
a biggie to crack, finding a way to initiate this is difficult and takes heaps
of courage, the recent contact has brought my daughter and I closer than we
have ever been since she has been a child. I am grateful that she has some
ability to meet me on this level. I think our addict adult children offer us
the chance to look at our own behaviour and reactions. I did some therapy
called "Family Constellation" last year and in a nutshell I came to "What if
today is my last conversation with her, my last phone call, the last
christmas" cos O.D. is always a possibility. Now I honnor and respect what
connection I have. I have also moved on with my life and am nuturing and
honnoring myself, gives us both room to grow. My heart goes out to those who
are living in the eye of the storm, I was in that place for 8 years, I know
1st hand what choas emotionally and financially it causes, things are slowly
changing, Amen

Reply

  * ![Judy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Judy

January 20th, 2011 at 8:46 PM

Hi Everyone, I am finally reading what I know and believe to be true…some
validation at last. I send my deepest best wishes to all of you that are
suffering. My son is now 43, he has been a drug addict since he was 25. He
started off as a heroin addict, at 30 he flipped his car 3times and was flight
lifted to the hospital with a 20% chance of survival. He returned to drug use
brewing up "cocktails" with his pain scripts and illegal drugs. After 7 more
years he was back to full time heroin use and living in a storage shed. I
stepped in at that point and he and his girlfriend came to my home…big
mistake. Long story short, I got rid of the girlfriend when he was in jail,
but he met another in "treatment court" who got pregnant, delivered a drug
addicted child who wound up in my care. I have cared for the child as a
mother, fighting both my son and the "egg donor" for 3.5years. No one will
help me continue to protect the child from her fathers drug use, or help me
get legal custody of her. I am growing older and am so afraid for the
child…and so alone. Thank you so much for sharing your stories. It is a
comfort. Bless You all

Reply

  * ![hydee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### hydee

February 7th, 2011 at 2:59 PM

You have all given me hope. From reading all the messages on this blog, I came
to the conclusion that I am enabling my 23 year old son and have been for a
long, long time. My son's father committed suicide when he was 4 years old. I
remarried a military man who I always thought was too hard on my "poor little
boy" who had been through so much. Granted, my husband was pretty hard on my
emotional little boy, but my intervention just started the whole ball rolling.
And let me tell you what, my son figured out just how to use me to get what he
wanted. As he got older it got worse.  
My son is my only family and the fear of losing him scares me into allowing
him to emotionally blackmail me. I keep hearing myself make excuse after
excuse for his behavior. He always chooses his friends and his pot over us.  
He has been in and out of jail since he was 16. Each time I convince my
husband that we should bring him home in hopes that all will be well, and it
is for a little while. Then he turns to smoking pot again which in turn leads
to other things as well. He has lied to us, cheated us, stolen from us, and
emotionally drained us. He has driven a wedge between my husband and I.  
This last time, january of last year, he took my car while my husband and I
were out of town. He went to make a drug deal. He got caught. My husband
started his "wish he would just die or go to jail" rant and I cried. After his
arrest, we did not talk to him for months. He lived far away from us which
made it easier. He seemed to be getting his act together and asked if he could
come home as part of his pre-trial agreement. He had been doing very well. But
broke our trust when he took the car without permission and put it into a snow
bank.  
I was all ready to make excuses, keep the truth from my husband, and cover up
for my son to avoid the inevitable. Then I searched for some good advice.
Though I fear loosing my son, and fear he will do something stupid like his
father did, I faced the fact that I have to save myself. This blog gave me the
courage to act. I know I AM A GOOD PARENT, HE IS THE ONE MAKING THE CHOICES,
and kicking him out of the house does not mean I do not love him.  
I calmly packed his things. I took them over to his friends house. I calmly
told him that he had broken our trust for the last time. He tried emotional
blackmail, pushing every button that has always worked in the past. I held my
ground and kept repeating "I am a good parent" "I do love you" "you have made
the decisions that have put you in this situation" and "this is my decision".
I felt like an addict who took the first step into sobriety. I know it will
not be easy. He tried texting me and I responded the same way I responded when
he emotionally attacked me.  
Thanks for the advice.

Reply

  * ![Edward W. Wilson, PhD](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward W. Wilson, PhD

February 7th, 2011 at 5:38 PM

It's always easier to give advice than to act on it - but acting does free us
as parents and frees our children, of whatever age, to grow up, or not.

As a father whose daughter has elected to "punish" me by cutting off contact
these past dozen years, I can say that we survive these attemptd to manipulate
and punish. Especially if we get good at taking care of ourselves and others.

So, again, turn your attention to where it can do some good and don't try and
change someone who isn't apt to change until their manipulation no longer
work.

To quote Lewis Thomas, M.D., "Sometimes the best we can do is to stand quietly
in the corner wringing our hands."

Though I suggest we can get out of that corner, stop watching our self-
destructive child, and turn our attention elsewhere.

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

February 7th, 2011 at 8:10 PM

Maree, Judy, & Hydee,  
My thoughts are with you all. Personally for me, I really have to stay
positive about the situation. My mantra (especially on "blue" days) is , "I
Can Do This". Wow, can this be difficult to do, but when you kinda get backed
ina corner, that's the only option, as far as I'm concerned. I think that I
was as addicted to saving my mom, as she was to her drug of choice. It was
just one big ole sick situation, really.  
I'm so glad that its better now than it used to be, however, always know that
feelings follow action and it sure as heck doesn't "feel" good when you first
start. As I wrote previously, when I started to detach from the situation I
really felt like those bad feelings would just swallow me up. Today, I stay
away from that despairing, hopelessness….which really wasn't the truth anyway.
The truth is people make choices and they are always free to make different
choices. If they don't like the situation, they are free to change their
choices in order to change their outcomes. Others choices don't dictate my
behavior. And my behavior is a reflection on me. Others behavior is a
reflection on them.  
Truthful statements like this have really helped me to get my sanity back over
the situation.  
Make sure that you are telling yourself the truth about your situation. For
instance, I changed telling myself something was "awful" (or horrible,
disgusting, etc) to "unfortunate" or "unpleasant". It just doesn't have the
same emotional fallout. These are some of the things that worked for me. Also,
journaling was and is important for me as well as talking with others whom I
feel can understand and keep confidences.  
Please know that you are not alone.  
Take care,  
Gracie  
PS…Great comments as always, Dr. Wilson.

Reply

  * ![Edward W.Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward W.Wilson

February 7th, 2011 at 8:36 PM

Thank you, Gracie, and for those of you struggling with the managing of your
thoughts and emotions, please remember that our thoughts and actions create
our emotions - not the other way around. We always refer clients to
threeminutetherapy. com for a really good introduction to CBT written for
people, not therapists (well, okay, we therapists are people too, sometimes,
but I think you get the drift).

Reply

  * ![hydee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### hydee

February 8th, 2011 at 6:09 PM

My son has resorted to telling everyone that his parents have given up on him.
I am hoping he doesn't actually believe this. And if he does actually think
this it worries me. But I know I can't give in.

Reply

  * ![Edward W.Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Edward W.Wilson

February 8th, 2011 at 9:36 PM

These so-called "children" will continue to manipulate, abuse, and pressure
parents until it no longer works. Then they may try something else - which is
called growing up - but they never will as long as they don't have to.

Rememebr the Biblical prodigal son? He cleaned up and then he came home.
That's the right order.

Reply

  * ![Gracie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gracie

February 9th, 2011 at 3:09 PM

Just speaking for myself, the best day for me in a long time was the day I
"gave up" on the situation. That is, I gave up this idea planted in my mind
that Somehow, Someday I could find a way to fix another human being. I was
totally obssessed with the idea and planned and plotted constantly how I was
gonna "fix" her and all her problems. Money couldn't fix it. Endless hours
talking and trying to convince her how to change didn't work. Giving in and
letting her have her way on everything was a disaster. Nothing ever worked. It
was an exhausting way to live.  
It was and is still a very freeing concept, To turn it loose, To Let Go. But
the thing is, its the only thing that will work. You cannot change another
human being no matter who they are. No matter how close you are to them or how
much you want it for them.  
However, we all have to get there when we get there. The old saying applied to
me…I didn't change until I just got so sick and tired of being sick and tired.
I still remember the day when I had just had it. That was 8 years ago. Words
cannot describe how much better my life is today than back then. She also made
threats to harm me and herself. Thankfully, none of that ever happened, but
the point is, it could have happened and there is no guarantee when you start
taking care of yourself that things will get better. In fact, for me things
got a lot worse for a good while, before they got better.  
Really, the only way that I got through it, was I was just determined to not
quit. Somedays were ok, other days were a nightmare, but no matter the
pressure I just didn't quit.  
I sometimes think maybe there could have been an easier way to deal with the
situation, I don't know. But I don't think these situations can be dealt with
in a "prettier" way. Drugs and alcoholism are just one ugly beast. So just
have to take care of yourself and your family the best you can.  
One thing I held onto that someone told me during all this, was, "It gets
better". This has proven to be so true for me. Once I started doing the right
thing and making good decisions, I can say it has definitely gotten better.  
Praying for you,  
Gracie

Reply

  * ![hydee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### hydee

February 10th, 2011 at 7:46 PM

Thanks for all the support. So far I stay strong and stick to my guns. Thanks
for the prayers. I am working hard to "Let go let God" to coin a phrase. I
will hold to the thought that "It gets better." I know that I have no control
over anyone else's actions. I only have control over how I react to them.  
Hydee

Reply

  * ![lori](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### lori

March 5th, 2011 at 9:32 PM

My son has been drinking and drugging since he was 15. Things really came to
head when he was 19 and we found out he was using heroin. Since then we have
tried 6 different treatment programs (2 out of state) and he has detoxed 10
times after relapsing. This past January he began drinking yet again. He got
out of rehab the middle of December. WE detoxed him and said we had had enough
and told him he could not come home. He is 21 now. He lived in his new
recovery home for 2 months. He found a job and things were going well until he
met new people at work and started partying with them. He left on a Friday
night and turned up at our house on a Monday, after driving the car home
drunk. We said we would take him back to detox but he would need to figure
something else out because we needed to start focusing more of our time on our
two other kids. I'm so worried that by not supplying him with a home is
signing his death certificate. I try to keep reminding myself that when he is
home he is always drunk, wetting the bed, puking, not working and basically
doing nothing at all productive. I just need some words or encouragement that
my husband and I made the right choice and should stand strong. Thanks

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

March 6th, 2011 at 2:09 PM

Iori, your story sounds so much like what we have gone thru with our 33 year
old child. For 18 years we have endured rehab and jail times with the hope
always that this time he has hit bottom. It has not happened, so thanks to
this blog over the course of the last 2 months, I have finally realized that I
can do nothing for my adult child except let go totally. We have supported him
financially and emotionally with the hope that he would realize that life has
so much more to offer, but he is "broken". I hope you and your husband have
the strength to say no to your adult child sooner than later as it definitely
will effect your other children. Our other child endured years of me being
distraught and sad over his big brother. Having your child become an addict is
a heartbreak, and has taken its toll on our family.

Reply

  * ![Maree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maree

March 7th, 2011 at 6:16 PM

Lori, my heart goes out to you for the huge effort and love you have put into
helping your son make better choices in his life. As a veteran of this I
encourage you to lessen with time this focus on your son and transfer this to
yourself and the rest of the family. This does NOT mean you love him less. I
would love to write a longer blog but I have had bone surgery re broken bones
in right wrist.  
Maree

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

March 7th, 2011 at 8:50 PM

Lori- I so agree with Ellen. You are doing the right thing in standing strong
and not letting your ADULT child move back home- yet again. You have other
children to consider, as well as the mental and physical health of you and
your husband.  
We are finally seeing that our daughter's alcoholism is not worth sacrificing
our life for. We have offered help- financial and emotional, we have taken her
to rehab (she stayed only 4 days), and we have waited many nights and holidays
for her to 'come back' to our family. She keeps choosing alcohol over her
friends, many jobs, college opportunities, and a relationship with her brother
and niece.  
Currently, she is living with a 55 yr old disabled man (she is 25) who
evidently allows her to not work, stay drunk, and live off of his disability
check. It is heartbreaking.  
We are regular middle class people who are educated, have always held jobs,
and provided good, stable home life for our family. I don't know what happened
and why our daughter has chosen this path. I sometimes feel guilty that we
have succeeded in moving forward with OUR lives- and not continued to try to
rescue her. All I know is that we tried that for 7 years, and nothing worked.
She continues to choose alcohol over all the good things life has to offer.
She has been taken to the ER numerous times for alcohol poisoning, she has
been found unconscious from alcohol on several occasions, she has been fired
from countless jobs for not showing up, and has ruined several holidays by
just not bothering to show up- too drunk or hungover. We have finally given
up- we are here for her if she ever decides to take the offer to 'sober up',
but so far she just says she likes to drink and she doesn't want to quit. So
be it.  
We are sad, but no longer suffering and ruled by her addiction.

Reply

  * ![hydee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### hydee

March 10th, 2011 at 7:20 PM

Lori, at the beginning of February, I told my 23 year old son that I could no
longer support his addictions and he would have to get a grip. I threw him out
of the house even though his father killed himself over drugs. I did not have
any contact with him for over a month. Which almost drove me crazy. But, Life
is full of choices. He made choices. I needed to start making choices for my
own welfare. He reacted with emotional blackmail followed with some poor,
poor, pitiful me. I just kept telling myself "I am a good mother, I do love my
son, I love myself, and he has to choose life and sobriety." I can not do it
for him I hope he can do it for himself. It was definitely the right thing to
do! I worried and was scared every day that I would get a phone call I could
not handle. The bottom line is, he was going to choose to live or choose to
not live and he was going do it in my home or out of my home. But, when he was
in my home his choices were slowly destroying my life and tearing my family
apart. He finally called 4 days ago and was ready to be civil. He did not try
emotional blackmail. He told me he is getting it. He tells me that he is
clean. I finally met him for dinner 2 days ago. He paid (WOW) and I could tell
that he was clean (for now). He knows that I stand my ground. He has come to
the conclusion that we will not save him, he has got to do it. But this kind
of conviction has happened many times in the past. But, because he is out of
the house it makes the yo-yo clearer. Be strong and choose to take care of
you. Let him make choices.

Reply

  * ![Amy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Amy

March 15th, 2011 at 2:34 PM

I just came across this site today, and was reading all the comments, and felt
like I was reading about mine and my sons lives.

I don't know what to do anymore, I feel like my next step will be planning and
paying for his funeral. I understand that I can't make him stop that he has to
want to do it, but how do I protect myself his siblings, his daughter and the
rest of the family from this heartache? I will lose my mind if I lose my son
to this addiction.

Reply

  * ![Lila](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lila

March 20th, 2011 at 4:08 AM

What a blessing to have found this website. I have felt so alone, trying to
cope with this family disease.  
I had a twin brother who passed away 1 year ago on the 21st and I couldn't
help him with his drinking.  
I watched the jperson I spent every moment of my life on earth die in front of
me. We loved each other so very much and my heart has a hole from his death. 3
weeks after his death my 32 year old daughter tried to  
kill herself because she is addicted to cocaine. This last year has been like
living in a trance, not believing life can be so hard. She is divorced and has  
2 beautiful daughters who are staying with me for now.  
Their father is only a part time parent. My daughter is always in trouble with
the law and has broken probation twice. I don't know where she is now but do
know there is a warrant out for her. We made her leave the first of the month
after we found drugs in our home. We have tried several times to help her but  
she wants to be her own person. No one is going to tell her what to do, and
all the choices she makes are wrong. We have totally cut her off of money and
we have her car which we purchased for her, one of many. She has gotten
violent several times and stole  
from us many times. We just can't do it anymore. Her older sister and family
have paid the price for our enabling her. Yet, they are beautiful in trying to
be  
there for us. My concern is for my grandaughters. How do you explain to a 8
and 11 year old about their Mother when you don't understand yourself. I also
have an older brother who is an alcoholic and has been sober for 25 years. I
know there can be hope, but I also know there can no hope. Thank you so much
for this website and I pray for all of us as parents and siblings and sons and
daughters God will give us the strength and peace we all need.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

May 22nd, 2011 at 12:25 PM

I am wrting again to help myself stay strong. I had lost contact with my son
for many months until last week when a call came from him wanting our help
while he is incarcerated for cocaine possession. My heart has an open wound
again, and I really do not want to help him, but I am an emotional wreck. Any
advice out there?

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

June 3rd, 2011 at 11:46 AM

I'm just a wreck about my son. My marriage is at stake because I'm the
"enabler." I hate what drugs & alcohol do to families. How do I summon the
courage to kick my son out? I don't know how people do it. Maybe I haven't
come to the last straw yet. My life is filled with disappointment, fear and
dread.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

June 4th, 2011 at 1:11 PM

Donna, I understand exactly how you feel and I do not think there is a last
straw until you decide it is. Do not let your son also ruin your marriage. He
has alreay ruined your life with disappointment, fear, and dread. I struggle
each day with the lost family my drug addicted adult son has given us. He can
never realize how many people have deep saddness and broken hearts because of
his actions, and any hopes for tomorrow have been taken away. We as parents
have to have our lives back, although I don't think I will ever really be
happy again. There has been too much hurt. I have to remember that my son is
an adult and made these choices without asking my advice.  
Stay strong and let your son know that you can not support him any more.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

June 10th, 2011 at 6:29 AM

Thanks for the words of support, Ellen. I don't want to let this ruin my
marriage. I just seem to get defensive if my husband makes certain remarks. He
can easily be strong and manage his emotions, whereas I tend to feel weak and
broken-down. I do get angry with my son and try to set boundaries, but after
years of legal & rehab stints, feel like my only option is kicking him out. I
cry as I write this- knowing I will fall apart (I'm barely hanging by a thread
now)if I have to do that. The thought makes me physically sick. He is such a
good kid and so sweet when he's sober. It's horrific watching drugs and
alcohol suck the soul out of your child.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

June 10th, 2011 at 6:38 AM

I'm really glad I found this site. I spend so much time pretending to be happy
and that things at home are "normal." Nobody talks openly about this stuff. I
mean, how can you? People talking about their successful children in college
and then you chime in with your horror story? I also feel that many people who
haven't lived with an addict don't understand the emotions involved. It's nice
to have found a website where people to give support, advice & encouragement.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

June 15th, 2011 at 5:08 PM

It is even difficult for us to talk with the "successful" sibling about our
drug addict son…I think he still feels like we give more energy to our
"broken" son than we do to him. It is so hard to strike a balance between
children, when we all know as the parent you are only as happy as your saddest
child. People that have not been thru this cannot understand, I only hope for
them that they never have to.  
I have to remember that addicts are master manipulitors and will say anything
to get what they need. I've been taken into this too many times and now want
to be free of the monster that drugs created.  
The new ads for a drug free America are right on. Seeing your child literally
become a different person is frightening and so hard to know how to deal with.  
All of you out there, please keep writting. This has been a great help to me
being able to cope with the lives drugs have impacted.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

July 25th, 2011 at 9:33 AM

Don't ask WHY… it will make you crazy.

Reply

  * ![Brandi](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Brandi

August 7th, 2011 at 8:42 PM

I have been dealing with a drug addicted daughter for over a year now. She is
almost 30 and has two children that she doesn't bother with. I don't know if
she will ever turn her life around and this waste fills me with sadness. I
loved the girl I knew but I realize that girl doesn't exist anymore.  
If she turned it all around today, I really don't think that I would care.
There is such a selfishness in drug addiction that I find it intolerable.
Really, how could you ever forget the painful road you must travel. For me,
another name for addiction is selfishness. I, my family, my grandchildren
don't need to be abused. I have only one thought left, drop dead.

Reply

  * ![sandra perry](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### sandra perry

August 13th, 2011 at 12:55 AM

my son is 25, living at home with no job. associates degree that took 6 years
to get. drinks and smokes pot every day. says he looks on craigs list every
day for a job and can't find one. stays out late every night with like friends
and sleeps 1/2 a day each day. This is driving me and my husband crazy and
when we try to talk to him he gets upset and we fear he will commit suicide.
we don't know what to do and it's eating us up emotionally and physically.

Reply

  * ![Brandi](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Brandi

August 14th, 2011 at 8:14 PM

Sandra,  
I would start with a plan. Give it a timeline. If your son is mentally
unstable, he should be committed to hospital. If they are a threat to
themselves or others, this will get him assessed.

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

August 16th, 2011 at 9:50 PM

Thank you so much for this blog post. My husband and I are two days from
cutting off my youngest son. At 26 he's addicted to synthetic marijuana or who
knows what. He's also an alcoholic on Antabuse. Money, time, heartache,
health, good regard, peace…all have been sacrificed to manipulative promises
and excuses. Our marriage is next. It's not as old as my son's problems. It
may even be a product of my own altered mental state from years of trouble
with my son, but that's another topic altogether. Thanks again. I'll be
rereading this page and the comments over and again for a while.

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

September 5th, 2011 at 9:31 AM

Donna, of June 3, 2011: How is it going with your son? Your situation is
exactly like mine. We finally put my son out two weeks ago. He ended up in
county jail on a warrant from some previous mischief because he was
panhandling at the local gas station. That kept him off the street for a week.
He's out now and came by to visit his dog, check on his belongings and beg to
come back…while skunk drunk and under the influence of something else too.
He's thin, sunburned, dirty. He's lost a bag of clothes. He won't even take
his clean-up items with him or fresh clothes. I had tucked some non-perishable
food in his bag with some pre-wrapped plastic utensils. He wouldn't take that.
He's not event trying to hobo it. I feel like it's a big "pity-me" behavior.
Can he be so dumb about camping out after being raised by me? It was difficult
but necessary to firmly make him leave again.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

September 9th, 2011 at 7:39 PM

Hi Kathy-  
Things got much worse. Car accident (shook him temporarily) which totaled our
car and luckily no one was hurt. Started drinking and whatever else shortly
thereafter. Ended up in jail for not appearing at court for a previous
drinking charge. Out not yet a week and drinking again. He will sometimes go
several days sober and is very pleasant, but when he drinks, all hell breaks
loose. I'm always on edge.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

September 11th, 2011 at 6:47 AM

My son is 32 and I'm 61 although I feel like 80 and am really noticing the
wrinkles and worry lines these days. The worry, stress and pain of loving an
addict is almost unbearable and the emotional and financial strain is
incredible. The black cloud is hovering overhead no matter how hard I try to
find joy. My story is like so many others; my son began his defiance and
deviant behavior at around 14 and has never learned how to be a responsible
adult. He has been in and out of treatment centers- some mandated by the
courts, some paid for by my ex-husband and some paid for by me. He has wrecked
every car he's driven, was addicted to heroin for years and is also an
alcoholic. He's currently in county jail doing time for a third DUI. I retired
4 yrs ago and have depleted a good-sized chunk of my retirement savings
trying, on several occasions, to help him get "on his feet". He just keeps
digging the hole deeper and deeper. He says he wants to stay clean and build a
nice life for himself, but nothing ever changes for long. I have told him I'm
finished and I mean it. I will research county-funded programs and that's it.
I will no longer transfer my hard-earned funds into his account so he can do
nothing but get in trouble. I grieve about what a sweet child he was and how
smart he is and it is so difficult to let go, but I know i have to take care
of myself and let him take care of himself. I don't want to have the same
relationship with him anymore; I feel used and abused and it makes me so angry
with him. I need to stay close to this website in order to stay strong. Thanks
to everyone for all of your helpful posts.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

September 11th, 2011 at 4:39 PM

I neglected to mention that my son suffered two seizures last year and ended
up in the hospital both times. This year he was diagnosed with Disseminated
Candidiasis, which is a fungal infection that spread through his bloodstream
and progressed to his optic nerve, causing loss of vision in his left eye.
Unchecked, it could have spread from the optic nerve to his brain, resulting
in death. He spent a week in the hospital on IV medication and had to have eye
surgery to save his life. His father paid for it because, of course, he has no
job and no insurance. This infection was caused by mixing heroin with lemon
juice and injecting it. He also had Hep C several years ago and was on
medication for quite some time. He may still test positive for it; I don't
really know. As I said in my first post, he's in jail. I've talked to him a
few times and haven't noticed a change yet. He thinks he is being treated
unfairly because he's in jail with men who are there for robbery and assault-
all he did was go out, have a few drinks and get behind the wheel. When will
he admit he's messed up his life and he's suffering the consequences of his
actions? When is something his fault? During our last call, he went on and on
about how dangerous it is in there and how I don't understand what it's like-
he's locked up in a cell!! What does he want me to do about it? I finally told
him I couldn't talk to him anymore and I hung up. I'm just tired of being so
enmeshed in his dysfunctional life. My mother was a rage-aholic (who probably
suffered from Bipolar). She committed suicide just 11 days before my son was
born. My ex-husband is a control freak and I finally set myself free from that
relationship 23 years ago. Now, for the past 18 years, my son has been
drinking and drugging. There's never any peace. I know this must sound like a
pity party and maybe it is. I'm just tired of the pain.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

September 13th, 2011 at 2:24 PM

Tanya, It does not sound like a pity party! Any parent that has an addicted
adult child understands the pain you are feeling. I have become numb, and
wonder if I will ever have any true happiness.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

September 14th, 2011 at 1:32 PM

Thanks, Ellen, I wonder the same. Like you said in an earlier post, it's
difficult to be any happier than your saddest child. When they hurt, we hurt.
The guilt never goes away either. No matter what I do, I agonize over whether
it was the right thing to do. I think I'll try doing the exact opposite of
what I've been doing because the old way certainly hasn't done any good!

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

September 23rd, 2011 at 6:46 AM

I hope that this blog will stay active, but it looks like it may be fizzling
out. Is there another blog that some of you have switched to or have things
settled down for most of you? I was so happy to have found this site, but I'm
disappointed in the lack of posts recently. How are things going for you,
Donna?

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

September 23rd, 2011 at 1:38 PM

Tanya, I am also disappointed in so few posts. I check almost daily to see if
anyone else has some words of wisdom. My 34 year son is on probation
again,(cocaine possession) and as usual he says this time will be different,
but the old behaviors creep right back. The only time he really wants to talk
with us is when he is incarcerated…probably because we are the only ones that
would stil pay to talk with him. As a worn out mother, this is going on 19
years, I am still trying to let go of the pain he has caused.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

September 24th, 2011 at 6:32 AM

Ellen, i searched for other blogs and didnt find any, however, I read an
article written by Michelle Dunbar that may be helpful. After reading it, I
was thinking we need rehab too- for about 3-4 days. Wouldn't it be nice to get
away from all of the stress and focus on changing our behaviors for a more
positive outcome? We could break out into groups and do some role-playing and
then have professionals role-play the healthier way to react, respond or
whatever? And, when we leave to go back in the real world, we could exchange
phone numbers and email addresses with other participants as well as the
counselors so we could keep in touch and support one another when we put what
we've learned into practice. Since we can't change the addict, we could put
our energy into changing ourselves! Regarding your post, I don't know if there
is a way to let go of the pain. As soon as I think things are moving in a
positive direction, my son has another crisis that throws him and those who
love him into another tailspin. If he got sober and stayed sober for several
months, there might be some healing. But car accidents, arrests and illnesses
don't create a healing atmosphere for anyone. I've bailed my son out of jail 3
times in the past year and I'm done doing that. For one thing, I get hung out
there for the entire cost of the bail if he doesn't make it to court until the
case is resolved. He's in county jail in CA and missed his court date in TX.
The judge is angry and is threatening to forfeit the bond. It's just one thing
after another and he's created such a path of destruction in his wake- I can't
keep up with it anymore. It's just a bottomless pit.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

September 27th, 2011 at 6:57 AM

Hi everyone, I tend to not write when things get really bad because the pain
becomes unbearable and I just want to crawl into a hole. I find it
increasingly difficult to stay strong. I've been to a couple Al-Anon meetings,
but by the time everyone introduces themselves, the meeting is over. I am
afraid to feel happiness because it is always short lived. I am always
dreading the next crisis- which always comes. I feel like there is very little
support for parents of addicts.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 28th, 2011 at 10:47 PM

Tanys, Donna and Ellen - I am still here as well. Like Donna said, when you
are surrounded by so much pain - you just need a break.

My son will have his 25th birthday in a couple of months but he won't be
celebrating here. I have tried for the past year to remove him from our home -
he keeps coming back, crying, pleading, telling us not to sign his death
warrant. I relent, he comes back and it all starts again. My husband stopped
coming home every night- my daughter is looking for an apartment (and she has
two more years of engineering school) One of my twins went across the country
to stay with his aunt and cousins and the other makes himself so scarce that
he is like a ghost. They are all sick of this dysfunction and pain. They are
angry with me as well so along with the unrelenting guilt from #1, I can add
all this to the soup.

He is also in trouble with the law - was pulled over twice in as many days for
drunk driving - but of course it was all my fault because I kicked him out
when I caught him sucking down cheap Vodka yet again in our home. He refuses
to go back to rehab, refuses to get a job, all he does is sleep all day, get
up and surf the most disgusting porn sites all evening and wait to go to the
bars he frequents every night. He comes home-drinks another pint or fifth and
we start all over again the next day. He recently told us he needed money to
move to Florida to live with friends who were going to help him get a job. We
had to fix his car (transmission blew) and put $1800 into that and gave him
another $800 in cash to get there. My sister (who doesn't have a great income)
bought him food and gas cards for the trip. We found a paper that showed he
sold the gift cards to a place that gives you 65% for them. He has now taken
to pawning anything he can get his hands on. Needless to say he never went to
Florida but the money's gone and we only got 3 days away from him.

I snapped today and threw him out. We gassed his car and gave him $20. We have
a family friend who lives alone and will take him in-and try to work with him
since he has had his own struggles with addictions. My son told me he will
have to sleep in his car because he would never live in a trailer park (this
guy has a manufactured home in a section of a trailer community). This
actually amused me - the car would be so much classier? And THAT car to boot?!
He is right now as I write this - writing me his "poison text messages" full
of threats and recriminations" He is a pathological liar, a late-stage
alcoholic, a drug user, and the laziest human being ever born. I knew the
party was over when he was grabbing me and begging me not to "throw him away"
and threatening to kill himself for like the 1000th time and I couldn't feel
anything - maybe a little disgust. We have offered him help - we have given
him years of chances and now - it truly is him or me. I can no longer be party
to the suffering of the rest of my family (including my parents whom he has
bled for money with his stupid lies). We won't pay a nickel for his legal
troubles - though he is representing himself at his trial. He is very high IQ
and expceptionally articulate - he would have made a good lawyer and we
encouraged him to pursue it before he spent almost his entire college fund on
booze. We all need to hang in there - I am turning off my phone - these
messages will come in all night long - Hugs to you all - I wish we all weren't
in this hell. (Must go and clean out the 15 bottles I found stashed under my
cushions in my study)

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 28th, 2011 at 11:16 PM

I forgot to mention that all summer he had us buying the story that he had
joined the Navy and he was shipping out for boot camp in Sept. He had a friend
print and sign enlistment papers that are actually on the web. He was going to
be in intelligence operations and was going to be a super spy because he
tested so high on tests. He even had me drop him off at a recruiters station
for the testing. It was pretty good - I told the family and he let me go ahead
and do it - you know- he finally cleaned up and everything was going to be ok.
My father (WWII vet) was so proud. All of it lies - designed buy him more time
and get more money out of us. His answer when we discovered the hoax- he does
what he has to do to survive and we drive him to it.

So it was the Navy, then Florida- two weeks ago he said he had a job at the
airport - today- an Apple hiring event-none of it true. It's always the same
pattern - He has a "job" - we wait for the background check to come back
(takes weeks) we wait for the start date - he fakes going for a while- he
needs money just til he gets his first check- we eventually find out he's
lying - he screams and yells at how we "micromanage" him - then he begs and
promises that he does have something else in the fire and the process starts
anew I can't even count the number of fake jobs he has had but the landscape
around here is littered with them.

I am convinced we will be doing this when he's forty and fifty if WE don't
call it quits. Which I just did - and his last text said: "This is simply
wrong. I'm being forced into what is now, for the first time, a completely
untenable position"- We've changed the codes and locked up the house- I won't
find him hovering over me at 4 am as I sleep on the sofa (because we are all
afraid of him and afraid he's going to burn us down with his 4-5 am cooking)I
just hope he doesn't show up and start banging on the doors and screaming
(we've been there before)-the bars are closing now - I kind of expect it. Hugs
\- sorry I'm just a little wigged right now - hardest thing I've ever had to
do in spite of it all….

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

September 29th, 2011 at 3:00 PM

Diane, Donna and Tonya, and all The hardest day is the day you finally say
"NO", but it is definitely the best for you and the rest of your family. Our
addicted children have to figure it out for themselves, without our financial
help. I will always be here for emotional support, but as I look back over 18
years and realize that the only time we were asked for help was help with
money…not ever advice. My son, now 34, with a baby mama and a 4 year old
daughter, is trying again to come clean. I wish him well, but he has to do
this for himself and his "family". I am not here to be abused or taken
advantage of ever again… Hang in there, all of you out there that know that it
is not something that we did or did not do to create this monster that is our
child.. Give yourself a hug.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 29th, 2011 at 3:44 PM

He showed back up today-right at dinnertime because he was holed up sleeping
all day. My husband has stated he doesn't want him here when he gets home and
so of course, that's when he shows up. He was so arrogant- let himself in,
walks to the fridge- I yelled at him to get out. He is violating the rules
laid down yesterday. He is supposed to contact his brother if he needs to get
us any messages.

He told me his phone is broke (he has been through dozens in the last couple
of years) I told them that is his problem and he called me "horrible' and 'an
fing shrew". He told me he will not go to our family friend who is expecting
him - and he won't say where he did go. I'm ok with that as long as he stays
out and follows the procedure for messages. I was on my computer and found out
that he has been surfing so much porn - including fetish sites about
masturbating in front of one's sister and her friends I have a 21 year old
very beautiful daughter and she has very pretty friends that stay here at
times. I was so repulsed and disgusted. He walked in right as I was finding
all this. He probably spends hours every night surfing these disgusting porn
sites. His big reason for his drinking and failure to function is because he
doesn't have a girlfriend. He is very socially awkward and he has never had
any self-confidence. But, to spend so much time on this - in lieu of looking
for work or help for his problems is just too, too much.

He obviously wasn't looking for work today - my husband swears he has no
intention of working He figured we would just go back to the status quo after
he sleeps elsewhere for just one night. He needs to live with us - it's free,
free food, stuff to pawn, people to manipulate, very close to his bars, free
internet and cable,people to fight with - I kicked him out so fast and let him
know he is NEVER coming back to live here so he better figure out what he
needs to do from here. I still offered him rehab or hospital to be evaulated
for his obvious mental and emotional problems. Thanks, I just was very shook
up again today. Need to stay the course but it's hard to be this disgusted by
and afraid of your own child.

Reply

  * ![Celia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Celia

September 29th, 2011 at 7:41 PM

I don't even know where to begin. My son is 30 years old and is a veteran of
the Iraq war. From the time he was 6 years old it seems that he has been in
some kind of trouble. As he got older it just seemed to get worse. During
elementary school he was kicked off of the bus on several occasions for
fighting, then in high school, even though he was a gifted athlete, he was
constantly having to be disciplined by staying after school and missed
baseball/football practice so much that he gave up on both sports. He was
kicked out of one private high school, but we were able to get him in another
similar private high school. He graduated from high school on time and then
was in and out of college for the next few years. He joined the national guard
and is/was a pretty good soldier. He did a tour of duty in Iraq and returned
home in 2009. Since then it has just been one nightmare after another with
him. He was able to finally finish college and actually did really well when
he returned from Iraq. Somehow…someway…I really don't know how all this
happened I ended up giving him money for drugs. This has been going on for 2
years now and I am just at the end of my rope. I have paid for 2 rapid detoxes
which lasted for just a month or so before he was back on the pain killers, he
has also been to a couple of different drs and tried the suboxone treatment.
Nothing seems to work. As Diane says, he calls me all the time and blames me
for everything. If I don't give him the money he demands he comes to my office
and confronts me. It is unbelievable the amount of money that I have given him
over the past 2 years. The really bad thing about all of this is that my
husband doesn't know any of this. I've been afraid to tell him and the longer
it goes on the harder it is. My son does not have a job and is always saying
that he is going to get one soon. I wonder who wants to hire a college
graduate that hasn't worked for over 2 years. He, too, has threatened suicide
and the guilt is just horrible. Now he wants me to pay for another round of
rapid detox and I told him I just can't afford it again and it doesn't do any
good anyway. I've begged him to go to a good treatment center where he can be
treated and receive counseling and maybe even his insurance (which I am
paying) will cover some of the cost. By the way, I am also paying all of his
living expenses and repairs to his car. There is no way that he could live
here at home….I could not handle it. I just am at the point where I don't know
what to do. I know that I need to tell my husband, but I just can't at this
time. This forum has been very helpful and it is a comfort to know that others
are going through this and managing to survive. It is a very sad and sometimes
desperate situation.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 29th, 2011 at 10:50 PM

Celia-its so hard to be bullied and taken advantage of by our own child. We
don't feel like mothers anymore but just as a means to an end. I'm so rowing
that boat right alongside you.

Mine was also a difficult and oppositional child all the way up. I tried to
get him diagnosed many times but was never told anything definitive except
ADHD.Why he has struggled his entire life is certainly a lot more than that.
It sounds like your son is also very bright and as he did get through military
service and finish college. I know what you mean about employment prospects-
they just scream of what they are by the gaps in their resumes.

Mine never really started to work-he lies on his apps and resume-just like he
lies to us. My husband told him the other day that he knew when he was lying-
its when his lips are moving-that is the sad fact anymore.

I'm just trying to cope with this new reality. He claims to be homeless and
that it is all our fault and we will be reading about what happens to him in
the newspaper. I wonder what that exactly means. We are actually worried that
he could hurt one of us-he is so bitter and angry and he just doesn't seem
rational anymore.

We think he does have some resources-someone has been giving him drinks and
bottles and some cash for alcohol but he wants to live here and keep
terrorizing us. The real terror is that this monster is my child like Ellen
said. I can no longer reason with it, accept it, or change it. He has to WANT
to change and he just isn't there yet. It may be hopeless-he has Borderline
personality disorder and a high number of them do commit suicide.

Since he tried to hang himself two years ago he has been threatening us
multiple times a day when not getting his own way-so cruel because my
husband's older brother killed himself at 20. This little nightmare played on
that-we don't believe his attempt was all that serious-just another
manipulation. Your son has to think about his daughter now-hopefully, he will
see that-somebody loves and needs him to be there and to be sober and clean.
You can't keep giving him money and taking on his responsibilites-I know I'm
new to this hardball thing but there's a kind of peace that goes along with
reclaiming your life out of the abyss.

I know the first weeks will be the worst. Can your son get benefits and
treatment through the VA? I know they are used to this kind of thing-my uncle
used to go in all the time for rehab. Hugs to you and your family and to Ellen
too- I need someone to listen who has been there, friends don't get it-they
keep expecting there's a magic treatment somewhere that we just aren't looking
hard enough. I talked to one family that spent half a million dollars on their
anorexic/alcoholic/drug addicted Borderline Personality daughter. They were
just told that her chances of survival weren't especially promising and she
ran off with a much older man who has three teen-aged kids. She is only 25.
Iguess the moral is that we can't buy our way out of this horror show even if
we had the money. Hugs,I wish everyone moments of calm in a very powerful
storm.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

September 29th, 2011 at 11:08 PM

Sorry, I mixed up the two stories - it is Ellen's son with the daughter, I
take it Celia, that your son doesn't have children? My eyes are pretty messed
up- I have a condition where I'm growing new blood vessels behind my eyes and
they bleed of all things. I have to get shots in eye every month-(like I
needed that)-probably caused by high bloodpressure and autoimmune thyroid
which doctors believe were kicked in by stress. I was worried about losing
sight in my one eye altogether- a high price to pay for all this stress. I
also worry about having a stroke-I have told him this but it doesn't seem to
worry him all that much. Anyway, I've got it now - Ellen has the
granddaughter-Celia has the son who is a vet-and we all have big problems
unfortunately-

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 1st, 2011 at 9:55 AM

It is a painful road we travel and it gets so old and tiresome. I just wonder
how all the stress will affect our health long-term. I keep reading that
stress is the silent killer, but what can we do to alleviate it? Even if we
put our foot down and declare we're not going to put up with them and their
antics, the worry and fretting never goes away. No matter which way we turn,
there's guilt on top of guilt. What is the answer to this hell we live in? If
I put a smile on my face, it's usually an act because of the dark cloud
hovering overhead. I have had a little more peace lately because my son is in
jail for a DUI- actually his 3rd. At least I can go to bed knowing I'm not
going to receive a middle-of-the-night phone call from the police. My son uses
our address because he doesn't have a permanent address, so I get to see mail
coming in from the Sheriff's Dept, Constable's Office, unpaid debts, unpaid
fines, etc. He's in jail in Ca and I live in Texas. Yesterday he received 3
citations and arrest warrants from the Constable's office here! This is on top
of 3 arrests in the past year. Never gets any better even after all the rehabs
and money spent helping him "get on his feet". I can't even begin to imagine
all the money spent on him in the past 12 years- I'm sure it would be enough
to buy a little summer house somewhere. I can buy my daughter nice, fun things
for her birthday and Christmas, but the money spent on my son is always to
help him with a crisis. I feel for all of you. Even though our circumstances
are somewhat different, we all suffer the same pain and heartache.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

October 2nd, 2011 at 7:04 AM

I feel similar in that, once my son is out of our home (which will tear me up)
I will still have no peace of mind. I am so stressed and sad. My son is
currently working, so I'm fortunate in the sense that he does not steal from
us. But the constant worry and regular outbursts and dysfunction are getting
worse. I am not suicidal myself, but DO NOT want to live- there's a
difference. I just see a future of misery. I cannot see any happiness for
myself unless my son gets better. This disease is horrible and the resources
are a joke.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 2nd, 2011 at 12:36 PM

I'm with you; I have not found any helpful resources. I've tried Alanon
meetings a few times at a couple of different locations, but have never walked
out feeling better than when I walked in. In fact, the last meeting I attended
made me feel worse. I walked in, sat down next to a young woman, said hello
and she pretty much ignored me. A few minutes later, a woman walked in and the
gal next to me abruptly got up and went and sat down with the woman who had
just walked in. They hugged and it was obvious they were friends. It occurred
to me that the gal next to me was actually saving the seat I sat in for her
friend and that was why she ignored me when I sat down. I never went back! I
had asked a couple of women on previous occasions about getting a sponsor, but
it appeared that most of them were already hooked up with sponsors. It wasn't
a place where I felt there was anything to gain by continuing to attend the
meetings. I've also talked to a therapist a few times, but just felt like I
was voicing my problems and feelings out loud. I need answers, help and
support. Where on earth do I find it? "Let go and let God" doesn't work. I'm
financially and emotionally spent.

Reply

  * ![Ellen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellen

October 2nd, 2011 at 3:14 PM

Resources are a joke, and "help" from the legal sy stem, like Theraputic
communities, only taught more tricks, just like the program "D.A.R.E."  
I have physically lived far away from my son for over 8 years, but that does
not help. His problems are with us no matter where we are, I guess because I
still want to have a happy family. I have tried my best to know that the
regular, boring, happy life that could have been will never happen, so I must
go forward and figure out life without our son.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 2nd, 2011 at 5:19 PM

Ellen, we all want to have a happy, "normal" family but it seems to be out of
reach. I can't imagine the day will come when my son has a happy, satisfying
life and, until that day comes, my happiness is put on hold. As mothers, we
want our children to be happy and live productive lives. I love my son and
always will in spite of the pain. I can't help but think of him when he was a
small, innocent, inquisitive, sweet boy. He is still that sweet, compassionate
boy, but drugs and alcohol are destroying him. I don't know how to live with
him and I don't know how to live without him. Will there ever be any peace?
I've come to the realization that I may very well outlive him and that's such
a sad thought.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 2nd, 2011 at 11:21 PM

This is all so unbearable for all of us. My son is living with our family
friend - who came over tonight for dinner. This man is very kind for taking
him in and he feeds him and gasses his car but he will not give him cash. He
told us he tries to talk to him - (he has had a brother and sister die from
drugs and alcohol). He is frustrated with his lying and his constant need to
go to the bars until close. We thought he wouldn't go every day because he now
lives much farther from the bars but he is there like clockwork. The gas is
supposed to be for him to "jobhunt" but he told us all again that "why should
he look for a job - nothing matters anymore anyway - his life is over."

He has been at this for so many years now. I can't remember the last happy day
he had - maybe never. He was a very intense and gloomy kind of kid once he
entered school. The only time he is somewhat satisfied is if he is getting his
own way. Right now, that would mean- he moves back in with us - we give him
money and gas - we don't say squat to him about anything he does in our home-
no matter how heinous (drinks all night- sleeps all day-brings bums home to
sleep off their drunks at our house because they can't go home to their
wives/girlfriends/parents like that nor do they want to be pulled over) If we
meet all his conditions - he would be partially placated. It still wouldn't
take care of his seething jealously and bitterness toward any of his siblings
or peers who have made something out of their lives and whom he has cut off
all ties with.

Tanya, I also feel that I will outlive him- he has already attempted suicide
once and he threatens to do it again several times a day. I'm numb to it now -
another manipulation tactic (but I can never be sure). If he doesn't take that
route - he will be dead within ten years from the rotgut he is ingesting mixed
with the prescription meds he procures, his poor diet, his drunk driving, or
maybe just beaten to death for debts he can't and won't pay. He is facing
court on Oct. 11 - believe it or not - his first DUI. I guess he stands a good
chance of getting it thrown out - so I expect he will be at it again. I agree
about the resources - I have read tons of books - but NOBODY can help. I
really want to know what happens to people like him - no income, mentally and
emotionally sick, addicted and unreachable. Unfortunately, I think I already
know.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 3rd, 2011 at 12:17 PM

Diane,

I guess our addicts are all committing suicide in a way. They're certainly not
doing anything that positively impacts their lives. My son will get high on
anything- alcohol, pills, heroin and even cocaine. We've been told he's in the
category of addicts who are the most difficult to treat because he will switch
addictions if he gives up his drug of choice.

I wish I had words of encouragement for you. I'm surprised your friend is
still allowing  
your son to stay with him even though it doesn't sound like your son has any
intention of getting a job or getting sober. At least he's honest about his
activities. Maybe you could  
look into shelters in your area and give him a list of the resources available
if and when he decides he wants to live. How can he think life is over at 25?
Hopefully it's just a manipulation tactic, but I know it's devastating to hear
him say those things.

Reply

  * ![Celia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Celia

October 4th, 2011 at 7:43 PM

Well today was a typical day for me and my son. He always calls around lunch
time demanding money. Yesterday he swore he had an appt today for an
assessment at a local drug treatment facility, he just needed one more day of
money and then today it would be over. I knew it was just a lie, just like
everything that comes out of his mouth is. Of course, I had to give him the
money or he would have come to my place of business and "make a scene". He
said "Don't make me have to come up there". Then today he says he can't go to
the treatment center because he actually has something he must do on Oct
15-16. He demanded $1,500 and said I wouldn't hear from him again….he's really
going to do something about it this time. Yeah…whatever. It is just
unbelievable how these drug addicts are. It is always all about them and their
needs, forget anyone else. I just don't get it and I don't understand why
someone wants to live their life with no future, no hope, no concern for
anyone but themselves. I don't understand why he goes back to the drugs, even
after the detox. I don't understand anything about drug addicts and then they
want to blame everything on anyone but themselves. I am so sick of my son and
the way he treats me. I know that I've been an enabler and the guilt is just
overwhelming. I wish I knew how to stop this insanity.

Thanks to all of you who have written on this forum….it is so helpful to know
that we are not alone. I hope that each and everyone of you can find some
peace…somehow.

Reply

  * ![Dianeuulli](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dianeuulli

October 4th, 2011 at 10:32 PM

$1500 must be the magic number. That's the exact amount that my son keeps
telling us is what he needs and he will leave us alone. I reminded him he's
gotten way more than that recently - and he told me we didn't give it to him
when it really counted. He needs living expenses and enough to start a new
life and apparently, that is costly.

I feel for all of you - Tanya, Celia, Donna, everyone here. It's the same
horrible story with slight variations for age, sex and substance. Addicts are
liars, manipulators,destroyers. They make us "hate" them and then we have to
live with the guilt of feeling that way. I mostly wish my son would disappear.
That way, I could imagine he was pulling his life together and he will be ok.
Reality just completely sucks.

Our family friend is beginning to think he is a sociopath because he is such a
user and he doesn't care about the pain and hurt that he leaves in his wake.
He called me again tonight pleading and threatening to be let back home so he
doesn't have to live in the 'trailer park" in what he considers to be a town
he is too good to live in. This from someone who doesn't work and really never
did. I listened to him berating me for 30 minutes- we are horrible people, we
never loved him or showed him the slightest affection, we favored the other
kids, we have abandoned him, we never really helped him, we are cold, callous
and cruel,we are leaving him to die blah, blah, blah…. so sick of him, we have
three other younger kids who do not act this way at all. They are being
cheated of our time, attention and financial help with college. All so we can
keep getting nowhere with this sick individual who won't even try, who
devalues his life.

My daughter is just so sick of it. She recently lost a good friend at only 21
years old. He drowned in a tragic accident. She said how much this young man
wanted to live, how happy and full of life he was and then she has to listen
to her brother scream and beat himself and talk about how he hates life and
just wants to die. It's maddening. She was downstairs crying the other day
because she feels so resentful of him and she refuses to live in the house if
he is here. But, then she feels scared and guilty that something might happen
to him and she feels she will have contributed to it somehow. He says he hates
her because she is "a bitch" and "a princess". She has worked since 15,
sometimes two jobs and she is an engineering student working full-time and
going to school full-time this semester. His brothers work and go to school
and pay for their own cars, gas etc. I was so heartbroken to see how hurt and
exhausted the other kids are at so early an age. I told #1 tonight he can't
come back here. He just kept threatening to "sleep in his car" and that he
will end his life soon because he is tired and he won't live a "compromised
life." What a position to be in.

It is horrible, heartbreaking, and often feels like death. It is a black veil
over all our lives - over the lives of all who live with and love addicts. I
agree with what everyone has written - they are committing suicide but it's a
slow, tortuous one and they are trying to take as many people with them as
possible. They blame and use anyone they can. We can't be held hostage to this
and we have to draw a line and hold that line. We don't deserve this and
neither do our families. I have decided to risk his anger, his threats, his
actions which will either lead to something better or something worse. I just
know it will be different and right now, that's good enough for me. Love and
Hugs- keep safe and warm -

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 5th, 2011 at 12:23 PM

You are doing the right thing, Diane. As Mary Ellen Barnes stated in her
article above, you don't have to stay stuck in the addicts world of insanity.
Try to remain strong and dont give into his threats. If he wants to sleep in
his car, let him. He has no right to bleed you to death and demand a free
ride. Why exactly does he think he deserves better than a trailer park? What
has he done to earn anything? I've been there with my son too, and I don't
know where on earth this sense of entitlement comes from! They don't think
rationally because they aren't rational- their brains have been re-wired or
something. We become just as dysfunctional as they are when we give into their
threats. The most I'm going to offer my son is a list of resources to help
himself and possibly a ride or bus fare to get there. I want a life for myself
whether he wants one or not.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

October 6th, 2011 at 3:35 PM

I honestly think any kind of mental illness/addiction is much worse than a
physical ailment! When that's the case, you have all kinds of support and
sympathy and people wanting to help you "get through it." With addiction,
you're just ostracized from the community! It's horrible! I'm so glad people
post here because I now know I'm not the only one dealing with this unbearable
emotional pain.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 6th, 2011 at 6:49 PM

You're so right, Donna. I'm embarrassed, humiliated, ashamed and guilty. I see
my nieces and nephew making something of themselves and I'm so proud of them.
Where did I go wrong? If my child had cancer, it would be an "acceptable"
disease and there would be lots of support and empathy from friends and
family. My brother-in-law said, "He could get clean and stay clean if he
wanted to". My response was, "Why can't you lose that weight you've been
wanting to lose and keep it off"? I don't know where I'm going with this and I
don't know the answers. I just feel deeply for all of you who are dealing with
the same problems. I just wish we had help and viable solutions. I feel like
I'm always going in circles and I can't seem to get off the merry-go-round.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

October 8th, 2011 at 7:19 AM

I feel like I'm on the merry-go-round, too. I've pushed my son into out-
patient treatment and counseling numerous times. I've sent him out of state to
live with different relatives to see if a new place and fresh start was the
answer. He's had stints in jail where I thought that would scare him straight.
He's been in the local emergency room several times for alcohol poisoning and
being found unresponsive curled up on the ground in the park. These should be
him "bottom," right? Wrong. That terrifies me. What's left? Death? Our
insurance company denied in-patient rehab because they didn't deem it
"medically necessary." Are you kidding me?!! That was after pleading with and
threatening my son that it was his only alternative if he wanted to live at
home. So, as always, we are back at square one- still on the merry-go-round. I
live in fear of what the next crisis will be. I worry about my marriage. I
worry about my own sanity. I feel hopeless. I feel like I will never be happy.
Thanks for letting me get all that off my chest.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 8th, 2011 at 8:17 PM

We're cleaning out the hangar and I found a box of my son's things. It was
still sealed and mailed from CA 5 yrs ago when he was between a stint in jail
and treatment. I ran across a letter he wrote his step-sister ( and never
mailed) when her father was dying. It was so philosophical and he had such
resolve to get sober, stay clean and make something of himself. He regretted
not being there for her and admitted it was due to avoidable mistakes that he
conscientiously made. He said the lost time, missed holidays, missed
birthdays, missed reunions, missed conversations are huge regrets and he had
no option but to learn to live a life free from the depths and confines of
addiction. As a practicing heroin addict actively engaged in his addiction,
he's leading himself down a one-way road to which the ends are always the
same; imprisonment, institutionalization or death. He said he passionately
hates the first two and there are countless things he wants to do with his
life before he comes face-to-face with the third. He had such resolve to stay
clean and make something of himself. He said it was such a critical time in
his life and in his recovery from close to a decade of heavy IV heroin and
cocaine abuse and this is life or death for him- from what can only be
described as nearly inescapable heroin induced comas to violent cocaine
induced seizures to various street-level criminal activities, he's been places
he simply should not have lived to tell about it. He said if he goes on
another sick run, odds are he's not coming back because you only get so many
chances until you must find a way out of the game or it swallows you whole.
It's so difficult for me to understand all of this because he continues to go
down that same path even though he seemed to be so determined. It's five years
later and he has had a major medical problem causing blindness in his left eye
because of shooting heroin with lemon juice. He has also had seizures. He's in
jail for a 3rd DUI. I know he wants to do something with his life, but here we
are again, 5 years later, and he has even more legal problems than he had at
27 and he's not nearly as healthy. When will he get it? I just hope it happens
one day soon. I'm exhausted.

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

October 9th, 2011 at 12:50 PM

I have not commented lately, but I have been keeping up with everyone's
comments and struggles. As for me, my daughter is the same. It has been
ANOTHER 6 months, and things are the same. She finally got a job- one she had
applied for and tried to get for 5 years now. Well, same old same old. After
about 3 weeks, she drank before work, 'freaked out' at work - afraid everyone
could tell she had been drinking- so walked off the job. That was that. I had
hoped that since she had something she had wanted for so long, maybe she would
work hard to stay sober and start building a future. But…. no. She has had
inumerable jobs over the past 8 years. She had one for a year. The rest, a
month at most. It is amazing to me that she keeps getting hired. No one must
be checking references. She is still living with a 55 year old guy who lives
in an apartment downtown. She is 26. It is rent subsidized and the guy has no
job, just SSI disability. No one in that apartment building works. Just a
bunch of drunks and druggies. They get food stamps. It is so pathetic. It
makes me sick when I think about it. She has no phone, so I have to call the
'boyfriend's cell phone (that his mom pays for) to check on her. His mom must
be 75 or 80 years old- and she is paying for her son's phone. I call less and
less. It is just depressing to talk to someone who is drunk.  
At least she moved out of our home. We kicked her out a year ago. She knows
she can't live here. Neither my husband nor I can take it any more. She lost
her driver's license due to 2 DUI's, so that is a blessing. At least she won't
be able to drive and hurt anyone. Since she totalled her car- due to drinking
and running over a median- no vehicle either.  
My husband refuses to talk about her, he says he can't take it. So, I still
feel the guilt, but at least we don't have to see her killing herself every
day.  
All I can say about that is that we have to save ourselves. I hope you will
all keep that in mind. We tried to save our daughter, all we got was abuse,
calls from the ER, the detox center, bums on the street that she was passed
out somewhere, pain from watching her sleep all day, drink and hide bottles,
and fail to thrive. Since we made her leave, we at least have our marriage,
our son, and our beautiful granddaughter. We've given up on the normal, happy,
family vision. She has been out a year now, and things are better. Not for
her- she is the SAME. But, it is better for us and what remains of our family.  
You are all in my thoughts and I truly feel the pain also.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 12th, 2011 at 8:48 PM

It is sad, isn't it? We're no doubt all from middle class families who work
hard, pay our bills and struggle to make life better for the next generation.
Our other children (for the most part) are hard-working and self-supporting.
We berate ourselves for failing this child who is an addict and and feel
guilty for somehow failing them. There never seem to be any answers for our
particular, unique situation. We're dammed if we do and dammed if we don't.
Money goes in and nothing comes out- rehabs don't seem to work and promises
are made and broken as often as the seasons change. I believe that I've
brought a "gift" into the world and yet the liability outweighs this precious
gift. Nothing but trouble and heartache for so many years. He knows his
chances of getting and staying sober are slim. But it seems that he does
nothing to increase his chances for success.  
It's just a sad story that never seems to get resolved.

Reply

  * ![Carl](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carl

October 14th, 2011 at 1:45 PM

Were we too harsh? We have a 29 year old daughter who has been an alcoholic
since high school. She is college educated, attractive, and has traveled and
worked around the world. She has been diagnosed with a mental condition and is
on medication but we also have been told that it may be attributed to her
chemical dependency. She often refuses to take her medication and drinks
excessively. During the past several years she has lived at home and is unable
to maintain a job.  
We are supporting her and unfortunately her habit as she sneaks and hides her
bottles. She was recently sent to jail because she physically attacked our
other daughter when she was visiting us. She has physically attacked both my
wife and I and she can also be verbally abusive when she drinks. Earlier this
year she had completed a 30 and a 90 day rehab program. Both times she went
back to drinking.  
Meanwhile, we bailed her out of jail after 24 days. We believed the jail time
would be a wake up call. Prior to her release she was in agreement to go to
another rehab center for 30 days and then go into a sober/transitional living
arrangement about 60 miles from our house. She was also informed that she
couldn't stay at our house again until she was clean. She lasted 5 days at the
treatment facility. Unknown to us, she had several drinks before arriving at
the treatment center where she tested positive. We had driven her there. She
later refused to follow their program and became verbally abusive toward them.
She was recommended to go to their other treament center which was more
restrictive. She refused, was asked to leave, and she called us up to take her
home. On the phone with us she denied that she had a drinking problem. We
tried to encourage her to go to the other treatment center but she said she's
done with these treament facilities. We said she couldn't come home. Her
mother tried to speak with her but she hung up on my wife. We told her we
would not pick her up to come home. Afterwords, my wife suggested to me that
we drive my daughter's car and my car to the treatment center with her clothes
packed and we would tell her to figure it out and leave. I suggested that we
wait, and that evening if necessary, she could sleep in one of the local
casinos. My thinking was that she would either try to go back to the treatment
center with an apology or she would agree to the more restrictive facility and
call us back. She did neither and took off with no cell phone a small
suitcase, and $20. We haven't heard from her in three days and yesterday we
did file a missing person's report with the police. We are now concerned for
her personal safety. If she was given the car, my wife said that she would be
so angry that she might be drinking and driving which she has done before. Now
I am second guessing my decision and both my wife and I are extremly upset and
are having difficulties holding back the tears. We have no way of contacting
her nor would we permit her to move back with us because of the abuses.  
We would sincerely appreciate any comments and ask anyone if this was too
drastic to leave a daughter stranded like this?

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 14th, 2011 at 8:04 PM

Carl,  
I'm so sorry for you and your wife. I empathize with you because I know how
difficult this is. We have been in similar situations with our son where we
anticipated he would make the "right" decisions and he didn't. I pray your
daughter is safe and she will stop denying her addiction and ask for help.
Perhaps she is punishing you for not going along with her plans to move back
in with you. She can't live with you- not with her history of being physically
abusive and also because she can't be trusted to follow your rules. I wish I
knew the answer, but unfortunately I can only listen and feel your pain. I
don't have the answers for my situation with my son either. I just pray you
find your daughter and she decides she wants help. Good luck.

Reply

  * ![Carl](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carl

October 14th, 2011 at 10:23 PM

Tanya,  
We had no idea that this site existed until today. I am currently reading each
response and also yours. We also experienced some of the same situations as
you have with Alanon, AA , and therapists. We feel the pain that you are
having. Your son has had a very difficult journey. Our daughter has been in
two expensive rehab programs and one on a sliding scale based on her income.
What I have learned is that many of the counselors are recovering addicts but
have never experienced the pain of a parent. It is not their fault, it's just
the way it is. I am beginning to learn It really is about choices and the
journey the child endures. The least expensive program can be the most
successful if and when the addict is ready. My wife and I are our best
therapists for each other because we have been married nearly 40 years and
love and care for our daughter. We are feeling the pain and we are caught in
that emotional box. No matter who the parent is, we all want what is best for
our child. This blog is helping me emotionally as well as our friends in our
inner circle. Having read through many of these blogs, I know we are guilty of
enabling our child often out of fear. We are so concern about are daughter's
safety and are waiting to hear from her…..You have said what our friends have
shared with us that she is punishing us for not allowing her to move back in
with us………Thank you for sharing with us…

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 18th, 2011 at 10:55 AM

To everyone and welcome Carl,

I held my ground about kicking my son out for about a week and a half. Then,
he started to worm his way back in with the same stories, the same lies, the
same pattern and I wanted to believe so much that he was different, seeking
help, wanted to change, blah blah blah. I was warned by everyone around me.

He is a very accomplished liar. He will look you in the face and he will stick
to his story and he will get so incensed if you don't believe him (you don't
love me, you believe everything my siblings say but not me, you are
marginalizing me, you are vindictive, you want me to die out there, you make
me lie just to survive etc) he has a million of them. I let him back because
he is now on a restricted license for two months and he has a lot of court
costs and DMV costs associated with his OWVI.

He says if he is put in jail he will hang himself something he has "tried"
before. Then, two days ago he was broadsided in his car and it completely
smashed up the driver side rear door. He told us the accident happened in one
location but we found out it was very close to all his "haunts". He says not
his fault, the other driver got the ticket so we asked for the police report
which he has yet to produce. We fully expect to get his ticket in the mail. He
did not have collision on this car so we got the wheels fixed and made sure it
runs - but what a smashed up looking heap. We had just put 2500 in his car so
that he could go to Florida for a job - a trip he never took.

Now, he says he has a job at the top restaurant in the state. He is a prep
cook but they of course love him and want him to wait tables- his prep cook
job pays at least $30,000/yr and if he waits table it goes up to $80,000. All
these numbers are courtesy of him. He says he got the job because the head
chef hangs in the bars he frequents and he has this connection. Mind you, he
can produce no proof, no schedule, W2 form, ID badge, apron, nothing. We've
been driving out there when he says he is working but his car is never there
so he says he is riding with the head chef who conveniently has the same hours
as he does. He also says he is starting a second job with the airlines on
Monday - also well-paying but we just got a message that they would like to
set up an interview - when I confonted him about that lie - he told me that he
knows he will get it. I guess he's just that awesome.

So, the last two nights he's been sleeping here - comes in at 4 am knowing
that I won't kick him out because he is drunk and on restricted license; we
have found 3 bottles; he comes in reeking of booze and obviously hopped up on
something; he is using my computer to check work related emails but the
history is full of the adult webcam and porn sites. All of these things are
violating the contract I wrote up and he signed that if we helped through to
the first of the year he would work, pay his fines and work on his debts, save
enough for some kind of car, never drink in our home, be in by 11 on
weeknights or 12 on weekends unless working, no more porn on our computers,
and no more lying to us. He has violated all provisions of this contract in
less than 12 hours time!

Truly unbelievable since he cried and begged to be let in so he won't have to
sleep in his car -he has a place to go with a family friend to sleep but he
finds it unacceptable. I feel like I let my family down again because I bought
his line of bull and I convinced everybody I had the situation well in hand
and he could sleep here for a few months while he worked and settled some
things. He doesn't intend to work and settle things he just keeps making them
worse and worse.

I threw him out again this morning - He told me he will die on the streets or
in jail. He is trying to make me (the weakest link) responsible for his messes
and his choices and to compromise our lives, marriage, peace and sanity and
future to his terrible addiction and babyfied approach to his own life. As you
said Carl, punishment - they try to punish us when we won't be used or when we
won't enable any longer. This time standing firm and true (the fourth time
I've written that on this site). Peace and Hugs  
diane

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

October 18th, 2011 at 11:01 AM

Just another question- he is sticking vehemently that he has this job at a 5
star Zagat rated restaurant- the kind that only seats 15 tables a night, you
need reservations 3 months in advance, have to wear jacket and tie. He has
never worked in a restaurant, never studied culinary arts or even had a
cooking class or even home ec and he can barely boil water at home. What are
the chances they would hire him for "kitchen help?" He doesn't know a roux
from a stew! I have to say his fake jobs are getting classier though!

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 18th, 2011 at 8:16 PM

Diane,  
I would say the chances are very slim! My son has waited tables at several
nice restaurants and it's hard work. He would always bring aprons home to wash
and needed new pants, new shoes, new shirts, etc. You have to start somewhere,
but I don't see how he could start at a top-rated restaurant without prior
experience. My son's first restaurant job was at a Chili's. He hasn't waited
tables in a few years now and said it would be difficult for him to get a job
at a really nice restaurant because there's a lot of competition and he hasn't
had recent experience. Unfortunately, I think your son is telling you what you
want to hear. It also doesn't make sense that his car wouldn't be there when
he's supposedly working! How stupid do they think we are? I think we just want
so badly to believe them.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

October 19th, 2011 at 6:34 AM

For me, the hardest thing to accept is how different my son is when he is
sober- such a pleasure to be around! It's that knowledge- that he does have a
chance for a happy life- that makes it soooo difficult to watch him self-
destruct and dig himself deeper into that hole of addiction. I feel so
desperate to get him out of that hole. It is so painful to watch what he's
doing to himself and his life. The pain is unbearable at times, causing so
much emotional distress that has begun to manifest in physical ways (sick more
often, heart palpitations, etc..) Whoever previously wrote the phrase, "you're
only as happy as your saddest child," hits the nail on the head!

Reply

  * ![Carl](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carl

October 19th, 2011 at 2:10 PM

Diane, I know what you are going through and no one size fits all. Our
daughter is completely different when she is not using alcohol and using her
meds correctly. We do have some good news. On Thursday of last week we filed a
missing person's report. On Saturday morning we had received the police report
that the Highway Patrol had picked up our daughter who was walking along the
highway the day before the report, and had taken her to our home town and
dropped her off. My wife and I spent three days looking for her at the various
homeless centers, walking the streets, and showing her missing picture
profile. Although this is a different topic, walking with the homeless was an
experience. I had no idea the thousands that were being fed, the respect they
had for each other, and how thin the line is between the have and the have
nots. All ages and genders were represented although men out numbered the
women by a 3-1 ratio. Who knows, they may be in a safer environment than us.
Enough said.  
My wife and I were continuously second guessing what we had done by not
picking her up. She had no cell phone, only $20, and no friends. On Tuesday we
had spoken with the Highway Patrol Officer who said that our daughter looked
ok but exhausted, and said she would have a ride when she arrived in our town.
What shocked us is our daughter had walked the entire distance, day and night,
from Lake Tahoe to Carson City, NV covering nearly 35 miles in temps. in the
low 30's and walking through a steep forested mountain pass. She was still
missing. Yesterday the local police had recommended that we file a medical
warrant with a judge. We gathered her medical records together and decided to
visit the local rehab/psych facility where she was once a patient for
additional records. For whatever reason, my wife shared our daughter's missing
picture profile with one of the secretaries. The secretary left the room with
the picture. Ten minutes later I RECEIVED a call from our daughter. She had
admitted herself to this rehab program. She was there at this facility. My
wife and I were overcome with emotion. Remember she was thrown out of the
other facility and walked almost the entire distance to our home town with the
exception of the police ride. She told her mother she is going to stay as long
as it takes to get well…  
Although our drama has had a happy ending, we know that for our daughter it is
going to take years for her to get over her addiction and to correctly take
her meds. What have we learned from this? That we rolled the dice and her
guardian angel was there. We could easily have found her in a homeless shelter
or receiving that dreadful midnight call from the police. That's what I mean
that one size doesn't fit each person's situation. We also know that our
daughter is an adult and whatever choice she makes, will have a lasting
effect. Like many other parents, we have been through tough emotional times
where you begin to second guess one's decision and allow ourselves to become
the victim. Its tough being a parent in these situations..too many emotions
come into play from their birth to the present day. My wife and I will always
be there for our daughter but we will NO longer enable her and reinforce her
addictions by giving her money out of our own fear. It would be better to give
money to a stranger for their addictions than to give it to your own kids. At
least you do not have to feel guilty and fall into their traps. Our daughter
may fall off the wagon again but we are praying that we are strong enough to
make the right decisions so that we can have a "normal" life…….I will keep
everyone posted…..

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 19th, 2011 at 8:57 PM

Carl,

Thank God your daughter is safe and in rehab again! You must be at peace
finally- knowing she is well and has made a committment to get sober. I can
imagine it feels pretty good to go to bed and get some sleep for a change. I'm
happy for you and hope all goes well for your daughter's recovery.

It's difficult to admit that I am more at peace with my son in jail, but it's
true. I'm sleeping well for a change and not waking myself (and husband) up
yelling at my son. I felt so trapped with the money situation and guess there
was a lot of pent up anger and frustration. I never used to talk or yell in my
sleep, so I think I was getting close to the breaking point.

I feel your pain, Donna. My son is the same way when he's sober- sweet,
loving, intelligent, funny and sensitive. He never gets mean when he's on
something, but I can't stand seeing him drunk or high. It's just disgusting
and so disappointing. They have him on Prozac for depression and OCD and I'm
praying it will help him. So far, he said he can't tell the difference. The
doctor told him it can take several weeks. It would be dangerous for him to
stop suddenly when he gets out though, so I sure hope they give him enough to
last a few days when they release him.

I don't know yet when he will be released or when he will get into rehab. He
had another court date today, so I'm hoping to hear good news when he calls
tomorrow.

Reply

  * ![Carl](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carl

October 21st, 2011 at 6:21 PM

Tanya, I am glad to hear that you are able to get some peace. Something like
this can break up almost any marriage. Although my wife and I have been
married for 39 years, we have stood together through the difficulties of our
daughter. We are now recovering from everything we have been through with our
daughter. We will always be there for her, but she must make the decision to
stay clean. My wife and I know that we can not, and will not, enable her. We
are sharing ideas of what we will do if she decides to use again. It is going
to be a long haul but we are working on a game plan. I hope that you son has
that burning desire to go to rehab and really wants to get on with his life.
One thing we will eventually ask our daughter is her game plan. We will be the
first to know if she alters her goals………

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

October 22nd, 2011 at 7:54 PM

My husband and I made the decision together- after 8 years of struggle with
our daughter- that we had to save ourselves. We cannot save her. It is up to
her to break away from her alcoholism and her addictive behavior. For 8 years
we rescued, talked, supported and probably enabled, her behavior by helping
her over and over 'make a fresh start'. Each time we were let down as she
would eventually choose drinking over living a happy and productive life. At
some point, we both agreed that we were finished with enabling. She is an
adult- 26 years old now- and all our bailing out and providing rehab has not
done a thing. She walked out of rehab, refuses counseling, is still drinking,
not working, and choosing to continue in this self destructive lifestyle.  
In order to preserve our marriage, our security, and our happiness and the
happiness of our other child- we have decided to let our daughter find her own
way. We are still here for her- but she needs to come to us for help. We will
no longer seek her out to push her to 'get help'. She obviously doesn't really
want to change. We love her, we will provide (if she asks) a safe haven and
medical care- but on our terms, not hers. She needs to want to change. So far
it has all been at our initiation, and she has always told us she doesn't want
to quit drinking. She says she can handle it. Well, she can't. Until she wants
to quit and commit, we are saving ourselves. It is a sadness- continual- but
we know we have other things to live for, and we refuse to let her misery ruin
what remains of our lives and the lives of our son and his child- our grand
daugher.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

October 28th, 2011 at 5:10 PM

WOW, I admire the strength some of you have. I'm hoping to get to that place.
Right now, it feels like I'd be giving up on my son. Believe me, I know that's
not the case, but it doesn't "feel" that way. I am slowly working on
detaching, but it is a very difficult process. I have alot of mixed emotions.
I am hoping he finds the desire to battle these demons. I just can't imagine
ever being happy while he is struggling with this.

Reply

  * ![Ann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ann

October 31st, 2011 at 1:52 AM

Thanks to all of you. What a blessing that I found this in the middle of the
night when I have been beside myself. My 42 year old daughter has left again
to be with her loser boyfriend and has left her 2 sons at home with me. She
was only going out for "a minute". I have allowed her to move in with me in
order to help give her sons a stable environment. Now she uses me to go out.
However, I believe even if I were not in her life, she would leave her sons
alone (ages 13 and 15). Both my daughter and her 46 year old boyfriend are
drinkers. If it weren't for her boys, I wouldn't have anything to do with her.
But what can I do when my grandsons are wonderful and didn't ask for any of
this? Thanks again so much for the great comments on this site. :)

Reply

  * ![Ann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ann

October 31st, 2011 at 4:43 AM

Also, what is it when I have paid $30,000 just since Feb. to provide for her
son to attend a private high school, for her attorney fees to get more support
from her ex., clothing for her and her other two sons,etc. that she confronts
me as to "lording" my money over her? When I told her that her loser boyfriend
could not live with us anymore, she calls me a very mean person. She loves to
tell me that I was not a good mother too, when I really was. She loves to say
"well, you drink too" when I may have a glass of wine out to dinner. How does
this all work?

Reply

  * ![Celia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Celia

October 31st, 2011 at 7:38 PM

I hope that this doesn't offend anyone on this forum but I would like to say a
prayer for all of us and our children:

Dear Heavenly Father,  
We thank you for this beautiful fall day and for your loving kindness. Thank
you for your grace and love and the sacrifice of your son so that we could all
have eternal life. Please be with us each day as we face a world that we don't
understand. Be with our children and please give them the strength and courage
to overcome their addictions and become functioning members of society. Give
all of us the strength and courage to say NO when we are so scared and afraid.
We are all in a world of darkness with our addicted children and can only pray
that there is a light at the end of the tunnel. We all love our children and
want only a good and decent life for them and for us.  
These things we ask in Jesus' name and for his sake.  
AMEN

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

October 31st, 2011 at 8:21 PM

Ann, you WERE and ARE a good mother and you are also a GOOD grandmother! If
you were such a bad mother, how on earth could she leave her beloved sons with
you? That makes absolutely no sense! They love to blame everyone else! Quit
spending your retirement on her though- that is a bad move. Take care of your
grandsons and take care of yourself. Let her take care of herself. She's
depending on you to still be her mommy and take care of her need even though
she abuses you. You must take care of your own needs!!!!

Reply

  * ![Ann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ann

November 1st, 2011 at 9:54 AM

Thanks Tanya for your kind words. The latest in my scenario is that my
daughter contacted a therapist for a possible joint session for her and I to
"set some ground rules" because I told her the money for her is cut off
starting immediately. I did this after reading all the letters on this blog. I
told her to attend if she could afford it ($150 per hr.). I told the
therapist, "no thanks" to talking about "ground rules" until my daughter wants
to address the elephant in the room. And, Celia, thanks for the prayer…no
matter what denomination we all are, a little prayer can always help
especially with today being All Saints Day! And for all of us, a quote from
the therapist's e-mail "Hang in there!" Thanks again to everyone who has
written on this site. Truly a godsend for me. :)

Reply

  * ![Marge](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Marge

November 7th, 2011 at 3:41 PM

Is alcoholism a disease? My nephew just cannot seem to quit and I know that it
runs in my family. He has taken just about all of my sister's retirement money
for rehab, etc. Should she just say NO and see if he survives?

Reply

  * ![karen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### karen

November 12th, 2011 at 9:58 AM

Hi everyone. Just spent last night and this morning reading every post on this
site. Thanks to all of you because it helped me. MARGE…I am a recovered
alcoholic/drug user. I have always heard that alcoholism is a disease. It
never felt right to me though. However, alcohol, like many drugs, is
addictive. If you use addictive substances often enough you get addicted. It
certainly causes diseases. It doesn't really matter though to me. It's all
about deciding to get help and to stop using whatever you use…alcohol/drugs
etc. Even smoking. Way more people die from smoking than drugs and alcohol.
The difference is that they don't make life a living hell for everyone around
them. I have a huge extended family. Many alcoholics (in recovery for the most
part) and many young drug addicts/abusers who are not recovered and don't want
to be. Now my own daughter is using drugs and it is more painful for me to
watch her destroy herself than anything I have ever gone through. I would do
ANYTHING to help her. But there is NOTHING I can do because she doesn't want
help. She doesn't think crushing pills and injecting them into her body is
anything to worry about. She is 20. Extremely beautiful and talented. She is
smart and has always had many good friends. Well, like all of your stories, I
have watched her change in the last two years. She has dropped out of two
schools. Lost many jobs. No more good friends. Nothing in her life lasts long.
I get mad at her and then I remember where I was and I know that when you are
"in it", you can't see straight. Yes I did have "lucid" moments. But then I
would "forget". I mean really forget! No one who hasn't had to overcome an
addiction can really understand this. Yes I was powerless while choosing to
continue to use. I couldn't fix myself while using. Does that make sense? I
was powerless as long as I continued to drink and use drugs. I had to be
willing to stop. Just willing. And once I made that decision I was really on
the way to recovery. And that was before I even got to an AA meeting. Get a
copy of Alcoholics Anonymous - The Big Book. Written before all the treatment
centers came around. It is all about becoming willing to go to any lengths to
get better. It's all about taking a very hard and honest look at yourself and
facing the fact that you are a big baby, selfish, immature, self-centered to
the extreme. It's about deciding to surrender and give up the battle so that
you can win the war. I think some of these posts reflect a misunderstanding of
what AA (the original) meant by powerlessness. I am powerless over lots of
things. Only an egotist would say that he has control over everything he does
and can do anything. I'm so exhausted. I know what I must do. I must get my
hair done and buy new clothes. I must find meaningful work and friends. I must
continue to grow and pray and find peace in my life. I cannot hang my life on
hers. Not easy to do when it's your daughter! And I love her so much. And I
always will! I CHOOSE TO! I can choose today. I will not give her money or
enable her any longer. I will tell you this. The anger and blame directed at
us parents is the child's own self-hate. I pray for my daughter and my nephews
and all these young lost children. Thanks

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

November 14th, 2011 at 10:30 PM

Thank you for your insight, Karen. I'm sorry about your daughter and I'm sorry
we all have the same struggles with our children. We love them so much and
want to help, but it's so difficult to understand the fine line between
helping and enabling. The "disease" theory is probably what we want to believe
because we see how addiction runs in families and it's easier to think of it
as a disease opposed to "choice". It helps to hear your perspective and I
appreciate that. I just pray my son makes the choice to live as you have done
and hope all our children make that same choice.

Reply

  * ![karen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### karen

November 17th, 2011 at 12:48 AM

Yes there is a choice to be made. At no time do I think that a person cannot
choose to be well. It can be extremely difficult to stay sober as many must
deal with "craving". With addiction comes alterations in the brain. Medical
help is necessary for many. Let me tell you something that is true. It will
take everything you got to overcome addiction, at least in the beginning. Also
you all should know that the experience of powerlessness occurs during the
course of active addiction. EVERYBODY tries to stop or moderate their use over
the course of months, years, decades. NOBODY sets out to become an
addict/alcoholic. NOBODY!!!! Why some and not others???? It's not as simple as
this site wants you to think. However an addict can get well if he/she is
willing to do whatever it takes.

Reply

  * ![Barbara](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Barbara

November 21st, 2011 at 1:31 PM

Thank you for this, it took me a long time to go through these emails. Every
child is different, and everyone has different needs. After working with so
many young addicts and troubled youth, I know that every case is different. I
strongly believe and tell friends/family of addicted loved ones to help the
addict as long as they are helping themselves. But there is also the time when
the seed of recovery needs to be planted, and that can be done with the help
of the YOU. Addicts get in a denial factor, that is hard to see when they have
blinders on.

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

December 5th, 2011 at 12:53 AM

Hi Ladies,

It's been a wicked couple of months since I last posted. I've read over your
posts tonight as I am awake with a case of the worries over my son. My gosh
our stories are all so familiar. Each one of yours hits me right in the gut.

So, since I last wrote hell broke loose. My son became more and more violent
in response to any requests we'd make of him and to any denials of money,
transportation, time listening to his bullshit. Out of pity, we hated calling
the police so things went on too long and too far.

Upon realizing he was going to push us into the pit of assault and battery
charges, we finally took it all into our own hands. We packed his clothing and
toiletries in bags and made him go. It was horrible. He cried, he wheedled, he
begged, he put his body in the door and tried to prevent my closing it. We put
the police on speed dial because we fully expected the violence of
desperation. As it was I had bruised arms from his response to my trying to
get him out the door enough to close it! I've never felt like such a pitiful
piece of work in my life, having been degraded to the point of physical
exchange. Mind you, my son is six feet, two inches tall and a very wiry 160
pounds. I'm all of five-five and a round little dumpling.

He left, but he'd be back at the door night after night, or calling me at home
or the office with the begging, wheedling, promising. I thought I was a
nervous wreck before, but wow, that was nothing compared to this. Finally on
the second or third night of a set of wet, heavy snowstorms he was picked up
behind a shopping center a couple of miles away, apparently extremely drunk
and feet slightly frostbitten.

The police dropped what was left of his belongings at our home. The warrants
from screwing up what should have been a pretty straightforward probation
landed him back at County for 60 days.

I visited him there once and never went back because after the first few
minutes of fairly lucid exchange he dove right back into the manipulative
talk. He tried calling many times, multiples in a row! I was so glad for the
blocking program I'd purchased for my cellphone. He even dialed my work number
so frequently I had to direct all calls to voice mail to screen them.

A couple of times I took the call and wished I hadn't. The whole purpose was
to work on my emotions. He's become quite the psychopath, really. All that
matters is him! After the 15 minutes my brain would be thoroughly addled and
my heart rate dangerous even though I'd beg him to please stop, to understand,
to do right.

Throughout all this, I've seriously considered hanging myself from the huge
tree in the back yard a number of times, or with the dog leashes from the
basement ceiling, just to get relief from the pain of it all. Dammit, I'm not
going to fold. He knows there is life insurance and sometimes I wonder if
that's what he wants. It's a miserable feeling.

Since my son's been released he hasn't come to the house, thankfully, but the
abuse doesn't stop. He's called all my phones and I've erred in answering a
couple of times. Begging, wheedling, promises that he's a new person, flattery
of asking for a pie, pulling at heart strings that the guy who took him in was
putting him out because the guy needs rent money for the room my son occupies.
My resolve wavers silently while outwardly I repeat the "sorry, I love you,
can't do any more for you" magic.

I admit I really considered coming up with $375 to buy him a month. Thank
goodness I was smart enough to not mention this to my son…he'd have grabbed
onto the idea like a pitbull and tortured hell out of me until I either did it
or involved the police. No matter to him that I'd be pinched for a month or
more to make up for it! All that matters to him is him.

It has become a two-person attack on me; my son knows, from years of seeing
his father do it and from his own experience, that enough haranguing will wear
me into submission. Not only was my son calling, but also the guy has called.
I have determined there's collusion to shake me down. So the last time I got a
call from "the guy" I told him that I think well of his charity to my son, but
that I would not be rescuing the 26-year-old young man who has decided not to
try to help himself. It's been a few days since either has called and I am so
relieved but wondering when it will start up again. Or worse, will my son come
to the office?

As I write now, it is very very cold outside…and you all know where my mind
wanders. Finally the sleeping pills are taking effect. G'nite…

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

December 18th, 2011 at 11:28 AM

I'm sorry about your son, Kathy, and the pain you're going through. I know it
all too well. It's a sickening horrific kind of emotional pain wrought with
fear, anger, deep sadness, grief, loss, guilt and many more. Having to force
yourself to be "cold" toward your children is unnatural. I hate this disease
like no other. I would much rather my son had a terminal illness. This is like
watching a slow torturous death for years. Some get lucky and get to see their
child choose sobriety. I hope some of us fall into the lucky few. Best to you,
your son and your family during this extremely difficult time of year.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

December 25th, 2011 at 12:15 PM

Merry Christmas to all you strong, loving and caring parents! I hope your
Holidays are wonderful and that the New Year will bring more happiness than
despair. My son is sitting in a jail cell, which has to be about the most
depressing situation to be in at this time of year. At least there's one
bright spot for me; I don't have to worry that he will kill himself or someone
else in a car accident! I do pray 2012 will be a better year for everyone and
that our addicts will finally turn their lives around!

Have a blessed Christmas and wonderful New Year!  
Tanya

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

December 25th, 2011 at 9:26 PM

Merry Christmas to everyone. I know many of us are suffering on this day- and
this website is here to remind us that we are not alone. My daughter did not
call, or return my calls today. No doubt she is drunk, alone, miserable,
crying. We are in another state, and she was invited to come- with us paying
for the ticket, of course- and she said she could not leave. Leave what? No
job, sleeping on someone's couch in a subsidized apartment downtown where
other addicts or losers are living on public assistance or SSI. No family
nearby,no church, no happiness. She has tried to commit suicide twice this
month and calls to cry that she hates her life and has begun cutting herself.
It is a nightmare- she is beautiful and her physical beauty is something she
has tried to maintain. Now she is scarring herself, her teeth are stained, the
effects of her abuse of herself starting to show. She knows she is an
alcoholic but continually tells me she doesn't want to stop.  
Sorry to be such a downer on this blessed day- every holiday I cry. I can make
it though most days and put my daughter's pain in some compartment and only
look at it occasionally. On every holiday, I wake in pain and spend the day
trying to be secluded so my sadness does not effect others. I have cried off
and on all day. Thank you for all being there and sharing. Our children cause
us so much pain. I know they are in pain- but how do we cope with the guilt
and pain and helplessness we as parents have to deal with?

Reply

  * ![Desiree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Desiree

December 25th, 2011 at 11:12 PM

i hate that i understand what you are all going through. My son is at a hotel
right now doing drugs. He will be 23 next month. He has juvenile diabetes. As
a nurse and emt, i know that diabetes and drug abuse is a bad combo. I agree
with Donna, i feel like my son is committing suicide slowly. i'm pretty sure
he will die and what hurts me the most is when will this be? tomorrow? next
week? next year? a mother sees this happening and wants to save or protect her
kid but can't! this is the worst feeling. in my career i see people of all
ages dying from illness that they didn't ask for and i have this kid who
doesn't care about himself. My heart breaks for him. i say to myself: "where
did i go wrong?" his twin sister holds 2 jobs and is a full time student. my
12 year old is an outstanding student and child.  
all i do is stress and cry

Reply

  * ![Karen Lewy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Karen Lewy

December 26th, 2011 at 5:08 PM

Watching your child "adult" or not get lost in the world of addiction is
something I would never wish on any parent. The roller coaster of emotions and
the fear of "what if's" is torture. I take each victory as it comes and try to
stay focused on understanding the war against the enemy. Separating the sin
from the person helps you stay focused on the person that needs to be freed
from addiction rather then the drug induced behavior of the addict. (Love the
person, Hate the sin)….addiction is becoming an epidemic in this country and
the "successful" resources for help are just not available. I pray, lean on
God's word for strength and continue to persevere to help my adult child be
free from this bondage.

Reply

  * ![Jillian](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jillian

December 28th, 2011 at 8:55 PM

I kind of can't believe I'm posting here…out son (21) is a heroin addict. He
is living out in the country w/us now, so cut off from drugs for the time
being. He's gone thru the physical w/drawl & now we're on the mental part. He
says he wants to stop using (I'm still shocked he actually shot up w/heroin
for a yr. & we NEVER knew). What do we do now? He's (& us) are seeing a
counselor. Since he's thru the physical w/drawl and has been out w/us for
about a month, does he still need outpatient? I'm afraid for when he can
finally leave us & go to the real world. I feel so guilty for now realizing
this sooner. My husband and I are having a tough time. ANY advice will be
sooooo welcome. Thanks.

Reply

  * ![Jillian](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jillian

December 28th, 2011 at 8:58 PM

sorry for the couple of typo's. I'm feeling guilty about everything as of
late…

Reply

  * ![Celia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Celia

December 29th, 2011 at 8:39 PM

Jillian,

I'm am glad that you have posted about your son. Be thankful that he has made
it through the physical w/d and that he is participating in the counseling. I
would think that he probably will need to be in counseling for quite a while.
My son has been through detox 3 times now in just over a year and has gone
back to prescription pain drugs every time. He says he doesn't need
counseling, but obviously, he does.

To all of the other parents out there I am so sorry that very few of us are
having any success with our adult addicts. Every day is a nightmare for me and
my son continues to drain me of money each and every day. He still doesn't
work and says to me that every day is the last day and he will get help
tomorrow. It is all just a lie and a delay tactic. I've told him that he has 3
choices in life:  
1\. Die an early death from drugs  
2\. End up in jail or prison  
3\. Choose to deal with his addiction and try to get his life straightened
out.  
He is 30 yrs old, a college graduate, and Iraq War veteran and really a
bright, personable, and handsome young man or he was all of this….but he seems
to have no ambition, and his only goal in life is to obtain drugs to feed his
addiction. I am so tired and stressed with all of this, I just don't know what
to do.

I wish he would just go somewhere and leave me alone so I can have some peace.
Sandy & Desiree…be thankful that your children are not bullying you and
demanding unbelievable sums of money from you everyday. I know you probably
wonder why I have continued to give him money for his habit…it is due to him
threatening me and saying he will come to my work and make a scene if I don't
meet his demands (he has done this before). I feel like I'm being blackmailed
by my own son.

God help all of us. We need him.

Reply

  * ![desiree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### desiree

January 4th, 2012 at 1:46 AM

Jillian, My son went into rehab last week. I'm pretty sure he went in to avoid
jail and/or to have a bed (it's getting cold out). whatever the reason, who
cares, he's in there and i can only hope that he will "see the light". i would
never judge you nor do i think anyone on this panel would as we all seem to be
going through the same ordeal. My son has and still steals from me and family
and whoever he can to support his habit. My mother in law has had to close her
bank account 3 times with losses up to 40,000 dollars including jewelry, some
necklaces worth 9,000 dollars. I used to give my son money or even gift cards
but he would sell the gift cards. I am giving him tough love and he( when he
is well) respects me but when high, hates me. I've been going through this for
over 5 years now so i guess you can say that i enable him less and less but
still, it is tough because he is my child. I am going to be going to my first
support group on Friday night. I think it can only help. I believe that the 3
choices you wrote are true for your child or any child going through this.  
Be well….  
Desiree

Reply

  * ![desiree](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### desiree

January 4th, 2012 at 1:47 AM

sorry i guess i was directing toward Celia, lol not sure

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

January 15th, 2012 at 9:14 PM

Well, my son is out of jail and he's here at our home. He was in jail in CA
for a DUI, but missed a court date here in TX for possession of marijuana due
to the fact that he was incarcerated in CA. The judge here wasn't happy
because he went to court the first time & asked for a court-appointed
attorney. She told him to bring proof that he needed one and he missed the
first date she set, so they had to reschedule. He made the next appt, and the
judge agreed to the attorney, but there wasn't one available that day. They
reset the date, but he was in jail in CA then. So, the judge issued a warrant
and there is an inactive bond forfeiture. They sent extradition papers to CA,
but somehow it fell through the cracks and CA released him. He flew in Thurs
night and called the court Friday morning. The clerk told him he can walk into
court with all the paperwork, but the judge will most likely have him taken
into custody! The clerk said he would be better off to hire an attorney to
show up with the paperwork & give the judge a chance to look it over. He
called an attorney & the attorney told him he could represent him, but he may
have to go in for a day for booking, but they would probably consider his time
served in CA and he would most likely be released the same day. My issue is
this- he has a total of $1000 in unemployment benefits and it will cost him
about $500 for an attorney. He has no job, no place to live and this money
would help him get into a sober living home and help support him until he can
get a job. I can't imagine that he would have to do more than 2 wks or so in
jail for 0-2 oz of marijuana, but he is adamant about the fact that he is NOT
going back to jail!!! He is on a wait list for a county bed in a good rehab in
CA and had planned to come here & take care of the court case, then go back to
CA and get into sober living, find a job somewhere and wait till he can get
into the rehab. Now I see all of that going out the window. I have helped him
so much financially in the past, I just can't go down that road again and have
told him that repeatedly while he was incarcerated. I don't blame him for not
wanting to go back to jail-he was there for 4 months and has been sick with
bronchitis and sinus infections the entire time. He's still sick. He says he
wants to stay sober and has made up his mind to stay off drugs and alcohol. I
believe that's what he wants, but he has never been able to stay sober, so I
don't see that happening without a good rehab. Maybe I'm crazy because he has
already been to several rehabs in the past. I told him earlier tonight that he
needs to be somewhere else by next weekend and he said ok. I told him I don't
want to argue with him about jail vs hiring an attorney, but I have to set
boundaries for myself and I haven't figured out just what I'm willing to do to
yet; I just know I can't be his bank or go back to the way things were before.
I'm leaning toward offering to pay the first 4 weeks in sober living, which
would mean he has about $500 to pay for food, cigs, transportation, etc. until
he can get a job. He has a felony drug charge on his record and he always uses
that as an excuse why he can't get a job, but I know there has to be other
felons out there who work! He is 32 yrs old and has been drinking and doing
drugs since he was 14, so he missed all those years when he should have been
maturing and learning how to be responsible. He has just made a mess of his
life, but he is not a bad person. I don't want to enable him and I don't want
to do for him what he can do for himself either. There has to be an end to the
help.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

January 16th, 2012 at 1:37 PM

Pretend I never sent that last post! What to do without enabling is always a
struggle. I've just decided to see what he does. If he helps himself, I'll
help him. If not, I'll drop him off at a shelter. It's not my problem to
figure out his life and I don't need to be tormented about what to do or not
do for him. If he makes positive strides, I'll consider helping. He's going to
reap the rewards or suffer the consequences of his actions.

Reply

  * ![des](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### des

January 19th, 2012 at 11:50 PM

Tanya,  
It is so tough to "not"enable. My son was just in rehab (lost count on how
many times he's been there). This particular rehab has alot of support for
families. I learned so much. I learned that i'm "sick" because i'm addicted to
my addict. I learned that throwing my son on the street forces him to go into
rehab and i know he is initially going for the bed and/or hot meal but my
feeling is, whatever gets him in there then maybe he will "see the light" so
to speak. Nobody can judge a family member going through what you and I go
through. Each person and family is individualized and what works in your
situation may not work in mine. I do feel that the support groups out there
for families is KEY to helping you and i cope.

Reply

  * ![Verla](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Verla

January 24th, 2012 at 3:41 PM

Well,I have been searching for some answers now for so long, it is actually
nice to hear that others are in similar boats…  
My daughter is 31 and is addicted to cocaine and now I believe prescription
drugs. Five years ago she was pregnant and was with us during her pregnancy
and didn't use. Her boyfriend got out of jail and the lies began…she had the
baby (they got married and were living with us). I went away for a couple of
weeks to come home to basically a empty house, they robbed us blind and stoled
our truck and took off, withthe babe. Needless to say we have been raising out
granddaughter for five years now. Meanwhile shehad another child three years
ago, she has been living in a different city from us, so she said that she
split up with her husband, got a job and was diagnosed with bi-polar.
Eventually the wheels fell off and she freaked out at work and didn't go back.
Next she got another job, then her little son got sick and possibly had a
cancerous growth on his lungand had to undergo two different biopsies. Then
she felland broke her arm, so on and so on, I was SO STUPID, thought if she
didn't have any bad luck she wouldn't have any luck at all. Anyway she came to
our house for Christmas, wheels fell off, she ended up in the hospital going
through withdrawls Social Service, removed her son from her care and she had
to leave. I also found two needles in the room they were staying and pills.
The littleone stayed with us but they wanted him close to his mother in order
to maintain a relationship (she has none withher daughter)so now he is with
his paternal grandparents. During all of this we found out she has been living
withher husband all through this time, during which she was asking everyday
for help with prescriptions (five different ones)groceries etc….it was all
lies constantly. I was crushed once again of how she could do this to her kids
and to her family. No more. So much has gone on with her,how can a mother use
her own child to get what she wants.He was so neglected it broke my heart.  
I have gone to AA but didn't see any help there. Then have been searching for
books on the subject but nothing there either, where can a person get help to
help themselves!

Reply

  * ![Linda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Linda

January 25th, 2012 at 7:29 PM

I've read a few of these stories….my story is very similar. My son is 34. He
has been nailing me to the cross since he was young. I divorced his father
when he was 3 1/2 and I still think that he blames me for everything that went
wrong in his life. He constantly lies, he does drugs, pain killers mostly,
then he becomes violent. Throwing things, punching holds in the wall, breaking
doors. He went to jail for 6 months when my parents called the police, for a
domestic, and drug charges. He violated probahtion and was sent to jail…I
thought that it would change him…it did..not for the good. He has a chip on
his shoulder; can't find a job. He is stealing, money, jewelry, forging
checks. I called his father, I just can't deal with it anymore. I don't want
to send him back to jail, but he refuses to go for help; and now he uses the
fact that his probahation officer will send him back to jail if he goes to
live with his father. It is cold and he has no money, no real friends, he own
brother won't let him go to his house. I feel torn. His father said that he
was going to put him away. He needs professional help. I do know that…I'm am
so sick. I have addiction in my family. Both my brothers, my father has been
on pain meds since I was 10 years old for a back problem, and really that is
when drug use was introduced to my family. My mom has gone through hell, still
is now her grandson. I am with heavy heart when I say that he needs to be
someplace that can help him, but not jail that is a horrible place. Any
suggestions. The court system doesn't help neither does probahation they
prefer to send you to jail. No jobs. No money, desperate.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

January 29th, 2012 at 4:08 PM

Same story here; just different characters. I'm so sick of dealing with
someone else's problems! When will my son take ownership and leave me out of
his daily struggles? My husband (his stepdad) and I let him come to our place
after he got out of jail in CA so he could take care of his legal issues here
in TX. He slept till 9 or 10 every morning and postponed taking care of his
problems here. He has a possession of marijuana charge here & missed his court
date due to the fact he was in jail in CA for a 3rd DUI offense. He had to go
to the jail here and turn himself in, which he finally did on Thursday. He has
a court date here tomorrow & is hoping the judge will release him on time
served in CA. He said if she doesn't, he will post bail. He only has about
$600 to his name, but he's going to spend most of it to post bail because he
said the jail is horrible here-nothing like Orange County where he was!!! I
told him he will need to be prepared to go to a shelter if that happens
because that money was supposed to help him get on his feet when he gets his
legal issues resolved. He spent the other $500 on an attorney, so if he posts
bond tomorrow, he will have spent almost $1100 on this legal issue, which
still won't be resolved and now he won't have any money again. I can't make
him make the right decisions-he won't listen to reason and that's why he's
always in trouble. If just one time, he would say, "You might be right, Mom",
I might feel like I'm getting through to him. He thinks it's okay to drive
without insurance-somehow the laws don't apply to him. I guess I will have to
follow through with the shelter threat since I don't think I should have to
replace the funds he spent on his legal issues here. If I cave in, I'm right
back to supporting him and I have promised myself NO MORE handouts. He has a
drug felony on his record, but I know there are others out there who get jobs
with a felony on their record. No more excuses. When is it time to live our
lives???

Reply

  * ![liz](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### liz

January 30th, 2012 at 5:28 PM

i have been dealing with my sons alcohol addiction for years he is 24. we have
been through very searious court trial that i and my mom paid 30thousand plus
dollars. it was not because of the drinking but he had been drinking and is
the commen thread in a long history. There has been jail on more than a few
occasions, dui 2 times in a month, drug arrest. i have bailed him out and not
bailed him out. ect.  
where i am now, he was beaten in a fight and was in icu for 7 days. after he
stayed with me and could now walk well or speak well. when he got back out to
a sober living house he started using. he has been in and out of the mental
hospital (they keep letting him out or telling him to leave and drinking wile
i have been paying his rent and taking him to the ER every few days becouse of
panic attacks, cutting, anxiety, ect. this was happing before he got hurt but
is worse now. so , i have to chose to let go. the hardest part is that i am
not sure that he has the mental capacity to do it he can't seem to keep it
together for even a day . the time before last that i was taking him to the
hospital he jumped out of my car on the on ramp to the freeway. out of idias

Reply

  * ![liz](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### liz

January 30th, 2012 at 6:03 PM

continued from the post earler one. after jumping from my car he was taken to
the er then to the mental hospital released the next day back at the er that
eve back to the mental hospital released. he paid his rent i drooped off his
things he says he is doing well. he shows up at my house this morning at 9am
and has been drinking. i tell him to leave give him the # to the mental health
clinic and a rehab to see if there are any beds. i get a call from the er
saying that he was brought in because he was found laying on the sidewalk and
he is being combat of.  
i love my son, probably tomuch but there is nothing that i have not done and
there is nothing that has worked …. i don't know what will happen to him

Reply

  * ![CMG](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### CMG

January 31st, 2012 at 9:41 AM

It is heartbreaking to hear these stories. And mine is so similar. I too
search for answers for how to deal with this heartache I have over my son. I
too am torn. If this were a 'bonafide disease' like cancer, diabetes, etc., it
would be so much easier. But I don't think that people with those diseases
lie, steal, blame their families and on and on. Like most of you, we have
addiction on both sides of the family. Like most of you, I never thought my
son would succumb to this.

Over the past two year of dealing with finding out about his heroin addiction,
my son has said such horrible things to me my heart just cannot take anymore.
I myself have gone through over a year of family counseling to try to
'understand' but I feel the NA/AA 'model' is broken on so many levels. His
father and his 1/2 sister have mostly written him off, yet I charge on like
some half-mad general in the proverbial Custer's Last Stand scenario, hoping
somehow, someway I can help him, fix him, save him. I know it's desperation
and a fool's folly, but my mother's heart won't let it go…

I call this journey the Roller Coaster, because, over the past 5 months, my
son had seemed to turn the corner, he had been on probation for being in the
wrong place at the wrong time and decided (like many of these other kids) -
the rules did no apply to him - he stopped seeing his PO. At that time he was
living with his dad who basically had had it with him. He moved in with me and
my husband. back in August, and turned himself in - was put back on
probation….seemed to be doing well. Then, around the holidays, two of his
friends (one of them very close to him), died from drug overdoses….and
suddenly, he was out of control. I reached out to him being compassionate and
he was nasty, abusive, full of resentment - telling me he hated me - telling
me how he was angry for the divorce, for how I got along better with him than
his sister (this is true) and on and on…

The next thing I know - he lied to his girl friend (who is an absolute doll
and one of the bright spots in his life), and she broke up with him. Now, he
is living in his car. It is winter in Ohio…

Two days ago, he said he'd be willing to get help…and his girlfriend agreed to
allow him to stay with her as long as he agreed he'd get help. The thing is he
is only staying with her when she is not working…or only sporadically.
Meanwhile he is still in his car with everything he owns.

Last night, I came home to find out that in all probability he came into our
house (he knew the code to get into our garage - which we changed now) - and
stole over $200….

My husband texted him and again with the emotional roller coaster of a phone
call - telling me he never took the money - but he'd replace the money he did
not take cause he's a bad person. I told him I did not want his money - I just
want him to get help. We sent txts back and forth and his final one said he is
done with everyone and everything and he just hopes he dies soon. I have no
way as of this writing to know if he is alive or not. Until the next roller
coaster ride/incident.

I feel (as many of you do) held hostage. I feel like I am on a death watch and
I cannot separate my emotion from my logic (I don't even think I possess
reason anymore). I don't know what to do - I know cutting him off is the thing
TO do…I cannot afford a funeral, and I don't know if my heart can afford
losing my son/my baby. I feel like a pariah, like I am the only one who does
not 'get it' and I don't feel, short of having him locked up (either in jail
or in rehab) that he is going to turn himself around…but of course (regardless
of the tenants of AA/NA) he truly does have to want this for himself.

I pray all of you find peace and solace somehow through this cyclone we all
seem to be going through. I pray your loved ones find health and healing. Keep
talking and don't turn inwards on yourselves…go get counseling to help you
cope and to get access to a support group. I know it's where I am heading
today or tomorrow.

Reply

  * ![liz](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### liz

January 31st, 2012 at 11:01 AM

i have read alot of your storys and still don't know the answers my son has
not been cruel or stolen from me and dose not have kids , thank god . but when
you put in the mental illness that i truly can't be sure is just a result of
excesive long term drinking ,but that was the start of the cutting, panic, and
er trips that i have lost track of the number of times 60+ at least in the
last 3years. i just know that if he drinks there is no chance of him making
it. there are really no resources for someone like him that he nor his family
have no money to help. think that the drugs that they are putting him on are
making it worse. there is no way to find out because he dose not go a day with
out a drama i.e. drinking or er or mental hospital.  
i cry at the loss of the awesome person that he was and that he still wants to
be and can't fine the way to get back. he cries becouse he dose not know how
to get back .  
god please let him find the way back

Reply

  * ![Jeannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jeannie

February 1st, 2012 at 4:29 PM

My 39 year old son is an addict. He left his 2 year old daughter with his aunt
for 3 months so he could get his life straight. Instead he became homeless and
took his daughter back so he could get "family shelter) How could he rip her
from people who love her and she was finally stable and secure. Mercy House
has put them in a hotel for a month. He is using her…she wasn't the one
homeless. He claims he wants to be a Dad…he has 3 older sons that want nothing
to do with him. I took to the motel some clothes and food my granddaughter.
She was SO happy to see me. I am so scared for my Brianna but legally there is
nothing we can do at this point. Son will do drugs again, sleep all day and
Brianna will be left to roam the motel room..that is dangerous. I've cut son
off of money but soon he'll ask and what can I say when he has Brianna?? He'd
probably cut me out of her life!! I'm scared for her. She was finally so
happy…how could someone use their own children!!!!

Reply

  * ![CMG](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### CMG

February 2nd, 2012 at 3:04 PM

Jeannie,

Can you afford legal help? Maybe you should call protective services - they
will take your grand-daughter and she will be safe and then the family can
step forward and secure custody - then I would imagine be able to petition the
court for full custody.

I am SO sorry for your heartache. Reach out to the authorities there has to be
help for your grand-daughter!

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

February 2nd, 2012 at 8:35 PM

Where do you turn to for help? I've tried Alanon, but never felt comfortable
enough to continue for long. I'm kind of shy and even though I asked about
sponsors, I never got anywhere with that. It didn't take much to get
discouraged and quit going. My son has 7 misdemeanors for 3 DUI's, 1 criminal
trespassing, 2 possession of marijuana and 1 for drug paraphernalia. He also
has a felony conviction for drug possession. He's only 32 yrs old, so that's 8
convictions since he turned 19 (in a 13-yr period). He can't hold a job even
if he can get a job! I can see where an employer might overlook one
conviction, but 8?? They're all related to drugs & alcohol, so there's no
violence, but how could an employer ever trust him? He's ruining his chances
and opportunities for a decent future. Still trying to find a sober house so
he can move out of our place.

Jeannie, I agree with CMG. Try calling CPS and see if they will help your
granddaughter. I know this puts you in a tough spot, but she's so young and
this is not fair to her. I hope you can get some resolution and feel better
about her circumstances.

Reply

  * ![Maggie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maggie

February 4th, 2012 at 12:32 AM

Oh boy, I share all your pain. I am in the same boat with all of you. My
daughter was born premature. She has horrible aniexty and depression most of
her life even as a little girl. She cried and had stomach aches everyday when
she had to go to school. Always complaining of not feeling well. In her Senior
year the counselor called and said she talked with my daughter and my daughter
saw no point or happiness in life. If I knew how to make my daughter care I
would do it in a heartbeat. She is now 28 living with us. She had started pain
pills 5 years ago. Then she got in to meth. She has been arrested 2 times. She
has stopped the meth but continues the pills. She just stole some from her
Father he just got for prostrate cancer surgery. He has had it with her. He is
so angry. We are both tired of it. I feel like a hostage as many of us do as I
have a niece die from a drug overdose and I have watched what that has done to
my sister let alone my whole family. Sometimes I hate life. It seems so hard.
I know I should kick my daughter out but I am sooo very scared she will go
back to meth or just plain give up. I lost my Dad at the age of 6 and my
Mother at the age of 28. I just feel I could never deal with my daughter
although like my Husband says she is dying a slow death with the pain pills
anyways.  
She has no insurance and we just do not have the money for any kind of help
especially with my Husband just having cancer. I feel hopeless.

Reply

  * ![Lori Sisson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lori Sisson

February 4th, 2012 at 10:37 PM

I have to be honest and say that I did not read all of your posts; so please
forgive me if I step on any toes or repeat any advice. What I want to to
say,and it came to me after reading the "hit" on Google, while searching for
something completely different, but I feel I need to tell you something very
important. MY 53 yr old brother, Rick committed suicide on October 16th, 2011.
When "victims services" showed up at my door that ugly morning, all I could
say was, (please excuse this, but it was the strongest, ugly thing that came
to mind)…F__ck! I knew without a word what was to come next. they drove me to
my mother's where my family had gathered. Quite a disfunctional family I might
add. All of us, silent, contemplating, ridden with guilt, sad, pissed off,
confused, and dreading the upcoming days of not only spending time together,
but sorting, and talking, and pushing away any quilt that…"Did I cause this",
was the last phone call, (that I didn't answer), his final cry for help. My
brother had lived with me prior to this but I had what I thought at the time,
carried out tough love by asking him to leave. (I found things laying around
the house that lead me to believe he was "cooking". (illegally), I have a 12
year old daughter living with me still, no husband. All my beuatiful children
love Uncle Rick- his free spirit, his fun- his willingness to teach, to spend
time with mine and his own beautiful girls. But it had been many, many, many
years of ups and downs. Rick had in the course of 2 weeks, years ago…lost his
home, his family business (in-laws) where my brother worked as a renowned chef
and amazing restaurant owner; and his wife of 20 years left him for a man
probably 20 years younger. As you can imagine, this was a major blow. It was
his wife's family business, and Rick, his wife and their children were living
in the old family home that my brother had lovingly restored with his own
creative hands, He was in a place that was almost perfect. That was about 20
years ago, and he never recovered. Oh, he also held a management position in a
large newspaper, that decided to downsize management, and in one day, without
warning 5 managers were asked for their keys and walked out. (literaly). This
was in the same 2 weeks. No joke! So…this gave Rick time to spend with his
girls, going to their school events, teaching them cooking, woodworking, the
lost art of pioneer living, which my brother adored. He spent time in the
forest with the girls, and took advantage of the time with them.
Unfortunately, life set in and bills began to come in, Child support was
demanded and with 3 children and no job…the back support began to stack up.
Some of you may know how this snowballs and you never seem to catch up. rick
began to make poor choices and got into drugs and alcohol. (a trait common and
widespread in my disfunctional family) (the alcohol part)…From there, he lost
all his self esteem. He was devistated, found some letters from his ex wife,
and found that she had been having a long time affair. To get ot the ending of
this story. We all tried to help, My parents…not so much…they were too
disfunctional and only criticized Rick for his life, and gave only with
condition. Their way of Tough Love. I have never stopped feeling guilty for
not picking up that phone and answering it, but quite honestly…I was having
problems of my own,at that moment and just couldn't deal with anymore sadness.
That day!!!!!!! i could have and would have gotten over it. I know it's not my
fault, and I know that Ricky is in a much better place…I find comfort in that.
I know he is not beating his head on the wall everyday, trying to get out of
this blizzard that started with a simple snowball. My only thing that I wonder
if I could have done was tried harder to get him into some sort of LONG TIME
program that he could live, and regain that which he had lost. He may have
taken money (which I didn't have), and it may have taken Rick further away
from me….But now…I would do anything to have Ricky here with me right now,
even if it's just to say…You are pissing me off, but I love you! So…I know
it's hard for you all and you wanna stop giving, stop enabling, avoid possibly
(like I did), stop being there everytime He/She needs you. And that is so
normal. It's hard! But not only are there support groups for our loved ones
going through this but their are groups for us who are against a brick wall
with no answers anymore. PLEASE…find one. go to your church and don't be
ashamed to ask for help, resources are readily available, I know their is a
ministry called forgotten man ministries and another couple prominent
ministries that deal with getting these people off the streets and will
actually keep them in their community, living with them, all biblically based,
and encouraging. Although it is a bit of tough love at first cause addiction,
withdrawls, will occur, but in the end….You won't have "Victim Services" at
your door, and you won't be handed a "suicide letter". Instead you will
receive a letter of gratitude and love for NOT GIVING UP! GIVE GOD YOUR BURDEN
AND HE WILL BRING SOMEBODY TO YOUR DOOR STEP SHOWING THE WAY. I will go to my
grave feeling like I should have acted on this myself, but I was being too
selfish in my own little problematic, busy, chaotic, jumbled, world. But If
Ricky was here and well…He would be the first one to step up to the plate and
help me! I love you all for the simple fact I empathize and want to enfold all
of you in my arms, lifting your burdens and promising you that God or whoever
you give your spirit world to….Just do it. Make a call. Don't get a call!

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

February 9th, 2012 at 5:28 PM

Lori,  
I'm sorry you lost your brother. I don't believe you were being selfish. I
believe you were protecting yourself and your 12 year old daughter from the
effects of being around addictive behaviors. Not that losing one person is any
better than another, but… you could be writing about losing your daughter if
she'd accidentally been around during a "cooking" explosion- which happens
frequently around meth. It's sad when the person who needs the help doesn't go
look for it. We can only do so much for them. Again, I'm sorry for your loss.
You made the right decision for your life, unfortunately, he didn't for his.

Reply

  * ![K. Chauncey](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### K. Chauncey

February 10th, 2012 at 8:30 AM

I am so heartbroken by the stories of parents, including myself, who are
suffering miserably at the hands of their children who CHOOSE to use. My son
has been in juvenile detention, residential treatment at the age of 15,dropped
out of high school, just spent 30 days in county jail, is facing 3 felonies as
an adult (19.5 yrs. old) ALL due to his obsessive/compulsive need to ingest,
smoke, and inject lethal substances into his body. He now is facing Mount
Everest which is his future. If he messes up ONE time he will go back to jail
where he was forced to go through heroin withdrawl cold turkey. Guess what??
It didn't kill him. He now finally is seeing the mountain ahead which is the
painful future which is lightyears worse than any imagined trouble he was
facing when he CHOSE to start using and escape his reality. I don't believe
his future is hopeless. I tell him this is one chapter and not the whole book.
However, he does have a broken spirit, an awareness of his sin, a remorse from
everyone he has hurt, and a desire to live a better life. He has told me NO
ONE will ever stop using until THAT person wants to. NOW HE WANTS TO. I can
only stand back and pray for my son, that he starts to WANT to have a
different life. When he was forced to live in jail, (where he may still have
to go), he decided using drugs and all that goes with it is not the answer.
Sometimes the thing you want to stop happening is stopped when your child
reaches the depths of despair. Isn't that often when we seek God ourselves? I
cam't do anything about his choices but choose to forgive him and pray for his
strong foothold for the future. I pray God lives in him even when life hurts.
You see, God answered my prayers that my child would be safe and not use. He
did answer; just not in the way I expected.

Reply

  * ![M Moore](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### M Moore

February 13th, 2012 at 9:39 PM

i'm glad to know that i am not alone in this my daughter is a drug addict who
has stolen from our home hurt her family with lies you're stories help me see
there are more out there like me who need help don't know what will happen now
hope she sees this is not the way

Reply

  * ![Jude](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jude

February 14th, 2012 at 12:38 PM

My adult son is 29 and been on and off drugs for the past 15 years. My
children we molested and beaten by their dad "until they were numb" so it is
not wonder two of them have chosen drugs and alcohol (mostly prescription
pills)!! Doctors don't seem to care that these drugs are KILLING people….they
are in it for $$$$the almight dollar! Right now my oldest son is homeless and
been sleeping some nights on my couch! I have a small one-bedroom apt and
cannot afford a bigger place. Honestly, I don't trust that he won't rob me
blind……isn't that pathetic!! My dad and i are both enablers….but I'm learning
how to stop! I hope! The problem lies in my guilt as to what my ex did in
their childhood with the molestation and beatings. I wanted to leave but had
no where to go and had no idea how to get out. My children paid a high price
for my ignorance so I've always felt sorry for them and given and given and
given to the point that they feel entitled!! It is a vicious circle. Will jail
help an addict or an alcoholic? NO!!! Maybe a 2-5 year lockdown rehab like the
Lubbock Corrections Facility. My son has no felonies, but does have the
deferred adjudication and cannot find work because of background checks. Does
anyone blame him for giving up? Please, if you know of any programs that will
give someone a second chance please post it here. Thanks and God bless you
all!

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

February 14th, 2012 at 11:14 PM

This is great and very helpful advice. Our 23 year old son has been addicted
to heroin for the past 5-years. We have struggled with out patient treatment,
residential treatment, living at home with verbal and written agreements. He
has relapsed again and was recently arrested for illegal possesion of
controlled substances.

We finally stopped supporting him-he is alone and although with friends now
will likely be homeless in the near future. We are willing to help if he seeks
treatment. Forcing him to face the consequences of his own choices has been
gut wrenching. He is addicted to drugs and has significant mental health
problems. Our actions may force him to seek help or may hasten what has been a
slow death. I believe we're doing the best thing, but if he does die our
lives, our hearts, will be so terribly damaged. I' don't know how we go on
from here, but it does help to know others have similar struggles. Thanks to
whoever started this and best wishes for all of you who have found yourselves
dealing with problems we never could really be prepared for.

Reply

  * ![Joannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joannie

February 18th, 2012 at 6:40 AM

I am the mother of a 19 year old girl who has just disclosed to me that she is
injecting crushed pain-killers. She said she wanted my help to get clean, so I
flew to the city where she lives and expected to be working with her to get
her help. She looked like such a mess, lost tons of weight and her arms were
full of bruises, red marks, and weird white bumps. I had just seen her a Xmas
and didn't notice this. However, a concerned family member pointed out to me
THEN that my daughter had dropped to much weight and her pupils seemed
strange. I dismissed this, being niave and never thinking my daughter would
partake is something so horrible. Looking back, I should have noticed the
remnants of crushed pill casing in the carpet at her apartment, and all the
random shoelaces laying around the apartment for tying up her arm while
injecting. It all seems so obvious now.

We took her to detox, and she was using again within minutes of being out, and
even right in front of us! During this altercation of trying to stop her I
accidentally got stuck with a dirty needle in the leg. Knowing that my
daughter had admitted to sharing needles, I now have the added stress of
wondering if I caught anything in the process. I was in shock, and so upset
about seeing my daughter using, that the danger of what had happened didn't
even hit me until later that night.

Her stepfather and myself found her a great rehab for youth with a 6 month
time line, and two years of follow-up. She agreed to go, and when the time
came to do the telephone intake, she started to make up excuses. That was a
week ago. She is still using, and has a circle of users whom she considers
"great friends". Its heart breaking and I was so foolish to believe "I can fix
anything"…that was my attitude at first. I've since had to quickly come to
terms with the reality of this addiction.

My question to you all is this: While we have cut off funds to her, now
realizing it was ALL going to finance her habit, and had to shut off her phone
because the bill was $1,200, and looking over the bill we realized she had
been using her phone to coordinate drug deals and little else. I am sick that
I have no easy way to contact her, but couldn't take knowing her phone was her
lifeline to the drugs. Also, the level of the bill was clearly out of control
as well. So having done all this, I am wondering how far a parent has a right
to go to protect their daughter through even tougher measures. I have access
to her doctors contact information (and she has recently been shown how to
drug seek with fake pain problems at the Dr's office and ER via older people
in her drug circle)and also the contact information for her housing manager
and PO officer (she was arrested for resisting arrest/public intoxication a
few months ago - that should have been a tip-off to me, but like I said I was
so niave). She had such a detailed explanation for why it all happened. She
has ALL of these people believing she is clean and in compliance with all the
rules. I feel like I should let these people know how much trouble she is in
and that she is refusing treatment. I love her and my heart aches over what
has unfolded, but I am also still in shock, have just found all this out. I'm
not even sure I am thinking straight. But one line of thinking I have is, if
she wont take help from me, perhaps these other people (Doctor, PO officer,
housing manager) might be able to get through to her? Or do I have to wait and
hope she sees the light at some point?

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

February 18th, 2012 at 9:49 PM

Hi Joannie,

I'm sorry to hear of the heartache you have with your daughter. Our son has a
similar problem with heroin addiction and other drugs. I wish I had answers to
the problems we face. After lots of trials to fix the problem, my wife and I
found that nothing we did could be of any real help until he wanted to get
better, until he chose life over drugs. He is on his own now and we about him
every day. I think all we can do as parents is tough it out until they decide
they need help, then be there as much as we can to help them through
treatment. Best of luck to you and others in our situation.

Reply

  * ![Joannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joannie

February 19th, 2012 at 7:36 AM

Chip, thank you for your reply. This comment page has helped me immensely and
I thank all of you for sharing your insights.

I also believe my daughter has mental health issues, however she could not
stick with one doctor or therapist long enough to be diagnosed or to benefit
from any therapy. She has severe anxiety, insomnia, depression, and ADD. She
has also had problems with authority and aggression since she was 12 years
old. I chose to believe she just had a strong personality, and since she
refused medication or therapy, I just hoped she would outgrow it, which was
foolish of me in hindsight. If you don't mind me asking, what type of mental
health issues does your son struggle with?

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

February 19th, 2012 at 11:17 PM

Hi Joannie,

I'm not sure what the formal diagnosis is for our son. He suffers from
depression, very low self esteem, lying to have others see him more favorably
or avoid being caught. On occasion he has had outbursts of uncontrolled rage,
but only a few times.

Don't blame yourself for being slow to recognize your daughter's problems. In
retrospect the pieces fall into place, but it's not easy to recognize as
problems unfold with greater frequency and severity. We missed lots of signs
with our son that I can now see as a pattern that should have told us he was
in more trouble, had more severe problems, than we were ready to face. Your
daughter is so young, I believe we have to chose hope, hang in there for the
tough times and be patient until they see the consequences of their own
actions and want to change.

I think what is hard for us is not understanding the degree of desperation our
son feels or why he continues self destructive behavior when we know at heart
he is a great guy and is young enough to put this behind him and do great
things if he only chose to. Best of luck with your daughter, I know everyday
is a challenge.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

February 25th, 2012 at 11:50 PM

It's been 2 weeks since our son has been arrested and we refused to let him
continue to live at home. We've talked with him a few times - unsure where
he's living or how he's doing. I know this is the best thing for him - to face
the consequences of choosing heroin and other drugs. I also know that even if
he seeks help and we get him to treatment, his chances of sustained recovery
are poor. We miss him so terribly much. He is our little guy and I fear we
have lost him. I almost died 2 years ago - this is so much harder, a battle we
cannot fight for him, choices we cannot make for him.

I lay awake wondering how did this happen? Some pieces fall into place, but
for the most part we don't understand how he feels or why. Nights are the
worst for me. It is cold and wet outside. He's likely with a friend and OK,
but if so this is only a short term fix. Like other parents on this site, we
fear the call that he has died. A large part of us will have died too if this
is the ultimate outcome. All of us struggle through life at times and have to
tough it out. I'm not sure that I have it in me to tough this out. It helps to
know that other parents and kids are facing similar struggles-this site gives
me a chance to put to words what my heart feels.

Reply

  * ![Joannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joannie

February 26th, 2012 at 8:29 PM

Chip,

Isn't it the most difficult thing to have so much support to offer and a child
who does not appear to want it. I am still struggling with my faulty attitude
of " I can fix anything if I put my mind to it". Logically, though, I know
this is one of those situations where all my determination and perseverance
make no difference. Only my daughter can choose to fix this.

Just three days ago I got into a physical altercation with her trying to
convince her to go to rehab. I tried to stop her from going out to buy drugs.
I knew it was wrong to try to stop her and yet my frustration got the best of
me.

In the end, myself and my parents were able to get her into a treatment center
just two days ago, but she has been planning to leave the center both of the
last two days. I know I have to let the professionals try to get through to
her. Its so hard to just stand by and hope and pray. Some parts of the day I
can detach a bit, and remind myself not to get swallowed up by this monster of
a problem, but like you said, in the evenings I lose all my resolve and I can
do little but miss her terribly and worry for her. I am dreading the phone
call from the center telling me she has walked out.

Thank you for continuing to post here, it is the only solace in trying to cope
with this all.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

February 26th, 2012 at 11:18 PM

Hi Joanie,

It is the start of another long night and I'm guessing, like my wife and I,
you're continuing to struggle with worries about our kids. It's great that
your daughter made it to rehab - I hope she becomes more willing to take
advantage of what they have to offer. My wife says we always have to chose
hope and I think she's right (as hard as it is at times).

I wonder if your daughter and our son could read the posts on this site if it
would help them better understand how their choices effect those that love
them so much. I suspect they already know this, but have rationalized it away
to continue their preference for drugs above their own health needs and the
impact to their families.

Our son has shown no interest in residential treatment up to this point. His
recent arrest may force him to enter a forced drug court program (18 months)
that has a better than average success rate. This is my best hope for him now.
If your daughter leaves her treatment program, there may be something along
these lines that would help.

I appreciate your willingness to share problems you are facing - helps me stay
grounded and know we're not alone in our desperation.

Take care and best of luck as your daughter's recovery unfolds.

Reply

  * ![PHarrison](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### PHarrison

February 29th, 2012 at 4:58 PM

I have a 30 yr old who has been an addict of some type since he was 17. I have
the guilt as his father was an alcoholic, I traveled for my job and left him
with his grandmother which also turned out to be a binging alcoholic, and then
his father had an affair and we moved away and we do not hear from him at all
for over 12 years now. My son is 30 cannot hold a job because he doesn't go
into work on time or lays out because he was out too late. He still lives at
home. I furnished him a car, his car insurance, his cell phone and a place to
live and eat. he lies to me and I know it and I still do all these things. He
has been in rehab twice with no results positive. His father was a
pathological liar and his father before him, is this hereditary like
addictions? I threw him out tonight with no money, no gas and I will cut the
car insurance off Monday and the cell phone or atleast that is my threat. he
just now text me to ask if I could bring his cell charger to him and a
sandwich as he doesn't have the gas to get them and he found a friend to stay
with. I told him NO. I know this is not solving his problem and making me
crazy but I want out of this maze. He does good then he falls, I pay him out,
he does good, he falls and I pay him out. I am 55 with no retirement to speak
of and I cannot afford to keep doing this not for him or me. I have no health
insurance and neither does he so where do you get counseling for FREE?  
What do I do and is what I am doing harmful or helpful?

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 1st, 2012 at 11:50 PM

We are following the same path that you are with our 23 year old son. Not
easy, I ask myself the same question you do every night. Our son had times
when he was doing better then times when things would fall apart for him.

Bottom line for us was although it was comforting to have him stay at home
where he was warm and fed, the reality was he was not having to face life - he
was slowly dying.

I believe letting our kids be responsible for their own actions and being
there to offer whatever help we can if they choose life over drugs is all we
can do. We've come to learn stopping drug abuse, dealing with underlying
mental health issues has to start with our son's choice, its not something we
could fix with our own strength of will, choices we could make, completion of
treatment plans that we want for them

I hope the best for you and your son. Your sense of loss, of despairation, are
shared by a lot of parents on this site. For me, it helps to know that we are
not alone and that there is such a common thread in so many of our
experiences.

Reply

  * ![PHarrison](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### PHarrison

March 2nd, 2012 at 3:19 PM

Chip,  
You are so smart to stop now at 23. I read the book A Beautiful Boy by David
Sheff, it helped me to pull back and allow him to move forward or backward,
but I did not go so far as to make him leave the house until this week. I gave
him the number of the county facilities and he stayed there last night. He has
called to come by and get clothes and shower which I am OK with but he cannot
stay here without going for counseling and a job that I know. It is SO hard
though as I lay in my warm bed in my house and have no idea what bed, if any
he is laying in. But you are right we cannot change them they must change
themselves. I must go back and reread this book as it gave me strength. I pray
that God will give me the wisdom to do what is best for my son, not for me and
I pray that he will do that for all of us out there in the same situations. It
is good to know we are not alone there are others but also so sad to know how
many others. God is constant though and he is available to us all. I so wish
he would "fix" this so my son and yours and the others would make the choices
they have been raised to make and have a wonderful llfe like we wanted them to
have when we brought them into this world. No matter how old they get they are
still your children.

Reply

  * ![Sue](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sue

March 2nd, 2012 at 3:41 PM

Jeanne

I so hope you are still reading here. Please, please call your local social
services department. I know it is a hard thing to do - but your granddaughter
has NO ONE to protect her. She is in a horribly dangerous situation. I had to
make these decisions…I hated doing it and honestly - I waited till the very
last minute I could. Your son took the little girl so he could get emergency
shelter! Just that tells you he (in his drug lifestyle) would use her in a
heartbeat. She has to be removed from there. Social services will place with
family. Please give her a chance. She is so vulnerable. She could even be
caught up in a drug trade. Protect the child. Your son's decisions are out of
your control - but, the little girl NEEDS your involvement…with all respect.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 3rd, 2012 at 12:07 AM

PHarrison,

Thanks for your posting and recommended read. I will get a copy of this and
read it. I too question if our decision to not let our son live at home is
best for him, or for my wife and I or for all of us. I believe our decision,
and your's, as hard as it is, is best for everyone.

You're so right, no matter how old they are, they will always be our children
and we will always love them, always worry about them. We both seem to have
lost our boys to drugs, like so many others on this site. Take care of
yourself for you, your family and your son - easy to say I know, but somehow
we have to tough this out and embrace hope.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 4th, 2012 at 11:35 PM

Our son called tonight - desperate to come home, alone, scared, cold and
hungry. Says he's lost 20 lbs. and doesn't know what to do. I told him he has
to figure this out on his own, we can't tell him what to do. He talked about
going to a treatment center his MD recommends - told him his Mom and I would
meet with him and his MD to discuss a treatment plan and after care. He said
he doesn't need treatment - would just be a warm place to go with food, but
doesn't want to go back to an Oxford House again.

He asks how we could turn his back on him? I think he is desperate, but also
manipulative. There is no doubt in my mind or my heart that if we let him move
back home the same pattern of drug use, not working and not going to school
would repeat itself. Although I think what we're doing is best, I am tempted
to try to fix the problem, help him find a place to live, give him money for
food, set rules he would dismiss and I couldn't hold him accountable for. So,
my "fix" would at best delay his coming to terms with his choices about drugs,
about living life - desperate fix for me, my wife, the rest of our family that
wouldn't help him.

Although I know so many things wouldn't help, I don't know what, if anything,
we can do that will help. I think this is a question that will haunt me …

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

March 6th, 2012 at 3:45 PM

The emotional pain of watching my child destroy himself is almost too much for
me. I am barely able to cope with life right now. Tough love seems so
unnatural (especially as a mom) and yet I know it's probably the exact thing
he needs. What a miserable way to live. I feel like it's so unfair. It's good
to have support and websites for parents to connect with others who
understand. The very few I share this awful story with don't seem to
understand addiction. Thank you for letting me vent.

Reply

  * ![Sally](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally

March 6th, 2012 at 10:00 PM

My oldest son became addicted at 15. He is now 40 and doing a second round in
prison. This time it is for bank robbery and kidnapping. Because we stopped
sending him money in prison when we realized that is all he wanted from us, he
is now threatening to have us killed for cooperating with the police over
seven year ago when he was convicted. This whole thing is a living nightmare.
The young son who was full of promise is gone and the son that remains is a
living dead. I don't seen any closer to this whole mess. At least people who
lose children to accidents and illness have hope of an afterlife with their
child. We have no hope only the daily struggle to stay above ground ourselves
because we refused to enable. My heart goes out to all of you on this website.
God help us.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 7th, 2012 at 10:49 PM

Sally,

Your problem with your son sounds extraordinarily hard. We are just now coming
to terms with our son's drug and mental health issues. He has not been in
prison yet, but I fear this may be in his future. Any suggestions or thoughts
that have helped you deal with this over the years?

Best of luck to you and your family.

Reply

  * ![Sally](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally

March 8th, 2012 at 5:09 PM

Chip,

Accepting the fact that in the end it is your son who must come to terms with
the consequences of his drug issues is really important. If you continue to
protect him from the consequences he will never try to make a better decision.
I don't know how old his is but if he is in your home get him quality
counseling for the mental health issues but know that unless he is a willing
participant, it won't help. Your only resource is giving him up to God and
allowing him to live in the bed he has made. My son has drug and mental health
issues as well. They will bleed you dry financially and emotionally. At some
point you have to tell yourself that it is "ok" to save yourself and the rest
of the family if the addict doesn't want help. We have lived through 15 years
of extortion, death threats, physical and emotional abuse. We go weeks without
hearing from him and start to feel like life is going to turn around and then
boom, more threats, etc. They will threaten to take there life if you don't
cooperate as well as yours or other members of your family. Keep in mind that
when you chose to allow them to deal with the consequences of their actions
which I believe is the only hope we have, be prepared to be hated by everyone
who is still caught in the co-dependency loop. Until they have walked in your
shoes they won't understand.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 8th, 2012 at 11:48 PM

Sally,

Thank you.

My wife and I have come to the same conclusion that you have - our son's only
chance to get better is to face the consequences of his actions. He has
threatened to take his own life, but not harm our family. It took us 4 or 5
years, a lot of pain and attempts to fix his problems ourselves before we
understood that no matter how badly we wanted things to change, it really
didn't matter - getting better, caring for his own life and family, has to
start with him.

He is 23, alone, homeless, cold and hungry. We think of him every day, hope
he's OK. We will always be there to help him if he decides to seek help and
mend his broken body and spirit. Until then, we know giving him a place to
stay or money is not a solution.

We're 1-month into this - you've lived with it for 15-years.Thanks for taking
time to respond to my question

Reply

  * ![Jill](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jill

March 11th, 2012 at 5:07 PM

my 29 yr old daughter is a pill addict. She has found a doc who will and does
prescribe anything she wants. I fear she will go to sleep and not wake up. My
ex husband enables her (after she totalled her car in a pill induced haze, he
bought her another)I can do nothing about that. He says its my fault (how it
is "my fault" is not exactly clear). She wants to move in with me, but I
cannot let her. I would have to lock up my own valuables, my medication and
listen to a cussing/ranting/raging lunatic all the time. I cant do it anymore.
Its agony

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 11th, 2012 at 10:00 PM

We are considering putting our 23-year old son through drug rehab a 2nd time
for heroin and other drug addictions. We want to help-unsure this is the right
time, he seems passively interested, but our sense is more this is a way to
get 28-days free room and board. I may be too callous, unsure, this maybe what
he needs to start the healing process.

What have others on this site found? -how many times do you pay for rehab and
how do you avoid it becoming a lifestyle or an easy fix when things turn bad?

Thanks for any thoughts or shared experience.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 11th, 2012 at 10:12 PM

Jill,

Hang in there. I think your decision not to let your daughter move in with you
is a good one- for your relative peace of mind and for her being responsible
for the consequences of her actions. We have found some, most, doctors and
counselors to be very helpful. There are however a few MDs out there that seem
willing to perscribe drugs that have a tremdous abuse potential to people they
know are already struggling with serious drug addiction. I continue to be
dismayed at this, but have found it to be a reoccurring problem. Part of it
may be to our addicts skilled ability to say the right thing, mimic the right
symptoms to get the drugs.

Best of luck to you.

Reply

  * ![Jessica](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jessica

March 12th, 2012 at 8:16 PM

I am a mother of a 25 year old daughter who is addicted to alcohol and has
also used a variety of drugs in the past. My daughter was sober for 2 years
and has relapsed in the last 3-4 months. My biggest concern is she is the
mother of a beautiful 17 month old son. This past weekend she text me saying
she was in trouble and needed my help. When I text back I asked her what kind
of help she needed. She told me she had been drinking. When she called me she
said she was driving over to talk to me. I told her I would come get her but
she insisted she was almost to my home. When she arrived she was intoxicated
and had her child in the car with her. She has no DUI's or any other arrests.
Her record is clean. I have called someone in child protective services to see
what our rights are as grandparents but have found out we have none until she
has a history with breaking the law.

She told us she was going to go to meetings and reach out to others for
support. Needless to say she hasn't been to a meeting yet. I told her today
that I would continue to watch her son while she worked but other than that I
didn't have much else to say her because our relationship was now on a
superficial level. I told her until she was ready to get help, I couldn't have
a relationship with her. We all know with tough love it hurts immensely and
now I wonder if I did the right thing. She does depend on us a lot to help her
with our grandson. His father is a drug addict and has never even seen his
child. It breaks my heart that this is happening to my grandson who did
nothing to deserve this and is such a blessing to our lives. If anyone has any
ideas on how to cope, I am open to listen. In the mean time I will pray and
try to let go and let God.

Reply

  * ![Elizabeth](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Elizabeth

March 13th, 2012 at 8:13 AM

Hello to everyone,

I have four children, the oldest one is a 34 year old daughter. She has two
children and a business that has always kept her busy. I am suspecting that
she has developed an addiction to pain killers. As I reflect back, I think it
started 5 years or so ago. But she has functioned as an adult for the most
part and it has been such a gradual change that it has taken a while for me to
get suspicious.

Here are some facts of our situation:

She had a terrible problem with varicose veins during her last pregnancy 7
years ago. At a gyn visit a few years later she was prescribed hydrocodone to
help her with the leg pain the week before her period. She was thrilled with
the benefits the drug gave her. After about 3 months of refilling the RX
monthly, the doctor said no. I believe this was the beginning.

Mood changes and occasional aggressive behavior with family members started a
few years ago.

Has been told that she has Sciatica and complains of her back all the time.
Still works, tho. Makes probably close to $50,000 a year with her child
suppport.

Before Xmas she told me she needed a new start because her car has been
malfunctioning and "was taking all her extra money". She told me, instead of
asking me, that she needed to move in with me for a few months. When I seemed
less than thrilled, she got angry and said "I guess me and your grandchildren
will just have to live at the Salvation Army."

She moved in for 3 months. When her tax money came and it was time for her to
look for another place, she began to make offerings of staying with me "to
help me out". I graciously declined. Then she resorted to "I'm not leaving
until I know you are safe out here by yourself". (I am recently divorced and
living alone for the first time in my adult life). Again, I reassured her that
I was fine being alone and that she should go ahead with her search for a
home.

All the while this was going on I never considered she was using pain meds,
much less buying them from others.

Last week she started an unprovoked argument with me.

She is BROKE all the time, despite living her for 3 months and making a good
living. She doesn't ask me for money, but she has ignored that she owes me for
her cell phone bill which is on my account. I checked those cell records
yesterday and she is texing and calling constantly to numbers I have never
heard of.

There are other things that are happening that have finally opened my eyes to
what I think is going on.

Here is my question: How do I approach her? She drinks wine EVERY NIGHT now. I
fear for her life.  
She still does her job and takes care of her children, but I believe that if
things keep progressing, I will start to see problems there.

I do not want her to now have a key to my home. I would also like to
deactivate her cell phone because I do not want a phone that is in my name to
be used to make drug calls.

I just don't know the right approach to take or if I am just being paranoid. I
am so angry with her right now for the way she talked to me last week after
all I have done for her, but I know this could be a life or death situation
and I need to face it head on.

Any words of wisdom is appreciated.

Reply

  * ![Jill](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jill

March 13th, 2012 at 9:10 PM

Chip, i dont blame the doc (she is a great liar). I am so afraid SO afraid of
her not waking up one day. My ex is oblivious to this. Her drugs make her
raging angry. I am the family scapegoat, having divorced her father after 28
years of marriage (verbal and emotional abuse). So i get the worst of it when
she is on a bender. Funny..she doesnt rage at daddy who gives her money , cars
and everything else . She rages at me who refuses to enable. I pray for Gods
help

Reply

  * ![Jill](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jill

March 13th, 2012 at 9:12 PM

My daughter is unemployed and uninsured. there is no place to go for help. I
cant pay for treatment for her (if indeed she agreed) . I am unemployed
myself.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 13th, 2012 at 10:18 PM

Hi Elizabeth,

Our experience has been that if you suspect your daughter is using drugs
and/or dealing them you should be concerned. We also saw this with our son -
short phone calls to seemingly random cities. To this day, we don't kow what
the calls were for. You might try working with a counselor as a condition of
allowing her to stay with you, set up specific rules, expectations and
consequences in a written contract and then be prepared to follow through. We
did this with our son, he broke the contract and has been homeless for about a
month.

I think there are few universal good answers out there. For us, one thing that
clearly wasn't working was to have our adult son live at home. Took us a long
time to come to this conclusion and it is hard every night wondering where he
is.

Others on this site may have good suggestions for helping your grandchildren -
makes a very tough situation incredibly harder.

Best of luck & hang in there.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

March 15th, 2012 at 10:02 AM

What is so sad is that the addicts not only destroy their lives, but they
destroy the lives of those who love them. When will there be peace in my life?
I'm so tired of the roller coaster ride, but I can't seem to get off. The
emotional and financial stress never ends. My son is 32 and this has been
going on since he was 14. Rehab after rehab as well as 2 or 3 stints in jail
for drugs and DUI. There's no point in going into the details; but he's
supposedly sober and my intuition tells me he's not. My friend's son-in-law
gave him a job because he can't seem to get a job with a felony and several
misdemeanors for alcohol/drugs on his record. He's only working a few hours a
week now, but is supposed to go full-time soon. He owes money to the court,
his car insurance is due, and he needs to go to the tax office and transfer
the title & pay the tax on the used car (which my ex-husband loaned him the
money for). Who gets hung out to dry on all these expenses right now? Me, as
usual. Who has to pay for his room & board right now? Me. How long will it be
before he is making enough money to pay for everything by himself? Who knows…
probably never (as usual). I'm so angry and distressed over being right back
in this trap I swore I'd never get into again… and I have no way of knowing if
he's sober. Of course he says he is, but addicts don't know how to spell
honesty & integrity. I'm so tired of waking up in the night worrying about
him. How do you not do these things to help when he's working and supposedly
trying to get his feet on the ground and make a life for himself? I feel
trapped, used and have a terrible sense of foreboding. There aren't any
answers. If I don't help him, he won't be able to keep the job and he'll be on
the streets. There's no guarantee he won't lose his job and end up there
anyway even with my help. I'm 62 and retired, which means the funds used to
help him are my retirement savings! It seems so unfair to have lived my life
as a responsible adult only to have to share what I was able to put aside with
my addict son. As I said, this has been going on for many years, so he's into
me for thousands and thousands of dollars. I'm not really asking for advice;
I'm just using this venue to get some of this off my chest and try to get out
of this funk I'm in.

Reply

  * ![Claire](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Claire

March 15th, 2012 at 4:50 PM

I read this article and the comments that followed and it has given me the
strength to continue. My husband and his son are in a disasterous co-dependent
relationship. His son is a 29 year old druggie and has been since he was 13.
He has been a meth addict for over 10 years, has lived with his mother, who
enabled the behaviour to continue. He would pop up in our lives occasionally
at Christmas or birthday to get what he could and ignore us the rest of the
time. His mother finally moved away and left him behind, it was apparent
something was going to happen when he started chumming up to his father. Now
he is facing charges for domestic violence and has "turned to Dad" to help him
straighten out his life. I think everyone who reads this blog knows full well
that he is only playing on my husbands guilt and sucking our money from us. My
husband has given him a place to live, gives him money, and helps buy food
(even though he has food stamps) When I try to discuss it with my husband it
becomes about me trying to keep his son out of our lives. I try to explain all
that was in the article to him but he won't listen. addicts are the best
manipulators and if you are a parent with any guilt feelings at all, they will
use them to suck anything and everything out of you. No one changes anything
without strong motivation, and these adult children have no motivation to
change. They have low expectations in life and don't think like we do… I will
keep trying to get my husband to listen but when the final blow up happens,
and my husband pushes him away, as I predict will happen. I will help him work
through his feelings, but after time has passed I am going to have to give my
husband an ultimatum… no more assistance to his son until he is clean,
working, has a place to live, and can prove all of it.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 15th, 2012 at 10:03 PM

Hi Claire,

I don't know if this will be any help. What you've said above about adult
addicts, manipulation and guilt is exactly what my wife and I have found to be
true with our son. I think for each of us there is a breaking point, one lie
too many, heartaches that we can no longer take, that bring us to the
realization that enabling an addict hurts everyone. Your husband sounds like
me, slower to see this and struggling to come to terms with the stark and
harsh reality that the only, albeit fragile, hope is to stop supporting them
and let them be responsible for their own actions.

My wife's patience and support as I've come to accept this has meant
everything. To the extent that you can get help from a drug counselor, this
might help you guys get on the same page. Best of luck to you and your family.

Reply

  * ![Mary Byrd](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mary Byrd

March 19th, 2012 at 9:22 AM

I am trying to learn how to cope with my 26 yr old daughter who has recently
been through dextox and rehab.  
Mary

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 20th, 2012 at 11:15 PM

I'm writing this to our son - a message he is unlikely to ever see.

Throughout all that our family has been through, there have been some hard
fought lessons. Read what families on this blog have been through - tremdous
heartache and loss. We all love you, we all hate what this addiction has done
to you, to all of us. Like so many things in life, I know your addiction isn't
all because of mistakes you've made. If anyone should share it the blame, it
is me.

That said, you are the only one that can fix this, all our plans, fixes, next
steps that make sense to us are meaningless. At sometime you will have to
choose to fight the hard battle to save your life or loose it through selfish
inaction. We're going to be spending money to send you back to rehab again -
money that could have gone to college, to buy a car or take a trip or…? If
this rehab starts a healing process that you can maintain it will be an answer
to what seem like endless nights of worry punctuated by heartbreaks. You can
choose to live the days you've been given or to ignore them. We choose to hold
onto te good times, we choose hope for a better tomorrow. We also chose to
recognize the outcome is your call. You are always a part of our heart, a
piece of our soul and spirit.

Reply

  * ![Joannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joannie

March 21st, 2012 at 1:00 PM

Hi Chip,

I am back on here after 4 weeks when I wrote that my 19 year old daughter had
gone into a 4 month treatment program. I must say, sadly, that after 28 days
she is walking out of the program. During the last 4 weeks she sounded so
calm, excited about life and the opportunities ahead of her. I was feeling so
encouraged and took the risk of being hopeful myself, that somehow this
treatment would give her back some of the peace of mind she had clearly lost.

Instead she tells me she is packing to leave, to return to the same bad
friends, dangerous boyfriend, and an apartment that is not safe. It was an
expensive program, and one of the most highly rated in our area. I think I now
see even more why parents here and on other comment boards, say that your
child must want the sobriety just as much as their parents do - otherwise it
may not be successful.

While I haven't received the call yet that she has left the facility, I expect
to get that call any hour now. I did most of the leg work and financial
finagling to get her into the treatment program, and realize now that once
again I have stepped in and tried to "fix" all her problems. Its so hard to
learn how to be a parent while also letting your child "choose their own path
and the consequences that comes from those choices". Like you Chip, my
daughter suffers from depression and other mental health issues that I believe
hinder her ability to climb out of this mess on her own, and so I question
where to draw the line everyday.

I wish every single day that I had someone to give me direction on this, as
each step I make I feel like I am somehow making everything worse. I second
guess every conversation, every goodbye, every thought. It's truly exhausting.
I find my mind scrabbling to somehow think of some "solution" that has
previously escaped me, despite know this is a faulty frame of mind. Uggh.

Reply

  * ![Tanya](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanya

March 23rd, 2012 at 12:46 PM

Everytime my son calls my cell phone, I panic. When he says he'll call and I
don't hear from him, I panic. It's one crisis after another and I'm too
wrapped up in it- too wrapped up in his "stuff". I want out, but I don't know
how to get out. The nice used car that he bought via a loan from his father
just one month ago now has a couple thousand dollars worth of damage. He said
his car was backed into a space at the apartment complex where he's staying
and someone backed into his car when he was sleeping. It was obviously a
truck, but no one left a note and he can't prove who did it. I want to believe
him, but it's just impossible. My gut tells me it's just another story. Who
knows? Every car he's owned has ended up a piece of junk. He still has the
job, but unfortunately it's not their busy season, so he has only worked a few
hours the past couple of weeks- definitely not enough to survive on without
financial assistance. Our relationship is so unhealthy- him asking for money
and me angry at myself and him for helping him. If I don't help him, he won't
be able to keep the job. If he can't keep the job, this whole effort the past
3 months will have been for nothing.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

March 25th, 2012 at 12:25 AM

Hi Joanie,

Thanks for your note. Sorry that rehab hasn't worked for your daughter. Don't
feel alone - my understading is that success rates from rehab at even the best
facilitIes are poor, something like 50% of those in top end facillities
relapse within a year. The good news is that although many people relapse, the
rehab does give them tools to better catch themselves and a greater likelihood
of turning things around.

We are working with our son and his MD to see if he has an honest interest in
rehab. If he does, will help make it available for him. He has been homeless
for about six-weeks now because we won't allow him to return home. He's very
angry and feels we've abandoned him. Don't think he's really ready to start
another treatment program, but have to try one more time.

Best of luck - hope rehab helps your daughter deal better with her addiction.

Reply

  * ![Jeanie's](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jeanie's

April 1st, 2012 at 6:30 PM

I too am a mother of a drug addict and have reached my limit. He came home
completely  
Stoned on meth,cocaine, clone pin and more. His pupils were the size of
baseballs. Furious and without a second thought, drove him quickly to local
emergency room to get real help, which was to tell the peychiatrist to admit
him in psych unit until he decided  
Residential long term treatment is a better choice. He is leaving Thursday. If
he walks out of there ibwillnnot rescue him my conclusion after researching
opiate addiction rehabs success rates and nobody regulating halfway houses is
a complete joke.  
I taught him where to go for help, hospital Medicaid etc.  
It's time to go after the pharmaceutical companies. Sue them for misleading
information regarding the intense addictive qualities of these opiate drugs. I
am getting a power of attorney form to release llmof his medical info and
starting a lawsuit. What are ll of you waiting for. Many of our kids, adults,
family got addicted from a normal injury.

Wish you ll the best, I blame perdue pharmaceutical and many states in this
country are suing them also.  
Where is the class action suit from us moms. Are we all slep on this one?

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

April 3rd, 2012 at 11:51 PM

As I read through the stories on this web site I continue to be amazed by the
commonality of the pain and loss so many feel. In our instance I believe our
son's addictive behavior is a very real, life threatening issue, but is also a
symptom of underlying mental health issues. I find myself ill equipped to deal
with either. Over the lastb10-years we have tried to help our son with our own
plans, goals and largely minimizing the severity of his problems. Although I
believe our efforts were helpful in demonstrating our love and concern for
him, they were mostly meaningless - attempts at times to insulate ourselves
from his harsh realities.

We are hopeful that he will begin rehab a second time. Although we know the
statistics for sustained recovery are low, we choose hope. There is tremendous
potential within him to good for himself and to help others. We hope he is
successful in finding this.

There are a few things I've learned along the way. Everyone's situation is
unique, but I thought these may be of some help to others. If nothing else, it
helps me to lay these out:  
1.) only he can decide if it is worth the sacrifices to not be addicted and to
fully engage in life;  
2.) as much as we want good, healthy, positive outcomes - we have no control
over what he chooses;  
3.) not enabling him took a long time for us to realize it is best for him,
even though it is tough for us;  
4.) there is a very real possibility that he will not change, have a short and
largely self centered life;  
5.) this is a lifelong challenge for him and all that love him, not an event
that can be changed by rehab alone;  
6.) it is possible to love him deeply while hating the behaviors and actions
addiction has led him too;  
7.) we cannot let this problem become our own addiction, we must be there for
each other and not sacrifice precious time with our other kids;  
8.) we must be resolute, clear and compassionate in dealing with him. Our
focus needs to be centered on how he plans to work is way out of this;  
9.) although there seem to be many things not to do, we continue to struggle
with what the right path is;  
10.) inspite of our efforts to understand him, what drives his decisions and
the internal turmoil he faces daily, we really don't understand and likely
never will;  
11.) getting to this point has taken time, willingness to frankly address
reality and a lot of soul searching, and  
12.) what helps us stay grounded is talking to each other about him, his
issues and what we can to to help without enabling him.

Long winded I know. I hope some of these thoughts are helpful.

Best of luck to all that find themselves on this site.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

April 5th, 2012 at 5:14 PM

Those are very good points, Chip! I struggle with fear and worry every day
about what will happen to my son. The emotional pain can be unbearable at
times. Even with all the hurt he has caused our family, I still can't look at
him without seeing my "little boy." It's heartbreaking. Finding the line
between enabling and helping is very difficult. It feels so unnatural for me
as his mother to turn my back on him. Some days I am angry with the world that
this is happening. I hate to feel so sorry for myself- I really for sorry for
him- but I feel such despair.

Reply

  * ![Denise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Denise

April 15th, 2012 at 6:28 PM

I found this information and blog just 2 days ago. I then spent hour after
hour reading every comment and I can hardly believe how many other people are
out there just like myself. Our story is so similar, a 36 year old daughter
who has been an alcoholic for close to 15 years. She has been troubled at
different times in her life, and after reading so many comments, I have been
able to get it down to 2 incidents in her life that seemed to have an impact
on her self esteem and some of the choices she has made since then. She too,
was a very bright and talented little girl, an honors student until early high
school. When she was 11 we found out that our 9 year old daughter had a very
large brain tumor. She needed of course, a lot of medical tests and eventually
surgery. This was completely devastating and consumed much of our immediate
time during the days and weeks afterward. During this time I still needed to
tend to the other children, ages 11 (Trish), 6 and 4. There was always someone
ready to offer a helping hand from babysitting to dinners, etc., as my husband
was the pastor of a small church. That brain surgery ended up being 2
surgeries over a 3 year period with a lot of special care and a near constant
seizure problem. Trish told me shortly after that it bothered her that we left
her to care for the other kids while tending to our other daughter. Well, of
course we never did that! She was only 11 years old! Like I said, there were
plenty of people who volunteered their time for whatever we needed. Several
years later she became pregnant while a high school senior. She did counsel
both sides of the abortion issue and whether or not to give the baby up for
adoption. She chose to have the baby and later stated that though pregnant way
too young, it was one of the most special times of her life. Within a few
short years the drinking began, slowly at first, so slowly we didn't realize
what was happening. She never attended to her baby's needs as one would with a
motherly instinct and I chalked that one up to a young mother who wasn't
prepared for the stresses of a baby. She still lived at home with us at the
time and when the baby would cry at night, instead of feeding him or caring
for him she just left the room to sleep on the couch. Even the youngest of my
children, by then a ten year old, would wake up and offer to care for him.
That was just the beginning of what I saw as troubling and self-centered
behavior. It became much worse and so did the drinking. Eventually she started
a fire in the kitchen while cooking one night and nearly brought the whole
house down, literally. The years have gone by, she has been in and out of
inpatient treatment, both willing and court-ordered. As soon as she is free
from her 28 day program, she will be downing vodka within minutes, hours at
most. She has escaped death so many times, with a BAC of .50, having to be
intubated after drinking rubbing alcohol, etc. She has slept on park benches
has attached herself to a loser boyfriend who is a dozen years older than her
and is now living in his car. Every time we have let her back home it is
always the same, lies, denial, hostility and theft. She always, always denies
this and will blame everyone but herself. After another ruined holiday at
Easter I finally reached my bottom (she apparently has not)and after an ugly
screaming match between her and her youngest sister over her wanting to hold
the younger sister's baby while she was drunk, I sent her a message and told
her that we are done with holidays and any family time until she really mkes a
wholehearted effort to change….not just going through the motions, but real
true change. She sent back a message that I will never see her again, sober or
otherwise. While I should be shocked and saddened, I feel a strange sort of
relief, which is horrible and an incredible sense of regret. It is so hard to
look back over the years and remember her as a baby, toddler, grade school
student and beautiful, popular talented teenager. Something went wrong
somewhere. It is so hard not to blame myself for something I may have done
wrong, although the other kids are all college educated, well adjusted and
successful people. This blog has helped me to realize that I am far from alone
in dealing with this very, very difficult and all consuming problem.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

April 15th, 2012 at 10:18 PM

Denise,

Like you, I find a lot of comfort in knowing others are facing similar
struggles. I think it's only natural that every parent in this situation looks
back to see what did they miss, how could they have helped more? All of us
have made mistakes as parents, but in the end our kids, like everyone, have to
make their own choices in an imperfect world.

There are so many times that we think of our son when he was little - such a
cutie. There is a sense of loss, an emptiness we feel when we try to reconcile
what addiction has done to our son and how his choices have given him no self
esteem. We try to embrace hope and at the same time live with the reality
that, at least for now, we have lost him. Understanding that true,meaningful
and lasting change has to start with him has helped us a great deal.

Best of luck to you.

Reply

  * ![Denise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Denise

April 18th, 2012 at 9:50 PM

Chip, thanks for your reply. Like you, I am trying to balance the realistic
with the optimistic. I will never give up hope for a miracle, and at this
point it would be a miracle. At the same time without at least the desire to
change, I feel that we are facing the end and how can you prepare yourself for
that? I feel so badly for all of the parents and their loved ones on this
blog, including you and your son. I will admit, like you said, that the choice
lies completely in the laps of each and every one of these "kids" and though
that does not alter the outcome, it helps to know that the choice is hers and
I cannot do it for her. She and your son may never change, but without letting
them go there is no chance for them to change, At least this way I have the
peace that I have done what I can and hope that in a lucid moment something
from her upbringing will come back to her like a shining light to guide her in
the right direction. I will be praying for her, and for you and your wife and
son, as we travel this very difficult road together.  
Take care, I will check in soon  
Denise

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

April 20th, 2012 at 10:28 PM

Thanks Denise,

My wife, our son, and I met with a counselor this week to talk about getting
him into rehab again. He is very angry with me for turning him into the police
and at both of us for not allowing him to come home. I know his anger is a
small problem in the big picture - still hard because we used to be so close.

Thanks for your kind words and thoughts. As I read the struggles you've
endured, your younger daughter's serious medical problems, your older
daughter's drinking problem and it's impact to your granddaughter I think how
hard this must be for you and your family.

I hope your daughter chooses to seek help and focus on her daughter. As
parents we know how special and fleeting our time is to be with our kids.

Best of luck,

Chip

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

April 30th, 2012 at 6:36 PM

I haven't written for awhile, but I do check the site frequently. My prayers
go out to all of you. I, too, continue to struggle as my daughter is still
non-functional due to her alcohol abuse. She is 26, physically very pretty,
and she,too, used to be an honor student. She hasn't had a 'real' job in 7
years- she has dropped out of college 4 times, and has quit multiple (maybe
20?) jobs over the past 7 years. She is able, somehow, to get waitress type
jobs again and again, but only works a few days before she shows up drunk,
doesn't show up at all, or who knows what. The last time she worked was 10
months ago.  
I feel the same pain as all of you. It is heartbreaking to see her throw away
her youth- and probably her future. My husband and I are happy, have always
worked, and we were as good a parents as we knew how to be. I really do not
know what went 'wrong' with our daughter. We have tried to rescue her many
times, all to no avail. She walked out of rehab after 4 days, she refuses to
even try AA. She has slept in the park, been picked up and taken to detox
many, many, times. She has been taken to the ER by friends several times as
she was passed out and non-responsive. She does not drive as she has totaled
her car twice, and due to 2 DUI's, has had her license revoked. We finally
told her she could not live at home unless she was working or going to school.
She moved out and into a relationship with a disabled man getting government
aide that is 55 years old. Did I mention our daughter is 26? She is living
with this man as evidently he enables her or at least allows her to drink and
continue to be non-functional.  
All of our situations are sad. We see our children with such potential- and
they are throwing away their youth, their future, their health……. and I have
come to believe that we cannot 'save' them.  
I have heard time and again that a mother 'can only be as happy as her saddest
child'. I DO NOT believe this anymore. I am often sad, I am heartbroken,
however, I have finally reached the place where I can be happy, and I will not
let our daughter ruin my life anymore. Seven- almost 8 years- of sadness is
enough. It is up to her now. I have a husband, a son, and a granddaughter.
They deserve more from me.  
I am here for my daughter, and I continue to try to encourage her- but I have
resigned myself to the fact that recovery may not happen for her. I hope it
does, but I can't continue to beat myself up. I am choosing to be fully there
for the rest of my family. This may sound harsh, but it is survival.

Reply

  * ![Angel](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Angel

May 9th, 2012 at 8:08 AM

With tears streaming down my face I am so thankful to findout that I am not
alone. My 18yr old son is a drug addict. My husband and I have four other kids
at home still and I am struggling trying to cope with this whole "tough love"
stuff and be the happy mom for the rest of my kids. He does not live at home
and though I recently bailed him out of jail I have cut him off since
financially etc… I am ok w/ that. What I am not ok with is the heartache and
tears and constant worry everytime the phone rings. He is 6'6 and should weigh
240 but looks like he weighs 150lbs. He looks so bad. I know where he is
staying doesnt have water etc… It hurts me so bad knowing my "baby" is living
that life. I know I cant fix it, everyone has told me to let go and told me he
has to make his own choices etc… I know that. I just hurt and I am tired of
hurting. How do you just turn off 18 years of mothering?

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

May 10th, 2012 at 9:05 PM

I'm back. My son, left jail, went to the streets and ended up living with a
man who took him in. Of course the guy wanted sexual favors and they ended up
in fights over it because Glenn just wanted a friend and someone to lean on;
he isn't gay or a gigolo. He's worn out the leanin' post here. The
arrangement, although tumultuous, worked out for some months but ended
recently when my son went wild over his cousin's suicide. It drove him to
imbibe in alcohol plus who knows what. He was outright belligerent and got
really weird. He made horrible remarks to me, my husband, my sister (the
grieving mother). Then the next day, he was calm again, winding down off
whatever he was on. He was the good guy, but we can't trust it and that was
proven when my husband checked his taking of liberties at our house. Another
blowup, more threats, police again. Just like Mary in #369, I jump when my
cellphone rings…and when it doesn't. I haven't heard from him for four days,
and worry while at the same time having ambivalence about when he will finally
call. There's always a want or need besides my loving conversation. I told him
this last time, I love him dearly but don't have to prove it by letting him
put me through hell. The problem is, even when he isn't here, he does.

To Angel in #379, you don't turn off the mothering easily. It's the hardest
thing to be forced to do and I still haven't turned it off completely. It's
not right at all that we are put in the position we're in. The fact that these
addicted offspring are not mentally well doesn't make it any easier. Which
came first, the mental illness or the addiction?

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

May 11th, 2012 at 12:51 AM

I haven't been on for a while but am writing because tomorrow is my 28th
wedding anniversary. I remember so clearly when it was the 25th anniversary.
My husband and I were sad because we couldn't afford to take a little trip to
celebrate because our finances were in a shambles because of all the money our
oldest son had siphoned from us due to his alcoholism, mental and emotional
problems and other addictions. We also didn't dare leave our home with him
prowling around with his scummy friends and his anger and bitterness toward us
and the other 3 kids.

So here it is three years later and we still can't afford that trip and we
still don't dare leave our house. He has just gotten out of his 5th rehab
which he now uses like a hotel. He lost his car to impound fees- broke another
phone- he doesn't work- he is now living in a halfway house\intensive
outpatient program that he makes sound like Turkish prison. He is still
harassing me for money daily, still lying, still drinking and\or drugging -
the last three years and hospitalizations have just taught him more tricks and
introduced him to more sick people.l

Most recently he was living in a cheap motel (that we were partially paying
for) with a 40 year old bipolar alcoholic who gambles every nickle of his
disability check. Bothof themwwere pawning their possessions to buy their
"suppplies". My son was cleaning up this guys vomit (pancreatic fluid as he is
a late stager) and I thought he couldn't sink any lower. He got out of the
rehab hospital after 15 days and was in the bar three hours later and every
night since.

He decided that since we are paying $400 a month for this program housing we
might as well pay for him to rent a room for him on a private basis and he
will of course get a job as soon as he settles his ongoing court issues. I'm
just so tired-he has taken so much of me for so long. I told him today that
his grandma is dying. She took care of him when I worked and she has given him
money and free cars etc. His only response was "Who do you suppose will get
her car?" I was sickened - we all need to get well because in all likelihood
they never will. I made clear to him he will never come back here to live. He
is still transferring his consequences to us and laying on the fear and guilt.
I am often amazed my husband is still with me. He truly has given up and is
frustrated that I just can't cut him off entirely because I am tortured by the
thought that the next time he will mean it and I will get my son back. So much
pain - so few understand..  
Diane

Reply

  * ![Darlene](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Darlene

May 15th, 2012 at 9:02 AM

I read this on the morning after my wallet has disapeared. Feeling beaten down
and hopeless AGAIN after a night of his partying on my work night. I have had
3 hours sleep an dnow sit here at my desk exhausted. I have proof now he
isusuing herion. Last Sunday he stole his grandmother's debit card oand used
it until we discovered it gone. He een took time to "help" look for it. I am
struggling to make the decision to call my 23 yr. old son's proabtion officer
and say come get him.  
But WHY is it so hard…? I am living in hell and wake every morning to face
another day of battle, manipulation and deceit. I have an 18 and 15 yr old at
home who knpw they cannot leave any item of theirs unguarded.  
This stress of the purse hiding, arguments and general BS is killing me. I no
longer enjoy life or even laugh. I dread going home to the place I pay the
mortgage on, yet am afraid to leave it with him there.

Send up a prayer for me will ya? I need the strength to stop the madness
befire it buries me.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

May 16th, 2012 at 7:45 AM

OMG Darlene - you have my thoughts and prayers - been there with the missing
credit and debit cards - last Christmas he stole our Christmas gifts (cash)
from us - He is no longer allowed in this house but everyday he tries to get
back in. Yesterday,he didn't show up again for appointment with his PO - and
he already has a warrant from a different jurisdiction. He actually told me
that if I want him to handle his court issues I will have to pay him. He wants
enough to be able to have a life when he gets out (he isn't facing more than a
couple of weeks max). He is just a sick, sociopathic personality anymore -
there is no reaching him. Unfortunately, this is still his address of record
so my 19 year old twin boys are being pulled over n front of our house as they
are looking for him. It is so upsetting and embarrassing - the neighbors don't
even look at us anymore. I feel so much for you - I still love him but I hate
him - I know I'm supposed to say I hate his behavior but it's all getting
jumbled the longer this drags on.  
Hugs  
Diane

Reply

  * ![Diann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diann

May 18th, 2012 at 10:54 AM

Just found this website this morning. I've been searching for advice as well.
Can relate to so many of the stories. However, I am just the 'significant
other'.

My other half (SO) has a 26 yr. old married son who is addicted to K2/Spice
and now prescription meds. His father and I have been happily dating almost 2
years. My (SO) has 3 adult children, two of which are highly successful and
have their own families. The youngest, his son has had issues since birth.
Born with a unilateral cleft palate, he had 12 surgeries to correct before the
age of 12. Parents divorced when he was 15. The divorce was not pretty. His
former spouse had found greener pastures and the son is the one who revealed
it. Being a lawyer and through a bitter divorce, he ended up with custody.
There is contact, but to this day, the son does not have much respect for his
Mother.

Little by little, my SO started sharing stories about his son. Like all
parents he has lots of fond memories, sports, fishing trips, holidays,
achievements etc. However, the wonderful stories stop around the age of 17.
Starting from 15 - 20 they're mainly about hanging with wrong crowd, smoking
pot, car wrecks, poor choices, being bullied, dropping out of sports, moving
residences to get away from a certain crowd to even retiring at a young age to
be a stay-home, full-time Dad.

From 20 - 24, my SO dedicated his life to getting his son on the right track.
He had counselors, prescribed antidepressants, got him involved in cycling,
fishing, working out and eventually into college. He was at several schools
before making it. It was there, he met the mother of his first child. She and
her father both drink, smoked pot and he's a convicted felon. They decide they
want to have a baby, and did so in 2003.

With great anticipation of a wonderful life together, but no means of
employment, they ended up moving back and forth between his Dad, Mom or her
Father. The relationship became abusive and ultimately, my SO gets his son out
of it with full custody of the granddaughter.

The son and granddaughter moved in with his Dad. But, before the final custody
papers were signed, the son had a new girlfriend. Life was looking up, he was
in college. The son and granddaughter moved in with the girlfriend and they
married in 2008. They had their only child in 2009. As responsibilities rose,
so did problems. Both of them were 'funded' by their parents through college.
Now, they have to work, raise their family, just like you and I.

Before the child's first birthday the marriage was on the rocks with fights,
verbal, emotional and physical abuse by the wife. The son started drinking,
smoking, running away and ended up getting 2 alcohol related DUI's which his
Dad got reduced.

Looking for a fresh start, both are teachers looking for work and moved in
with my SO who also recently moved here from another state.

Christmas 2010, I met the son and his family at my SO's home. Very strange
dynamics. You could cut the tension with a knife. The hair stood up on my
arms. My SO later explained he had had words with them for not handling
responsibilities that they'd agreed to in order to live there while saving up
money for their own place. I thought that was understandable, but the tension
was always the same while they lived there.

It was obvious the wife couldn't stand my SO. It was also obvious that the
couple were having difficulties. The worse part to me was how poorly the son's
wife treated his daughter. She was fine with her child, but treated the
daughter like an unwanted step-child.

Both very secretive, moved out without notice and left a huge mess. I helped
my SO clean up. That's when, I found about 10 empty prescription pain killer
bottles. I showed them him, and he explained his son had knee surgery recently
and they were just leftover and threw them away.

I believe, his son was in trouble then and well on his way to where he is now.

At first, they appeared to be ok on their own until the granddaughter told us
'Dad is living in a tent in the back yard'…About every other month, the son
would show up on SO's doorstep with his granddaughter - usually in the middle
of the night or when she should have been in school. He'd say…his wife had
done this or that. They's stay for a couple of days, things would settle and
they'd go back.

Now, what was every other month is almost daily! Since last August, there's
been 6 arrests including battery, domestic violence, DWLS, child abuse, DUI
drugs. He has multiple traffic offenses in 4 surrounding counties. And instead
of further arrests, we've received compassionate calls from police, asking to
pick up his son and granddaughter whom they found passed out on the side of
the road.

He's unemployed. If you give him any cash he goes straight to the head shop
for K2, cigarettes. His wife won't allow him to be alone with their son,
doesn't really care about the daughter. He's pawned almost anything he can
find. His daughter's Mother makes state ordered child support payments that he
uses for cigarettes and doctor shops for pills. He lied to everyone saying she
wasn't making payments, but the family found bank receipts. I could go on and
on….

My dilemma is: My SO and I almost parted ways, because he felt I was being too
critical of his family situation. It was heartbreaking. I did some real soul
searching and told him I would support him and his decisions, which I have. He
has opened up and shared with me some of the most recent events and his
discussions with his son. He's still trying to be his advisor and protector
but told me there be no more financial help.

This past week, we got a call at 1:30am, the police had his son and
granddaughter stopped and wanted us to pick the granddaughter. Needing 2
drivers, he asked me to go with him to bring back the son's vehicle.

Upon arriving, the vehicle had a flat, had run out of gas, battery dead, the
son was passed out in the back of the cruiser had no money and lost his phone,
license and debit card. The police had sat with the granddaughter, gave her
crackers and a banana and did her homework with her while waiting for us to
arrive.

The woman policeman, told us she has a 4 month old and decided to release his
son. Pulling him from the back of the police car, he wasn't even able to stand
on his own. They put him in the back of the car I drove and we followed a tow
truck to get the car serviced so it could be driven home. Got home at 7am, the
son never woke. He doesn't remember being there or where he was.

At 5pm, the son woke, and immediately asked his Dad to take him to his car and
for the keys. My SO said No, I'm tired. I'll pay for a taxi and you can go get
your car. It is parked across the street in the lot from where you had a flat
tire. He got upset and walked out to a convenience store and called his wife.
She came over, they talked for awhile and announced they were going home and
would be moving again soon.

My SO asked if he could keep the car in my spare garage. It's still there. But
this morning, he left early to pick his son up and drive him to meet with
lawyers to represent him on the 3 latest charges.

I want so badly to contact DCF, they already have an open file on him. But,
I'm fighting with myself because the son is very much in denial and my SO
continues to bail him out even though he says he won't. Just don't know what
to do.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

May 22nd, 2012 at 1:41 PM

My emotions are all over the place. I feel extreme sadness when I see my son
destroying his life. I feel angry that our family has been afflicted with this
illness. I feel fear for what the next crisis will bring. I feel grief for my
"lost" son. I feel ashamed for the way my son acts. I feel guilt for feeling
ashamed of my own child. I feel helpless, hopeless, and often tired of the
struggle and pretending to be okay.

Reply

  * ![Joannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joannie

May 29th, 2012 at 3:40 PM

Donna, you said that so well, your comments capture every single emotion I
have experienced since I found out my only child has been abusing painkillers
and stealing to support her habit. Thank you for writing that, it really hit
home.

Reply

  * ![Vicki](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Vicki

May 30th, 2012 at 4:06 PM

After reading some of the posts here, I'm sort of glad others can relate with
what I'm dealing with; yet at the same time, I am so sad because so many
"others" can relate. It grieves me to know there are so so many families
dealing with drug and alcohol addictions.  
My daughter is only 18 and already on the wrong path. I was shocked because we
had the drug talks, the drinking talks, the sex talks. Now I am not sure she
got any of it. She has been using meth and marajuana for over a year (I
suspected but never could prove it and she denied it). She left home at 17
twice to live some boy and both times it failed. Both times she called to have
me come get her and I did. But she has no respect for me or my home. When I
found drug paraphanelia in her room, I gave her a choice of rehab or jail. She
did not choose rehab. She was arrested and her boyfriend bailed her out. She
lived with him at his grandparents about 3 months before they were kicked out.
She called me to come home. I drug tested her before bringing her home & she
tested positive for meth and marajuana. So I took her to a halfway house that
helps addicts. She is in for 1 month. She wants to come back home.

She has no high school diploma, no money, no job, no car, very little work
experience. I know and you know, she will have a majorly hard time making it
on her own. But I fear if I bring her home, she continue with the drugs. We
live in a small rural town…she knows every addict and dealer. And I think she
will just run me over and disregard anything I say. But if I don't bring her
back, what are her choices except to stay with other addicts? No hardworking
unaddicted people want her in their houses. I feel like by not letting her
come back, I'm forcing into the drug scene.

What do you guys think?

Reply

  * ![Deborah Smith](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Deborah Smith

June 4th, 2012 at 11:29 AM

Vicki, I am going through the same thing EXACTLY with my son but the crowds he
has been running with are mean, racists, and he posted bad things on his face
book wall about them and after a week and half of being clean he left at 1:00
am in the morning saying he had a friend that needed help moving. I am in
complete torment right now. I don't know if has come across the ppl he has
made very mad and they have hurt him or what. My nerves on edge, I feel like
I'm ready to jump out of my skin. He has no jobs skills that he has pursued,
no money, he has one skirt, 2 pairs of pants and some shoes he stole from a
friend and justifies it because his friend was mean to someone. I'm living in
total mental hell right now. I've lost my baby and he seems to ignorant to
stay on the right track. Does "bottoming out" really work???? Because he has
absolutely nothing to his name and he doesn't even have his ID. He left it
here. Probably as an excuse to come back. I'm soooo so so heartbroken. But I
feel your pain and I am waiting for the response you get because my 21 yr. old
son is IDENTICAL to your situation.

Reply

  * ![donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### donna

June 4th, 2012 at 1:11 PM

The hard part is, I don't think there is ONE answer. Every situation is
different yet the same. The scary thing I've come to learn is not everyone
hits a "bottom" and some addict's "bottom" is death. Making rational decisions
while we're so emotionally involved is very difficult. I usually second guess
every decision I make. I don't want to enable but often times find it too hard
to say no. Yet, some addicts in recover have told me tough love is what ended
up saving them from themselves. I just don't know. It's so hard. There's not
much support out there for us, either. Praying for us all, and our loved ones.

Reply

  * ![Chip](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chip

June 8th, 2012 at 11:48 PM

It's been a while since I've checked in. This is a tough site to read, hard
stories to write.

Donna's comments about emotions truly capture how my wife and I feel about our
son. He will be 24 next month and is now in rehab. He has no money, is
homeless, friendless, despondent and angry. We told him he can't move back
home when he gets out of rehab - we have offered to help pay his living
expenses if he goes to a structured after care program like Oxford House.

We just feel exhausted and empty inside. This has been an ongoing problem for
a long time that we've been slow to recognize and slow to deal with. He has
had problems with drinking, herion, other drugs and now meth. The addiction
problems he struggles with relate, I believe, to underlying mental and
emotional problems. We have tried everything we can to help him and have
finally come to realize we can't fix this. As unfair as it is, he is the only
one that can start the healing, we can and will be there support him in
decisions that are, at least to us, positive.

I think he has struggled mightily during his young life, fallen time and time
again. I fear that he has fallen so many times he has forgotten how to get up
or is unwilling to try for fear of failing. We want him to have the courage,
confidence and force of will to get up, move forward, forgive himself for bad
choices and embrace life. It is hard for him to see beyond himself. He feels a
victim of his mom and me, of his friends, school, and jobs.

We know he is terribly afraid, alone and unsure. We and his sisters worry
about him every night - is he somewhere warm and safe? is he fed? is he sober?
Is he with someone that is a true friend? Has he learned to be a good friend?
Lots of questions and very few answers.

We will be meeting with him as he completes his rehab. We were asked to write
how is addiction has effected us. I think I will use posts from this site.
There is so much heart, love and caring within him -

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

June 9th, 2012 at 6:47 PM

Diann-- I have been struggling with my daughter's addition for the past 8
years. I read your comments and want to tell you that things may NEVER change
for your SO's son. Do you want this for your life?? Most of us struggle
because it is our own child- and so very hard to give up on them- even though
that is probably the only way to save ourselves. Your SO's son's behavior is
NOT your problem. You can't fix it, and it sounds like this is ruining your
life and your relationship with your SO. It is like a slow death and as 'only'
the SO, you have no control, no power. And so very sad to see the children
suffering. Thank God my daughter does not have any children- I do not have
that pain or struggle. I hope you will try and separate yourself from this
situation. It is like quicksand. It can take over your life. I would also say,
getting a child into the DSHS system is another nightmare. Once a child is in
'the system', you are at the mercy of the state to make decisions for the
child. Not always good, but living the way the daughter is living is no life
either. What a dilemma. Maybe you and your SO need to see a counselor to help
him see that his rescuing is not helping- ? Maybe he needs someone else to
help him see he is ruining his life and your relationship?  
Sorry to be on a soapbox- but I hate to see someone voluntarily getting into
this nightmare of another's addiction.

Reply

  * ![ANITA](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### ANITA

June 14th, 2012 at 4:01 PM

I raised my two children no ages 35 and 33 alone. Their dad left when the
youngest was 10 days old. it was a hard life needless to say. I went on
welfare and worked 3 part time jobs to support myself and my kids while
attending a community college in town. Eventually I got a good job and settled
into being mom and dad both to my children. I rarely got child support and
never on a regular basis. I was a good mother or so I thought. I didn't drink
or date or run around as I was devoted to my children. Ball field, foot ball
field, cheerleading matches and the whole 9 yards. My ex husband beat up on me
more than once during the years we were married. He was a raving alcoholic. He
since has been married 5 times all of which failed and now he lives with a
very prominent person in town and he has been clean and sober for about 15
years now. My daughter loves him in spite of the things he did and has chosen
to forgive him. My son who is now 33 got into drugs and alcohol in school and
this has been with him since childhood. He had a wonderful job and marriage
both of which have ended now. He was hurt on the job and has been on comp for
4 years now. He says he is clean but I see things and wonder if he is telling
the truth. He has stolen from family members and lies so much that I wonder if
he ever tells me the truth. He lives with me now. Waiting on his comp injury
to settle. He cannot have children and has a girlfriend who has 3 children. I
have seen counselors before. If I turn and walk away from him he has no one.
He was so close to his sister growing up and they are at each others throats
all the time now. I am hurting for him and I don't know what to do. Can anyone
give me some insight. I haven't overlooked this as I know he has problems but
waht do I do. No one in his family speaks tohim but me. His dad was never a
dad and then tried later on in life but he hates his dad for his life growing
up.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

July 11th, 2012 at 11:47 PM

Anita,  
I wish I knew what to tell you- my 25-year-old son is out in the streets
tonight homeless. He also has very few friends- he always has had problems
socially, but the friends he has now want nothing to do with him. He is
hanging around with a 30-year-old crack addicted psychotic. This guy has been
paying the bills for my son because he chose to walk away from the county
rehab program. He has been in rehab seven times previous to this -and this one
is kind of the last straw.

My husband will not allow him in our home because he lies and steals and
exhibits bizarre behavior. He is a pathological liar and will say or do
anything to get five bucks from you. I have three other children still at home
and I am devastated at how dysfunctional our family has become. Our new normal
is a horrible place to be indeed. The only thing I can say is that these
addicts Will take you and your life right down with them. I keep getting the
feeling that he only sees me as a means to an end anymore-I have begged him
for the sake of my health to get something in his life started or straightened
out. He just comes up with one line or scheme after another.

Tonight I feel 75 years old. I am 52 and just feel beat up and exhausted by
life. This is exacting a terrible toll on my marriage- as my husband seems to
be able to compartmentalize this so much better than I. He refuses to go
backwards so when I got the call today that he needed money for a hotel yet
again ot to be let back into the house to sleep for a "few days" My husband
just said no. I only got an hour and a half sleep last night I don't expect to
get much more tonight. I am doubled over from stomach pain I have thrown up
twice. This just seems like somebody else's life. I know in my heart that my
husband is right. To let him back here for even one night would mean beginning
this all over again. If you're nice to him at all he just uses it as an
opportunity to walk all over you. I have respites of an hour here or there
where his problems aren't foremost in my mind.

We are not rich people but have sunk thousands upon thousands of dollars into
this so far losing cause. This money would've been better spent helping the
other kids with college expenses. Instead they get to watch as their older
brother, who has never held a job for longer than three days, who is drunk and
abusive, who lies cheats manipulates and steals, and who puts others in harms
way- gets money just handed to him, most of which he drinks away. This has
been going on for us for almost 8 years now- and I just can't do it anymore.
I'm letting him sleep in the street tonight- I hope he realizes that the Path
he has chosen leads only to death insanity or jail. I feel stronger than I did
last year- and as these episodes escalate, I learn more and I have more
resolve. I know something has to change and soon- I thought I would have to be
hospitalized for exhaustion this afternoon- but he belongs on the psychiatric
floor not me.

These are his choices, we warned him, we bribed him, we worked hard and paid
to fix him, all To no avail. Please know you are not alone. The ice we walk is
so thin. I just feel like he tortures me day and night. Please stay strong and
spend part of each day thinking about the good things in life -  
Diane

Reply

  * ![Sandy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandy

July 11th, 2012 at 10:06 PM

My beautiful 28 yr old daughter is coming home from 28 days in rehab. This is
the longest she's been sober in years! I am just beginning to see my REAL
daughter now who was gone for so very long and its joyful! 28 days is not
enough to change however. I have just gotten used to sleeping at nights again.
I would like to be here sponsor when another one isn't available but don't
know how or what to say. I want to encourage and not discourage and stress her
out. What to do? Anyone? I love her more than air and life. Please help me be
a good mom/friend/sponser. I'm all ears!Give a mom some hope. Bless you!

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

July 12th, 2012 at 10:30 AM

My understanding is that a family member can't sponsor. You can only be
supportive of her efforts - but beware of doing too much- it can lead to old
enabling habits so fast. Tell her how her sobriety and new lease on life is
positively affected family and friends. Be a shoulder if she asks but avoid
falling for the money trap - don't give cash - in my experience that is too
much temptation for an addict- help with food, maybe clothing for a job, gas
card (though my son sold those- we used to take his car to be refueled).
Bestow trust as it's earned and show love and express your belief in her power
to overcome and persevere. Good Luck to you both!!!

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

July 12th, 2012 at 10:34 AM

I wonder if this site could be set up for new comments to show up first-
having a devil of a time getting to the bottom- this is an incredible resource
for me right now.

Reply

  * ![Eileen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eileen

July 19th, 2012 at 9:49 AM

Please I really need help, My 40 yr old son is an alcholic. We tried to get
him into rehab last year, he refused and stopped drinking for maybe 2 mos. His
wife is passive aggressive. Yesterday I told him he was no longer welcome in
my home, he of course proceeded to tell me he hasn't drank since the 4 th. He
works for us and our business is pretty much non existent. His wife is
demanding he find a job. Prior to this recession they had a Beauitful home
which we put the 80thousand down on, had boats,motorcycles etc. He has lost
everything. My son and husband enable him. A counselor told him 20 yrs ago he
had to stop. After me doing one of the hardest things I have ever done( he was
not drinking and was his sweet adorable self.) My husband is furious with me.
Slamming doors and using his roughing tones on me. My son Joe can not believe
I did this when his life is following apart. Haven't slept . He if does
something stupid my whole family will blame me. I feel like I'm about to have
a nervous break down. It's like I'm the bad one even though he has drained us
of all our money and his brother also. I am 64 and need to know where to get
help. I am on SS so my funds are now limited as he has exhausted most of our
savings. Help please.

Reply

  * ![Bev](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Bev

July 19th, 2012 at 3:00 PM

i disagree with the author of this post. Addiction is a disease. Enable or
not, detach or not, tough love or not, the disease will run it's course. The
most a parent can do is to keep themselves safe, set boundaries and educate
themselves about this disease called addiction.

Reply

  * ![Unknown](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Unknown

July 24th, 2012 at 5:19 PM

My second to the oldest daughter passed away at 23 leaving behind a 3 year old
for us to take care of. (she is now 8) This same daughter was married to a
physically and emotionally abusive man. She spent a year married to him and
two years trying to divorce him. She had a protective order against him while
he was threatening to kill her and making her and my grand daughter's life
miserable. (of course, ours too) The doctor prescribed her anxiety, sleeping,
antidepressant medications for her. One night, a friend gave her medication
for pain, she was in pain with her PMS, that some how counter acted with her
other medications where she went to sleep one night and didn't wake up. This
turned my life into a tailspin because we had been dishing out money to get
her full custody of her daughter, as well as put her in hiding so they would
be safe. She was one month away from having the divorce final and everything
over. The autopsy called it accidental overdose. (5 years ago)

My oldest daughter has always been extremely hard. She was knock out gorgeous
and looked like she was 21 at the age of 13. We fought her constantly, trying
to sneak out with older boys. We would ground her and she would sneak out of
the house on a Friday night, play all weekend, then turn herself in so we
would have to take the day off to go pick her up at a youth center for run
aways. (this happened at least 5 times) She started smoking about that time
and dabbling with drinking. At 19 she married a much older man where they
smoked pot and drank. Divorced at the age of 23. Around 23 She went to the
sand dunes with some friends, was a passenger on the back of a 4 wheeler when
the driver turned sharp by a truck bumper. (I am sure there was drinking going
on) It cut my daughters leg up. She was in surgery for 5 hours. That is where
the prescription drugs started. She has always been ADHD and the doctor
prescribed her some kind of a pill for it as well as pain medication for after
the surgery. Up until this point she held down a steady job and was at least
making payments. To make a long story short it just escalates from there, to
her turning to meth after her sister passed away. (she was 25 when her sister
died) At least she blames that. We have not only lost a daughter and raising
our granddaughter but our oldest decides to be out of control using and
abusing drugs and everything that goes along with it. You all know what I
mean. Stealing, lying, etc. She pawned my wedding ring and of course denied it
until I went to every pawn shop around and guess whose name was listed as
turning it in. Of, course my daughters. At first we bought into it and played
the games giving her money and letting her live with us until she pawned my
wedding ring and denied it. When she goes to court it is always the same well.
It is just that w I lost my sister…. poor pity me. (major manipulation) While
the rest of us have tried to continue life. Well, it has finally happened she
was just sentenced to prison. My, now 30 year old daughter, is in prison. Most
people would be devastated, which I am not, I am grateful. She would have
ended up dead. When they picked her up it was a Friday night late, shop
lifting at Walmart. She didn't even realize that she was in jail until she
woke up Monday morning. They kept her there for a month then just went to
prison. So I get a reprieve from the drama of addiction for at least a year or
so. Thank you for listening.

After I read all these comments I am so grateful to realize that there are so
many of us. You are absolutely right when you say that unless you have lived
through the death of an adult child and/or an addicted adult child, they do
NOT understand what we are going through.

As we have battled through our oldest daughters addiction I have found it was
extremely hard to have tough love in the beginning. As time goes on it does
become easier to tell them NO but it does still hurt. You so want to protect
them. However, I have a son that is 20 and just adopted my 8 year old grand
daughter. I realize that they do not need all of the drama that comes with
addiction.

Reply

  * ![taylor](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### taylor

July 25th, 2012 at 3:19 PM

I did not mean to put unknown. Sorry!

Reply

  * ![Eleanor](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eleanor

August 13th, 2012 at 9:30 PM

I just wanted to say thank you ! And thank you to all the stories! I have felt
so heart broken and down! But I know I have to protect my son whom is 12! And
now a granddaughter just under 2! My oldest drinks ALOT, and is always drunk!
Everything in his life is everyone's fault! He is mouth, and verbally abusive!
He has done years of things too family members, stealing, lying, stalking etc!
And just this last 12 months he manage to call about something monthly! Long
story short, I guess he must be living on the streets, since I told him I
couldn't take it any longer!!!! There is my step daughter, she for 10 years
has used drugs, stealing, spent time in jail and is a drunk also! My current
husband talked in to leaving the baby here. So I have been raising a hard
little one, since I know her mom used while carring her. I am so tired of
people like these, and felt so alone.. Thanks again for sharing , I needed to
hear that I'm not,

Reply

  * ![Eileen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eileen

July 25th, 2012 at 7:13 PM

How do I remain in my 4yr old granddaughters life, while excluding her
alcholic father out of mine. We are a close knit family and all family members
are at get togethers. I want no contact with my 39 yr old son, but love my
grandaughter and she loves being with me.

Reply

  * ![Janette](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Janette

July 30th, 2012 at 2:30 PM

What a heartbreakingly sad blog thread. At first, I was overjoyed at reading a
blog that actually stated what I've been thinking…"helplessness" as indicated
in all those 12 step meetings, is another way of absconding from personal
responsibility. My 22 year old daughter has, like all the other poster's
children, made my life a living hell for the past 4 years. Several arrests-
incarceration, drug use, drug dealing, and several rehabs. Every promise
broken, ever lie told a blow to my exhausted mind and injured heart. Why are
there no meetings or groups for us? Why must we suffer seemingly alone-why? I
read the posts above and feel sadness and a bit of relief (no grandchildren,
thank God). And, I feel a kindred spirit who gave voice to the fact that even
though they would be devastated-they know their lives would be easier if their
child were dead. I think that thought often…hating myself for even considering
it. But, it is what it is. Death would free my family from this hellish
existence that HER choices…and I said CHOICES…not "disease" has caused. Cancer
is a disease. Crushing pills and snorting them or smoking crack is a choice.
I'll argue that till I draw MY last breath.

To juxtapose the cruel, hardened feelings of almost wishing your child would
die…to end this nightmare is a hideous thought for a mother. But, it swims in
my consciousness nonetheless……

Reply

  * ![Kim](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kim

October 11th, 2013 at 6:51 PM

Thank you for your honesty. I too have had the same thoughts. Relief for all
from the torments alcoholisim brings.  
It is so painful to remember the child that has become this tortured addict.
All the hopes and dreams lost. Yet we do hang on to some hope that our child
will be THAT recovery story.  
And at the same time we know that THAT phone call may very well come for us
and we will get through it.  
We are the ones making the choice to live.  
I am struggling with family thinking I am a cold hearted you know what b/c I
have basically turned my back. I know I have to do this for my daughter to
stand any chance of suffering the consequences of all af her actions and her
not destroying my health, marriage and life savings.

Reply

  * ![Len](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Len

March 14th, 2014 at 6:23 PM

Wow, my 22 year old daughter is in exactly the same boat. I felt very guilty
for hoping God would intervene, but it is sooooooo exhausting to endure each
day. Racing to her bedroom door, petrified about what's behind it, knocking
and worried sick she won't answer, worried about getting the mail, which I
used to look forward to. Keeping it all from everyone, being saddened by other
young adults with normal lives. Heart racing when answering her phone calls,
worried about if she will come home straight. Fighting with husband over
her…….Wish I could cope better….

Reply

  * ![Dan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dan

August 1st, 2012 at 1:58 PM

Boy did some of these hit home, and VERY recently so. My oldest son is now 27.
My first marriage (from which he came) was her 2d, and my 2d was also my
current wife's second. All the marriages had children born to them. That is
just for background-all of the other children (three others in their 20's)
have not had serious problems and, as I see it, the time for "using" that as a
basis for any of HIS problems has passed, if it ever should have existed.

Drinking and drug use started with junior high school-age 12-14 or so.
Problems in school followed, then dropping out, then juvenile detention. After
a failed enlistment in the Navy, a short-lived first marriage, and a number of
lost jobs, things seemed to settle down. He found a job he liked (and lost,
but found similar work immediately)and was in school. Like many in their 20's,
it was "work hard, party hard." There were the drunk "I love you man" phone
calls. There have been family gatherings where he has (especially if the
dinner bill's my treat) 3-4 drinks compared to everyone else's 1.

Recently (if not longer) things have worsened. Still has the job and is
keeping responsibilities, but the drinking, and, to a lesser extent, drug use,
has intensified. It came to a head this past week when six of us were at a
concert. He arrived with more than a few drinks in him and a half-empty 1/5-at
10:00AM. The pre-concert tailgate meant more, to the extent he had nearly been
involved in more than one fight, had been kicked out of nearby stores, and
removed from one local business when he carried a drink into their
establishment. After another episode where he became VERY loud and
profane/obscene (and aggressively so), I told him to have some respect for the
rest of us. His reaction was to tell me to "f-- off," throw a drink at me,
leave the concert (he did get 50+ miles back to his house), send a drunken
text disowning me and telling me to never contact him again, and block any
"facebook" connections. When his younger brother tried to intervene, he
threatened him as well.

I'n honoring his wishes, and have not tried to contact him. I WILL not do so,
and if he contacts me, there will be ground rules, or that will cease, and
cease fast. It hurts, but I will not place myself, my spouse, or any other
family in harm's way. If the other kids (they are in their 20's and out of the
home for school or employment) want to have a relationship with him, it's up
to them. He's not welcome in my home until he gets it together, and sobriety
is just the beginning.

I miss him daily, and I'm worried sick about what may come for him and for the
rest of us as the result of this destructive behavior. That having been said,
I agree with this writer. NOBODY "forced" or "drove" him to drink this large.
The notion the "divorce did it" is beneath serious consideration-neither his
mother or I are problem drinkers. In short, he suffer's from no "disease."
He's made bad choices, they've had consequences, and he'll have to make his
way out of them, quite possibly without my help.

Reply

  * ![d](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### d

August 29th, 2012 at 11:16 AM

Dearest helptemple

With my heart and soul I thank you. You have given me the strength to perform
the work that was making me emotionally, psychologically and physically ill. I
have yet to finish but I am thankful I have made progress. People came into my
life to help me. They helped with my bills, my mental well being so that I was
able to make good decisions. Today I received the highest rating at my job
even though last year was the most horrible year of my life. I have never been
rated lower than far exceeded during my entire career and I thought for sure
it would happen this year. With that comes a lot of responsibility and I hope
I do not fail as times are still tough and sometimes still feel sad and
helpless. I wished that I could feel like a women and a person again. To be
able make good decisions and get through this paperwork. Any help financially
I would be extremely grateful. If it was more than I needed than I would do
good with it. I have been provided with all that I prayed for.  
I am extremely grateful to you and all that you do. You are very gifted and I
will never forget you. I am also grateful for the Blessed Mother, Jesus, God
and St. Anthony whom I also pray to.  
I hope that my journey in this life continues with a clear mind and an open
heart and soul so that I can do good for my children and this world.  
Again I thank you and send to you all that is good.

D. from USA

Reply

  * ![Cathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cathy

September 2nd, 2012 at 8:08 PM

I just spent 2-3 hours reading all the posts on this site. I really have
nothing new to add to their stories as they all are so close to mine I could
have written them. I have 2 sons, both addicts. the younger one is back in
college all As and Bs, going to meetings and seems to be sober. My oldest son
is really struggling. I have to think about all I have read about toughlove,
letting them make their own choices, realizing that I cannot fix them, that
their behavior is a choice and not a disease. I have picked him up in the
mddle of the night so many times I am embarrassed to say. Even recently when I
chould have known better. I have a question. How can you be certain someone is
on drugs. My oldest son's 'drug of choice ' is either pot or benzos. Xanax or
valium. He seems to be a 'little' drugged, but of course denies it. It isn't
so obvious that we can tell him to leave based on just what we see. I ordered
drug screens today and have told him that i will give him 7 more days to clear
his system and that if he tests positive after that he will have to leave.
What does everyone do to be sure of the abuse?

I pray for the strength to stick to my decision. I realize I have been through
very hard times trying to help him. Terrible times. Just like all the others
on this blog. So I think that if I can really understand that this is the best
for him I will be able to do it. I pray to God for his words and wisdom to
help my son.  
I also have realized in reading this that my doubts, checking up and questions
are probably feeding his feelings of helplessness. I fI don't think he can do
it, if I don't give him encouragement, if I, his mother who loves him so much,
cannot have any faith, if I can't think positive than how can he?  
I will include all of our sons and daughters in my prayers tonight.

Reply

  * ![Cathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cathy

September 2nd, 2012 at 8:13 PM

P.S. This has been going on for years. My sons are 24 and 28 years old. Do I
bless God that they are still alive or kick myself for letting it go on so
long?

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

September 11th, 2012 at 3:13 PM

Hi Cathy, Do what you feel is best for you. Parents don't let this go on for
so long, we just don't realize what's happening until years have passed and we
are so caught up in it we don't know how to get out. Continue to pray for
guidance. Best wishes to all with a loved one who is actively using drugs or
alcohol. It is such a difficult thing to accept.

Reply

  * ![Lauren](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lauren

September 15th, 2012 at 7:42 AM

Hi I have read all the stories on this site. My situation is a little
different I think. My daughter is 19 diagnosed an alcoholic but denies it. My
husband is desperate to help her and has been taking her to the Drs and
various help meetings. The latest was yesterday - he got up early in the
morning (he works nights) to take her - that night she went out whilst he was
at work, and came home at 8.30 this morning drunk. She got attacked last week
after being out all night. She has sold her guitar (which she loved) this week
for money for drink. She spent all of her wages in 3 days on drink. I just
want to scream - I feel so angry and betrayed. Both my parents were alcoholics
and I grew up with this until my father died of it and my mother had a major
stroke. I have worked really hard to get away from that life, changing my name
when I was 18 and disassociating myself from my family. Now this has been
brought into my house. My husband has suggested that I go to a help group that
supports parents of alcoholics to deal with the situation. I don't want to
deal with the situation! I shouldn't have to. So now we are lurching along
with him taking her to various help meetings where the support she gets goes
in one ear and out of the other. I have told him until she wants to stop she
won't but she is ruining our lives. He feels he has to try and put this right.
I think where I am different from some of the parents on this site is that I
actually hate my daughter and think it would be easier if she was dead. People
may think that I am just angry but I grew up with this and know that it will
never get any better, all we can do is remove ourselves from the situation. I
don't think I can go on much longer if she doesn't go, I am going to have to
leave. its only been the love for my husband that has kept me going. We have
had years of problems from our daughter I am just exhausted by it all now.

Reply

  * ![Yvette](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Yvette

September 18th, 2012 at 7:19 PM

This article is very helpful. I have an adult son 36 years old using some kind
of drug that has made him now loose everything I think meth. I have been
enabling him too long. He is now on the street with nothing and still comes to
ask for food, shower, money for gas and yes stay with us. My husband and I are
tired of his treats of beating up my husband, nobody wanting to help him, and
yes "he does not have anything to live for". I just have the guilt,
depression, and anxiety because of this. He has not been diagnosed but I'm
sure he has Bi-polar. I love him very much but don't know how to help him in
the right way. I am going to start with a therapist soon. I wanted to know is
there a parent support group somewhere in Anaheim that I could attend?

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

October 1st, 2012 at 8:52 PM

Hello to all who post on this site…like the majority of you, I'm on the net
once more, searching for help as to why my handsome, talented son (we'll call
him Twin A) drugs or drinks himself into oblivion every chance he gets. His
twin brother (Twin B) gets out on parole in November, after a second stint in
jail. They just turned 22 years old…I am 58 now, and have been crying over
them since they hit puberty at 13.

First it was Twin B, who went into a completely blunt/flat affect…drugs,
alcohol, dropping out of school, petty theft to support his habit. Court
ordered rehab at age 15…Twin A followed suit with drug use, drinking, wild
swings in mood, suicide attempts. Soon, both were in full drug and alcohol
mode,covering each others use, experimenting together.

Twin B was diagnosed with emerging schizophrenia, which explained the blunted
affect.  
Twin A is prone to mood swings(either bipolar or paranoid schizophrenia, the
jury is still out on his diagnosis),where the outcome is either overdose/near
death, violence, or a week long paranioa fest, where he sees government agents
in trees and accuses me of trying to poison him.

They are adopted,we've had them since they were 13 months old. They have 6
older bio siblings, a few diagnosed with depression and bipolar. Mother died
at 7 months pregnant with the twins, from a brain tumor.

Paranoid schizophrenic bio father, who recently killed himself in prison,
after being there for 11 years for trying to kill two people. Many relatives
on the fathers side with bipolar, schizophrenia, alcoholism, depression.
Suicide and depression on the mothers side, so yes, I've been told by
professionals time and again, the deck is stacked AGAINST them and I should
never expect them to be "normal."

I have three older children, and the twins were the center of our universe. My
entire family loved and adored these boys. We still love them, but tonight,
I'm just at a loss, cuz love just isn't doing a whole lot of good right about
now.

I feel I lost both my sons at 13, when the drugs started. Twin B has spent his
teenaged years growing up in detention centers and jail…I don't even feel I
know him anymore. I have no pictures, no family memories with him past 13. I
do have mug shots,news articles on his arrests, and a BIG Rubbermaid storage
bin full of legal and medical papers. He's alive mainly because he's been
locked up so often.

His brother, Twin A, is alive only because we've either found him in time, or
his twin has, on the rare occasions he is out in the free world…or because
after he overdoses, he panics and asks us to take him to an Emergency Room.

They have both lived in apartments we signed for and paid the rent on, when
Twin A became too violent and unpredictable to live at home. Neither could
hold a job. Twin B never had a drivers license, Twin A totalled our van after
it was paid off, in a joint drunken/suicide attempt, which they both survived.

They were evicted from their first apartment because of Twin B cooking up
drugs in the bathtub constantly and fumigating the apartment building…got them
into another place and that lasted a month before they were both arrested for
breaking and entering.

It was the first time Twin A had been locked up…he got out this March, after a
year. Twin B was put into drug rehab in jail, which is useless, its the old AA
model, which does not work. He gets out in November on parole.

Twin A has sworn time after time,he will change. He will stop using, will make
himself a life, he will not end up in jail again like his brother keeps
doing….but yet, the first week he was out in March, he stole my credit card to
buy cough syrup, to extract the DXM and get high.

He stole needles from our office(we're in the medical world),sold them to get
drugs. He goes through drawers, pocketbooks, cars, to steal change. We clean
drug paraphernalia out of his room, we talk to him, we make him appointments
with counselors. Doesn't work. Nothing works. We keep trying.

We carry our credit cards, cash, and car keys 24/7. We sleep with them in our
pillowcases and take them into the shower with us. We're the Drug Police when
they live with us, but we're also the prisoners, in a weird fashion.

Twin A has shoved and pushed me, slapped me in the face and punched me in the
head. He's punched his father several times…destroyed many areas in our home
from his uncontrolled rages.

Jail has not fazed either of them. Rehab is useless.

The get high together, have almost died from overdoses, attempted suicide a
few times, gotten shot at, gone into psychotic, delusional states where they
claim demons leaped into both of them.

Twin A flipped out from sniffing glue and beat the living hell out of his
brother last year, gave him a concussion and broke his nose. Still, they get
high and say they like it.

Twin A has spent most of this summer at his bio brothers house, who is 18
months older. I got an email from the brother this morning, telling me that my
son was stoned nearly the entire time, stole money, prescription pills and
other items from them, and was shooting up morphine from one of the local drug
dealers, along with taking any other drug he could get his hands on.

When he was confronted and asked WHY, it was the usual…he LIKED IT. He states
he doesn't care about his life, he doesn't care about anything, he just wants
to get high. Doesn't care if he dies. Doesn't care if he steals. Doesn't care
who it hurts.

Told the bio brother we had beat him up and abused him, we didn't love him,
his family life was crap, etc, and he had to get high to cope with it all.

I sat there, shocked and stunned and too hurt to even cry. I don't know why I
am surprised at what he accused us of, or why I am shocked he is shooting up
morphine. I should be used to this. I keep trying to make myself immune to it
all, but I'm failing.

I expect the same from Twin B when he gets out on parole in 6 weeks. He will
last only so long, and then it will be drugs as usual. We have to drive ten
hours this weekend to pick up Twin A, they want him out of their house. Can't
blame them, can you?

My husband doesn't want him back in OUR house. The bio brother lives out in
the country, so its not like Twin A can get anywhere. He has no money, no car,
no training, no friends, and no skills to survive. He's sick with bronchitis
because we live in the mid South, and he is up north, where its cold, and he
isn't used to it.

It is so easy for people to say, "Leave him there." "Let him live on the
streets!"

Letting him starve or freeze to death won't solve his addiction…well, if you
wish to be macabre, I guess it would,wouldn't it? We won't go there tonight…

As I see it,our only option at this point is to bring him home, drive him an
additional 90 minutes further south where we used to live, drop him in the
local fleabag/drug motel where all the loser drug addicts end up, and say to
him, "Call us when you're serious about getting clean."

It's a nasty place. Meth cooks are always being busted there, windows are
painted shut, rusty pipes drip in the bathroom, mattresses are stained and
saggy, and dirty, skinny druggies are roaming around outside.

Sure don't want my beautiful son in that place…every cell in my body is in
full NO mode, my Mommy Radar is at full blast. But I know I can't bring him
home…when he wants drugs badly enough, he'll steal, and I know way too many
cops as it is.

Guess I came here tonight to see how the rest of you manage with an addicted
kid. How you survive it. How you go on breathing, with the stress and worry
eating your guts out.

I need to read how all of you go on, and maybe have a life of some sort, cuz I
tell you right now, I am just as addicted to my sons drug-fueled lives, as
they are addicted to their drugs.

I can't seem to escape it, either…I try…doesn't work. I'm overdosing, and have
been for a long time, on guilt, fear, remorse, stress, worry, heartbreak and
oh, tons of other ulcer creating emotions.

I don't sleep, because I've been listening for the past 9 years. Listening for
doors opening at 3am, for knocks at the door by police officers, or listening
at their door, to see if they're still breathing.

We don't go on vacation, because a lot of places like Florida have really bad
jails and prisons, and what if the boys get picked up there? We can't go on
vacation and leave them at home, cuz their concoctions could blow the house
up, or they'd steal everything, or they'd overdose and we wouldn't be able to
get to them in time.

We didn't have friends in our last neighborhood, because its hard to
fraternize with people when your kids have broken into their garage or car. We
don't have many friends, period, now that I think about it.  
No one wants to come over to the house of a pair of drug addicts and sit down
for a cup of tea and a chat with their mother. It makes them nervous.

We don't dare take them to visit family for holidays, weddings, graduations,
etc, because no one will be able to put a pocketbook or suit jacket down, for
fear the boys will steal. And they do steal. Even if its from their cousins or
Grandma.

No one in the family actually asks how they are doing anymore, anyway…if
someone does,its usually, "Are they still alive? Oh,they are? Wow."

We don't make plans for Christmas or even set up a tree until the night
before, because usually, one of them is in the hospital, the psych ward, or in
jail… and it's really depressing to see those gifts unopened under the tree,
when you know the guards or attendants won't allow them through security.

I don't have nice jewelry anymore. Twin A kept stealing it and hocked it, and
its just stupid to keep prowling through pawn shops trying to buy back your
own stuff after awhile.

Living a drug addicted life is horrible for both our sons. Twin A struggles
terribly with depression on those rare sober occasions, when he gets too close
to Deaths Door, and realizes we pulled him back in the nick of time. He knows
he is headed towards destruction, he's running full tilt towards it, he
practically embraces Death and offers himself to it constantly…but then he
hollers for help, and one of these days, it's going to be too late. We all see
it coming, as does he…yet, he will not STOP, neither one of them will stop.

Okay, had to take a break to cry it out once more, blow my nose and mop up.
Please realize how all of you help by sharing these episodes of your lives for
people like me to read.  
I've felt so alone for so many years…I cried reading about your pain here, but
at least I'm not alone anymore…I'm still lost, but I don't feel alone…thank
you, thank you all for being here…

Reply

  * ![Dr Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr Mary Ellen Barnes

October 2nd, 2012 at 11:19 AM

Cynthia:  
Neither one of your twins are going to stop using but it isn't just because
they are addicts, it is because they are seriously mentally ill. Your story
sounds very much like the stories I hear from people with seriously mentally
ill adult children without the addition of the alcohol and drugs. If the
mental illness cannot be successfully managed, there isn't much hope that the
drugs and alcohol problems can be either. I am so sorry you are having to live
this and I am so sorry your boys are so ill.

Reply

  * ![Laurie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laurie

October 3rd, 2012 at 3:02 PM

Need some advise on where to start.

My daughter is 30 years old and has three children ages 12, 9 and 5. She is
addicted to smoking Oxycontin and takes whatever prescription drugs she can
get by hospital hopping. She is also dealing drugs I believe. She doesn't
work, she sleeps on my couch all day long. She claims she has several medical
issues that prevent her from working. Everyday it's something new. Chrohns
disease, Fibromyalgia, various female issues, thyroid…you name it.

She ignores her kids. If it wasn't for me they wouldn't eat half the time,
wouldn't have help with schoolwork, no school supplies, clothes, Christmas
etc. She will not admit she has a problem but when she gets even the smallest
amount of money it goes towards drugs. She has pawned the kid's electronic
toys I bought them. I know she smokes the drugs in my house, I've found the
foil and tubes she uses and I often can smell the odor. When I confront her
she blames someone else.

The 12 year old knows what's going on. He tells me what she does. My question
is where do I start? I need help getting her out of my house and getting help
for her even though she doesn't want it. She does not have insurance and I
can't afford to pay for treatment so what options are available? I've talked
to the local sheriff and they were less than helpful. I can call Child
Protective Services but they will see the kids are taken care of by me and
possibly wouldn't do anything. One other issue is that I work full time and
travel for work often so I could not keep the kids if she was out of the
picture. The 5 year old's dad would take her but the older kids dad probably
would not take them.

Can someone give me advise on where to start? I am in Washington State.

Thanks.

Reply

  * ![Dr Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr Mary Ellen Barnes

October 4th, 2012 at 8:41 AM

Laurie:  
Those little kids deserve better than this. Your daughter is a danger to them.
They should be removed from the house since you don't want to/can't care for
them on your own. Somehow, you are under the illusion that any
drunk/high/comtose adult in the house is better than none, but you have to see
that your daughter is totally unable to care for her kids, nor does she want
to. Granted they are in school during much of the day, but she is still
endangering them. How would you feel if because of her neglect, one of them
died?

I would start by calling child protective services and telling them what you
have told us on this blog. The 5 yr old will be placed with her dad and the
others will be placed elsewhere, but at least they would be safer than they
are now.

Then I would kick your daughter out of your house and change the locks. Get a
restaining order if you need to.

She is not going to change. She has a free place to live and you to raise her
kids. What's not to like about that?

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

October 4th, 2012 at 5:12 PM

Mary Ellen, hello there, and thank you for the response. My husband and I (who
is also a physician) have been told so many things over the years, its a
wonder we aren't crazy, for lack of a better term.

Yes, there is definite mentlal illness. Twin A has never been officially
diagnosed, becasue when he is in psych, they zonk him out on drugs for 48
hours, he wakes up by Day Three, and at 72 hours, they release him. They
always label it as Polysubstance Abuse.

No one in a medical setting EVER sees him pacing and prowling for the weeks
leading up to a crash, where he accuses us of trying to kill him…they insist
it is drug abuse. Well, he did this IN jail as well, with NO access to drugs
or alcohol, but the guards are not doctors, so there is never proof.

His brother gets out in a few weeks, and we are frankly terrified of what will
happen with both of them together.

Time after time, they end up in front of a judge who points a finger and says,
"Drug addicts! That's all you two are," and off they go for more time behind
bars. Twin B told me, "Mom, you wouldn't believe how many people in here are
screwed up in their heads," and he is right. Jail has become the dumping
ground for the mentally ill.

I've read several times that a lot of addicts "age out" of their addictions
after a time…but I cannot find any statistics on what happens to drug addicted
mentally ill adults after a time, unless there aren't stats because the
majority of them are dead…

There may not be much hope for my twins, but it still helps me to read the
stories here…I keep trying to see if I can pick up any ideas, treatments,or
programs…I'm reading now about the European approach to addiction, harm
reduction, versus the harsher American system of harm induction.

Everyone in the family is telling us to "Cut them loose, let them make it on
their own! You've done enough for them! It's time they grew up and acted their
age!" It sounds so sensible…but how do you cut loose a 22 year old that every
3-4 months is following you in lockstep, 24/7, asking you to make sure his
heart is still beating? Who slices himself up on occasion to see if his blood
flows, thereby giving him proof(in his head) he is still alive?

How do you tell THAT to grow up? How does a parent close a door in that face
and say, "Lotsa luck!"

So, guess I need to come to some sort of realization, that they may NEVER get
better? Because both of them think they are fine, naturally, and its the rest
of us that are messed up…they won't take medication, instead they self
medicate with drugs and alcohol…so maybe its not an addiction, but its self
medicating, and the courts and all of us( my husband, myself and the family)
are not seeing it for what it is?

Reply

  * ![Dr Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr Mary Ellen Barnes

October 5th, 2012 at 10:31 AM

Cynthia:  
I work with alcoholics all day every day and I have for years. Many of them
come with all sorts of "co-occuring disorders" that they have been diagnosed
with along the way. None are as severe as you describe your boys, but they
have issues, nonetheless. When these people sober up and stay sober, 90% of
these co-occuring disorders go away because it was the alcohol and drugs that
caused or seriously exaccerbated the problems. So that may be where so many of
the courts, etc., are coming from.

In our society,the bias is to treat the substance abuse first, then the mental
illness because you just can't tell which is which when people are actively
using. Of course, one of the problems is that it is hard to get a mentally ill
person to quit because they are using the drugs/alcohol to medicate their
mental illness.

One of the biggest problems I see with people who are both seriously mentally
ill and drug abusers is that nobody wants to help first - the police don't
want to help, and the mental health people say they need to clean up the
substance abuse before they can help them. That leaves people like you and
your husband in dire straights. Reading your email, I have no doubt that your
boys have serious mental illnesses. I have 2 male cousins with schizophenia
and if you take the drugs/alcohol out of your description, it is them,
completely. Their families are stressed and exhausted and scared.

It is nearly impossible for a loving, caring parent to just walk away from
their children, whether it is drugs or mental illness. Our society seems
unable or unwilling to help young adults with serious mental illness. We
usually wait until they break the law and then jail them instead of treat
them. And you can't make them get treatment, as you well know. So, yes, you
need to come to the realization that they may never get well. That there is a
real limit to what you are able to do for them and find some peace with it. I
am sorry you have to go through this, I am sorry your boys have to go through
this, too. I wish there was some real help available to all of you.

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

October 5th, 2012 at 12:28 PM

This is going to sound so odd, but reading your thoughts on it is somehow
making more sense to me than anyone else has over the years, Mary Ellen. Why
is that? Maybe its because you do have relatives and have experienced this, or
maybe its because you're a total stranger, and not one of the people the twins
have victimized, and can see it objectively.

I cannot even see this issue objectively anymore, none of us can…we're too
immersed in it. We're all apprehensive to have them in our home for any length
of time from the drug use, stealing, or police appearances at our door…yet,
we're all very scared when they're on their own, because nobody wants to
chance having to stand next to a pair of caskets.

You're right, there is no happy ending to this, as it stands. Yes, we must as
a family realize no matter what their actions, they did not ask for their for
mental illness…maybe we should be the ones in therapy. I don't know, I have no
good answers or solutions to this.

A foremr neighbor, whose garage they broke into, looking for alcohol, summed
it up this way a few years ago…he said, "I see these kind of guys every day of
my life. They don't get better…and you'll kill yourself trying to make them
better. You need to face what they are and where they're ultimately
headed…right into the ground."

I thought him cruel and callous at the time, and said so. I'm thinking now he
was right. It may be an intensely personal issue for our family, we love the
boys…but to almost everyone else, they're a train wreck waiting to happen, and
people don't want to get hurt by the debris.

Guess the rest of the family is going to have to sit down together at some
point and make some sort of plan or preparation, in case the unthinkable
occurs…and just go on from there. Thank you SO MUCH, for your imput, and for
listening…

Reply

  * ![Tracey](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracey

October 8th, 2012 at 11:37 AM

My 34 year old daughter has been drinking alot in the past few years. I didn't
know how much until she stayed with me for about 9 months earlier this year. I
asked her and her kids (13 and 15) to leave my apartment because of the abuse
and disrespect all three of them brought to my home, and I found 6-8 empty
fifths of vodka after she left. They then stayed with my parents, but after
three weeks, the situation became intolerable and physical threats were made
by the son to my 75+ year old parents, and they were asked to leave there,
too. About the same number of empty fifths of vodka were found in her room
after they left.  
My daughter is a drunk and her kids are angry at everyone except her, making
it impossible to help any of them. I have tried everything to turn around the
situation, and have failed miserably. The kids' father is somewhere around,
but isn't involved in their lives, though several months ago, he threatened to
take them. I hope he will and I will continue to try to find him.  
The three of them have been sharing a house for several months with a lifelong
friend of my daughter's, but she moved out last week ("I just cannot take it
anymore" – she experienced the same treatment as the rest of us.)  
Now the rent cannot be paid, there is no food in the house, and things are as
desperate as you might imagine. I am bringing dinner and some groceries
tonite. Paying her bills for the past few months has me on the very edge of
financial disaster myself, so I cannot help much and I am heartbroken that
things have come to this. Do you have any suggestions to help my aching heart?

Reply

  * ![Dr Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr Mary Ellen Barnes

October 8th, 2012 at 1:45 PM

Stop paying her bills, stop bring food over. Call Child Protective Service to
have the kids removed and let them find "Dad" so you don't have to. Your
daughter is a danger to her kids, she should not have them.

Of course you are heartbroken, any mother would be, but she in an adult and
she is making choices about how shw wants to live. You don't have to support
those choices. If you remember that she could get help, she could choose
differently, then it will be easier for you to disengage from her.

I understand that you are heartbroken over the life your daughter is choosing,
but there truly isn't anything you can do to "make" her change.

Reply

  * ![Leslie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Leslie

October 27th, 2012 at 4:14 AM

I want to write a few things about addiction. I have 2 addict siblings. I also
raised 2 daughters. One is successful and the other is an addict.  
There is no formula in raising non addict children.  
My daughters attended church, were honor roll students, creative, artistic,
nice kids. Its the choices they made as adults. One was stable, went to
school, got married, went to work everyday.  
the other partied , drank and drugged, worked in strip bars and married an
addict, who killed himself.  
I have beat myself up trying to figure it out, where did I go wrong? what did
I do??  
I stopped doing that. My addict daughter chose at 20 yrs old to work in
unsavory places. hang with low life people, scam the government, insult her
family , etc…  
She is now 35 yrs old. Getting off drugs, working in a strip bar. I have been
raising her 2 kids for a year. She does not speak to any of the family because
we all told her to clean up her act.  
She didnt like that.  
Some people choose to live this way because its fun, its easy, less
responsibility.  
Its hard to wake up every day and get to work on time and get kids off to
school and go grocery shopping on your day off, save money, pay car insurance.
Its easy to day heck with it, get high and get a bridge card. Go on
assistance. Exchange food for cash. Its a lifestyle.  
I also want to say something about the Psych field. Not all addicts are BI
Polar. I see that as a new trend. Some addicts are just plain…lazy.

Reply

  * ![Jane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jane

December 5th, 2012 at 12:48 PM

I have a wonderful Son who has grown up in a very loving, supporting home. Was
a wonderful student, College graduate, athlete, etc.Had a bad relationship in
high school with a young lady. This is where I believe his problem started.
Although well hid from us his parents, we by the way do not drink, nor do any
of our family memembers. He was a normal teenager, would party on occasion but
nothing out of the normal. UNTIL we recently found out at the age of 27 our
wonderful, educated, successful SON is a alcoholic. He recently has lost his
job, has a DUI, an OWI, and a reckless driving charge all within 1 month. He
did enter a 30day re-hab only to get out and the very same night drink himself
a 5th of Vodka. I am so upset, can't eat, can't think, can't do anything but
worry about his future and his life in general. What do you do when everthing
you've done that you though was right as a parent, support your child in
everything, taken them to church, helped them find a home, a career, kissed
them, held them, loved them and turns out to have failed you. I have no idea
where to turn to help him! Please help!

Reply

  * ![Lara](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lara

December 11th, 2012 at 3:17 AM

In response to #6 Carol McAnn of educating our children at a young age and
such "but it can be minimized by family members who educate their children to
the propensity to addiciton in the family by such actions as telling them
about relatives, not having alcohol use as a centerpiece of family gatherings,
seeing family members who have successfully participated in recovery. The
other significant factor in predisposing a person to an addiciton (which could
be something other than drugs or alcohol) would be a sense of emptiness and
the feeling that the significant people in their lives (particularly parents)
cannot be counted on. This begins in infancy. No parent can meet their child’s
expectation 100% of the time! (To paraphrase Donald Winnicott, a pediatrician
who became a psychoanalyst, one just has to be a “good enough” parent.) But
the child must have the general sense that their cries (signifying wants &
needs) will be heard and responded to in usually meaningful manner. This
acknowledgement & sense that the world can be trusted expands to being
supported and loved for what the child is, not what the parent thinks they
should be; for example, allowing the child to explore playing a musical
instrument (if that’s what they express interest in) instead of insisting that
they play sports.  
My husband and I did all of those things. I chose to be a stay at home mom,
became very involved in their activities, not a helicopter parent but helpful.
We let them explore what they were interested in etc., etc. and are now having
to cope with an adult addict. He chooses to steal my prescription drugs when
he comes for a visit. (I have been hiding them for years but he always seems
to find them.) I now lock them in a safe.  
I have gone months with no contact thinking that would help but no.  
This year we banned him from Thanksgiving and are finally discussing on
whether to have any contact with him at all.  
We do not give him money as he has a very good career.  
However we are awaiting the day when we get the news that something happens
and that will be gone.  
Anyway I believe it is a choice. Just as choosing to have an affair is a
choice. It is behavior. It is an act you can choose to say no to. One can
choose to be selfish or one can choose to place others higher than themselves.  
It is an act of pure selfishness. One must always deny themselves whether it
be drugs, alcohol, affairs, stealing, lying etc.  
It is painful to watch a loved one destroy themselves and their relationships
but the sooner you realize they have to make the choice to quit and you can do
nothing but be there for them when they finally hit rock bottom will you have
peace.

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

December 13th, 2012 at 8:59 AM

I have a 22 yr. old daughter who I have been enabling for a while now. We now
have guardianship of her special needs son.He has cerebral palsy and is one
neat kid! I have fallen for all of her stories and some I have just humored
myself I think??? It is Christmas time now and I have to keep her son away
because of her drug use. Why am I the one feeling guilty??? I had a problem
years ago and I am using guilt to keep her habit. It doesn't make much
difference but she is shooting and I never went there! Some of the drugs she
is shooting I have never even heard of! I am so scared for the phone to ring
and me not have done anything besides type this that it is making me ill and
sleepless nights

Reply

  * ![mary](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### mary

December 27th, 2012 at 8:39 AM

My son is 34, and I have experienced every kind of rehab you can think of;
from the $$$ ones to the state mandated. I have not only enabled with fresh
starts, but chased him down in cities far away with the local police, etc. to
be certain he wasn't dead. He is back home now, (not at home) but recently in
a residential facility that has a transition program from inhouse to living in
the community. I have had problems with social service agencies after I'd
detoxed him, who told me the only way he could get public assistance is if he
was drunk. She actually told me to get him something to drink. Fortunately I
called a state board to report that….then I had a doctor who prescribed huge
amounts of Aterol to deal with my son's "ADD" problems. Nowhere did anyone
deal with the fact that he dual doses on ephedrine and alcohol. Ephedrine can
be easily had at the drug store with a signature, any doper can get blister
packs of Pseuda Fed by asking random people to sign for it. He ended up after
taking (regularly) 180 pills at a time…the fact that he isn't dead is amazing.
After much searching and locating I found a program with "so called" sober
living component -- finally got a call from the hospital that he had been med
vacked near death. I would also like to add that prior to this my son did mess
up his sober living and accepted the consequences..he had to move out for 3
days before the house would vote to accept him back. During that time his AA
sponsor got him a flop house to live in -IF he would agree to work 10 hour
days for a moving company under the table and then was given a bed in a
storage facility.

My reasons for going into all this detail are this: be very selective, someone
should have a cheat sheet of every program you find for a rehab facility;
unfortunately there are now real estate companies that buy and rent out sober
living with no programs rules or consequences attached.

finally - I had to section my son, and had the court release him to me over
three separate trial dates. In that time, due to the fact that he almost died
on the med vack, he was put into an outpatient program until a public health
bed was foudn in a "decent" facility. Dependent on your state, and if your
financial resources are drained - you do have an option as to which state
facility a program is available. He is now "fathered" by the courts, with a
job, drug tested and ok so far. This doesn't mean the end, it's still under a
year….but my point is, a parent needs to find a way to show love, but not
enable. THERE ARE FEW IF ANY RESOURCES FOR THAT KIND OF HELP.

Reply

  * ![Mike](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mike

January 24th, 2013 at 9:51 AM

I've spent the last two hours reading posts on this blog from people who are
experiencing the same sort of issues my wife and I have been dealing with for
the past several years. I thought that I was all cried out. Reading these
posts have brought it all back home for me.  
I am 54 years old. My wife is 55. We married 15 years ago. Both had been
married previously and had children. I have a son,32. And a daughter, 28. My
wife's daughter is 26. I long ago stopped thinking of my wife's daughter as my
"step" daughter. She is as much my child as the other two. When my wife and I
met, she had been divorced from her daughters father for about a year. He was
in the Navy and had an affair with a woman in a city he was briefly stationed
in while going to school. At the time, my wife was willing to overlook his
transgressions and have him return to their marriage but he chose not to do
that. He left his wife and daughter for the other woman. My wife has described
the night he left as a night of screaming and crying as her child watched her
father leave. She has always felt guilty that her child was traumatized in
such a way and has always tried to compensate for this by giving her daughter
"everything". She had a good job and made a pretty good living and so, was
able to afford to give her whatever she wanted. I, on the other hand, had been
a single parent since my kids where 5yrs and 18 months old. I made enough
money for us to survive, and they always had everything they needed, but there
simply wasn't money for frivolous things. In other words, they had grown up
with a different mindset.  
Here is where our lives turned south. Throughout my youngest daughters teenage
years we had problems. Acting out at school, running away, hanging with people
who we knew where trouble. All along my wife blamed her ex husband for all of
her daughters issues. All along she coddled her and blamed herself. She
continued to do everything for her. She allowed her to drop out of school in
the 8th grade. Her reasoning was that the daughter didn't like school and
would just skip class anyway so why send her? She would do home schooling
instead. You can just imagine what a disaster that turned out to be.  
About 8 years ago, my wife came to me to tell me that my daughter was
pregnant. I didn't meet the father of my grand daughter until the day she was
born. Apparently, and with good reason, he was afraid to show his face around
me. After the baby was born, we let the three of them come live in our house.
I didn't like him, but he had a job and appeared to on his way to being able
to take care of my daughter and new grandchild. When my grand daughter was
about a year old, they moved into their own place. We helped them with the
rent, groceries, and a car. For about two years it looked like they where
going to make it. Then he lost his job. As they moved back into our house, she
informed us that she was pregnant again. Fast forward two years. They were
still living in our house, now with two daughters, neither working. Just
laying around doing nothing. He would work a nothing job for a week or two,
but nothing ever substantial. We just thought they were lazy. We didn't know,
or just refused to believe, that drugs had anything to do with their
situation. As it turns out, we where so wrong.  
Finally, he got and held a job for awhile. They decided to move out. They
entered a "rent to own" contract on a mobile home in a park not too far from
us. For a year they lived away and seemingly where doing ok. The girls would
come stay with us most every weekend. We still helped them when they needed
it. We had always paid their car payment, insurance and cell phone bill. I
didn't like it, but my wife rationalized it by saying that the money used to
pay for those things was the money she received in alimony so it wasn't really
"our" money anyway. I learned long ago that it is best in life to choose your
battles carefully and that was not one that I chose to fight. I rationalized
it in my own mind by thinking that I should do everything I can to help
provide for my grandchildren.  
We learned while they were living away that my son in law had once again lost
his job and was not only taking pills regularly, he had become the "go to" guy
for whatever any junky/user/addict could possibly want. We stopped paying the
rent. Within 60 day's, they were evicted. We told them that we would take the
children, but they were not going to come back to live in our house. Instead,
they moved into his parents house. Whenever we got to see the girls, they were
always dirty, hair a mess, and unhappy. We have since learned that he was not
only supplying most of the community we live in with pills, he was supplying
his own mother too. The father was there, but is really just a mouse of a man
and apparently, in that family at least, the mother rules the roost.
Eventually, my son in law was arrested for counterfeiting. He went to jail for
4 months. During that time, my daughter and grand daughters came back to stay
with us.Also during that time,a third grand daughter was born. This is when we
found out that my daughter was also addicted to oxy's. She entered a drug
rehab program mandated by the county. My little grand daughter had to stay in
the hospital for two weeks after birth to detox. My daughter seemed to be
making strides to improve her life. She became again a loving, caring mother.
The change in her was incredible. Then, her husband got out of jail. They went
back to live at his parents. The kids were sick all the time. We felt the only
way we could protect the kids was if they stayed with us. We asked them to
come back home.  
They moved back in in October. In early December, they had been fighting
regularly and she asked him to leave. He did. We thought at the time that she
was still clean. Turns out we were very, very wrong.  
A week and a half before Christmas, I got a call from my daughter. She had
taken the girls to spend the weekend with their father and after dropping the
girls off, had run out of gas. She asked me to bring her some gas. This was
around 10:30 on a Friday night. I grabbed the gas can and went to where she
had told me she would be. When I pulled up to the car, the headlights where on
but I couldn't see her in the car. I walked up to the car and found her passed
out, laying across the front seat. I opened the door, woke her up, and
escorted her to my truck. I locked up the car and left it on the side of the
road. We had driven about 5 miles before she realized that she wasn't in her
car anymore.  
The next day I contacted the same county run rehab organization that she had
been through before. They agreed to try to help her. They said the first step
was detox. They told me to bring her to the facility on Monday morning
prepared to stay for 5 to 10 days. She agreed to do that knowing that the kids
were with us and would be well taken care of. When we got there, they told us
that they did not have Inpatient facilities there, we would have to take her
into Jacksonville to a facility know as The Gateway Center. I had heard horror
stories about this center before, but nothing had prepared me for what I
actually saw. It looked more like a prison than a hospital. Downtown in a
"urban" area of town. It nearly killed me to leave my child in this place. But
I thought that they would help her. I talked to the people running the place,
and they assured me that she would be safe. Her admission was voluntary, so
they couldn't "make" her stay. But they assured me that they could help her
detox safely with medical supervision. I hugged her and told her she would be
ok. My heart was breaking as I walked out the door without her. I sat in the
parking lot for an hour wondering if I had done the right thing. Finally, I
pulled out and went on about my day. Within an hour, my phone rang. She had
checked herself out. I went back and picked her up. I took her home and she
spent the next week detoxing in my house. She suffered a lot. It was rough. We
knew we had to be strong to get her through this. She begged for us to let her
get some pills. Finally, she woke up. We talked. We listened. We thought she
had turned a corner. We asked her father, now living about 6 hours away, to
let her come spend Christmas at his house, thinking that if she got away from
the local influences, she would have a better chance to make this stick. She
stayed for a week. When he brought her home she seemed like a different
person. Bright faced and smiling all the time. We talked about the
opportunities she had before her. She seemed to relish the future. We thought
we had made it. Unfortunately, that wasn't to be the case.  
Three weeks ago, we discovered that she had stolen about $80 from her mothers
purse. When confronted, she admitted that she had used the money to buy pills.
We took her car away from her. Of course, being high, she got angry and called
one of her friends to come get her. She took the girls and vanished. We
changed all the locks on the house but found evidence that she was still
breaking into the house while we were at work. We finally learned that she was
back in her husbands parents house. Apparently they had no money and no one to
steal it from so they were not into the pills at the moment.  
Two day's ago, she showed up at our front door with the girls. We let them in.
Yesterday, we allowed her to use the car to take my oldest grand daughter to
the doctor. She was gone for 8 hours. When she got home, she appeared to be
sober. But to be honest, I'm not sure I can tell anymore.  
She has lied to us so much that I don't trust anything she say's. She has
stolen all of my wife's jewelry, my tools, golf clubs, basically anything of
value. I have purchased back all of the jewelry she stole from her
Grandmother. I am on first name basis with most of the pawn shops within 10
miles of my house. I just don't know what to do. We love our daughter. More
importantly, we love those grand daughters more than life itself. we live in
Florida and my understanding is that grandparents have no parental rights in
Florida. At this point, my only concern is for those little girls. We have
cried so much that we've become numb to the pain she causes.  
I want to cut her off completely, but what about the girls? How do I take care
of them? Do I have any legal options? We are financially ruined. We have
nothing that we have worked for all of our lives. We just don't know what to
do. Any help would be appreciated. I am sorry for ranting on so long. To be
honest, it feels good just to get it off my chest.

Reply

  * ![JD](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### JD

January 28th, 2013 at 4:45 AM

Hi Mike,

Just let me say ditto. Our grandchild is in FL and we know we have no rights.
My only suggestion is to hotline your daughter and fingers crossed the state
will take the girls from her. You can tell the child protective services
everything you stated here and fingers crossed they will place the girls with
you. IF they take the case your daughter will have a service plan with the
intent to reunite. It does not always work. IF there is a case to open ask
that they assign a Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA) to represent the
girls best interest. Money is tight in all the states but keep pushing. We
will be in FL in May to close up the apartment we have paid for almost a year.
I am not sure if they have BILY in FL. Google it. You and your wife can and
will regain some sanity. Prayer for all of you. It is heartbreaking. All the
best.

Reply

  * ![jean](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### jean

February 5th, 2013 at 5:58 PM

I have read this blog many times over the years and it has often helped me as
I am experiencing many of the same things. My 25 yr old son who I love dearly
is addicted to hash and God know's what else. (he only admits to hash and
calls it his medicine). He has been living on the the streets for almost 2
yrs.

My husband and I (not his father) recently moved to the state where he has
been and I felt the need to try and help him get a place to live. I wanted to
help him get a new start but but what I am seeing is that all he really wants
is to live his life on his terms and not have to do anything. He has warrants
for his arrest in another state so he feels as though he can not get a job or
a driver license. He has an excuse for why he always needs more money and the
stress of this situation is making me sick. I want so bad just to move back
across the country to be far removed from this situation. When he doesn't get
what he wants he flies into rage and begins making all kinds of threats and
insults.  
Everyone keeps telling me to just cut him off but I feel as though I need to
try just a little longer and give him the tools to possibly turn things
around. I know I sound foolish but I feel so guilty if I don't. Does anyone
know if there are any type of support groups for parents of young adults like
this? Any help would be appreciated.

Reply

  * ![JD](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### JD

February 7th, 2013 at 5:28 AM

To Jean #427,

If you have BILY (Because I Love You) in your state it is a parent support
group for our kind of children. Many parents have adult children with multiple
problems. If not in your state you can still go to their website and find many
resources. We attended a BILY group for 5 years. You cannot change your son,
but you can change how you respond. We were able to regain some of our sanity,
learn our situation is not as bad as some and worse than others. All the
parents are in the same boat. After many years of counselors, therapists,
rehab, doctors etc, it was this group that help us the most. While our
situations break our hearts it is comforting to know we are not alone. All the
best.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

March 5th, 2013 at 2:53 PM

I suppose I don't belong commenting on this page as my daughter's addictions
(so far) are limited to food, relationships and spending money but like most
parents of adult children with addiction I am looking for solace from others
who know the pain that addictions of any kind can cause a family. The hope we
felt raising these golden children too soon replaced with despair and
desperation at the futility of trying to save them from themselves. Marriages
ruined; siblings who didn't get the attention and love they deserved because
all energy and resources were gobbled up by the addict; the years taken off
our own lives due to the stress and drama these children create. The lies and
the stealing never seems to end. The threats of suicide to manipulate and
create drama as an excuse to keep abusing. I know that she will most likely
become addicted to alcohol, drugs and/or sex as these addiction personalities
know no bounds. I know that someday I might lose her to her addictions…this
golden child with God given talents and abilities she has chosen to throw away
for a life of dependency and waste. For those of you lucky enough to have a
spouse who supported and presented a united front with you…consider yourself
blessed. My fractured marriage and damaged relationship with my other daughter
is the gift my addicted child has left for me

Reply

  * ![Victoria](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Victoria

March 13th, 2013 at 10:12 PM

My heart breaks reading all your stories. Many sound so familiar- beautiful
child with a promising future. A close relationship that seems unbreakable…and
then addiction hits and life as we knew it, is gone. No certainty if it will
ever be the same and in the mean time, we have to love and deal with our child
who we don't even know anymore, but get occasional glimpses as to who they are
underneath all the chemicals. It doesn't matter if the doc is alcohol,
opiates, speed, the behavior is the same- dishonest, selfish, superficial, and
delusional. Through it all, we have to remember- we were not put on this earth
to be a door mat for our child. Through the pain and uncertainty, we need a
life of our own, where we remember what it is like to feel joy, regardless,
and love ourselves enough to remember who we were before this all started and
refuse to let their disease turn us into someone we don't even know anymore.
It's a roller coaster ride for sure. But lean on your faith and start taking
care of you. Because you deserve it. You've been through enough.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

March 22nd, 2013 at 1:00 AM

Victoria…  
I'm going to reread your comment most of this sleepless night. I've been
writing on this thread for years the story only getting worse & worse.
Sometimes I wrote that I bought his lies or that his manipulations worked…at
least for a little while.

I finally chose Me. I decided to save my marriage and my relationship with my
other 3 kids and tend to my dying mom. I decided to move on with our plans of
building our empty nest house where I will plant a big, beautiful organic
garden to celebrate life and beginnings instead of pain, disease, darkness and
the specter of death.

I want joy and happiness again. I want my husband and I to be those snowbirds
in a few years when he retires. I want to be that spry & sassy older couple
sharing a golf cart and moonlit walks on the beach. I want the tears to stop,
my chest to stop hurting, my blood pressure to normalize, my sense of
suffocation to cease. He can only keep me in this box as long as I let him &
he no longer has my permission. I want the constant looping images of my
beautiful tow-headed, blue-eyed little boy to stop but I don't want the more
recent images of the vacant, glassy, snarling & stumbling monster that he's
become to take their place.

He was arrested again a couple of days ago..open warrant OWI and something
new…Armed Robbery. No details yet…just his frantic collect calls from county
lock-up " Please post my bond..they are so terrible to me here…I will pay you
back…" Tearful, pleading, lying (I found out about the Armed Robbery charge
myself)…he will leave me holding the bag for the bond money-$5000 if he
absconds…which he will, done it every time.

I am so scared..the pain is unbearable. He was just back in our home for a
month to "start over" and we had his brother take him around to the courts to
clear up charges (which were still all misdemeanor). We had to kick him out
again when we found 45 Vodka bottles in our home & he was stealing from all of
us, fighting, threatening. My daughter is terrified of him. This is a new
phase, an escalation. I heard he faked a suicide attempt in jail..he did this
at home & college too.

He has been diagnosed with many things. Bi-polar, ADHD, High-IQ, Learning
Disabilities, OCD, Generalized Anxiety, Depression. The one that makes the
most sense is Cluster B Disorders..a cocktail of Borderline Personality with
Narcisstic and Sociopathic Components. He has been hospitalized 17 times the
last three years, he thinks the psych ward or Chem Dependency Units are
homeless shelters.

People around me are telling me to relax, at least now I'll know where he is,
and he will have a bed and food. I'm not there yet…I tried to help him so many
times..We can't afford a lawyer for this..he would never work, 26 and never
really had a job…but all I've been for years is his "victim", his "mark" …I
hope I remember how to just be me. We all deserve better ….

Reply

  * ![Maggie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Maggie

May 11th, 2013 at 11:12 AM

I have a 40 yr old daughter with three children 20, 17,11. She has recruited
the oldest to be her enabler and the girls have to stay with her as their
father is an Alcoholic. We have enabled her for 25 years hoping she would
change and she did for awhile but always went back to the seedy people and
booze and drugs. She has a bum living in her home that we own with her two
girls and I am afraid. I need help.

Reply

  * ![Dr. Ed Wilson](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/edward-wilson.jpg)

### Dr. Ed Wilson

May 11th, 2013 at 2:02 PM

I'm sorry to read about your plight and the common problem so manmy of us
face. But the problem is that your daughter continues to be rewarded for her
irresponsibilty and behaviors. Why would she change when she has successfully
trained both her parents and now her children to reward her for her chosen
life-style?

That's always the major difficulty - getting everyone to stop rrewarding the
drinking, drugging, and whatever else.

That means getting everyone on the same playbook, the same page, and sticking
together.

That may not change your daughter's behsaviopr, but it will stop encouraging
another generation to either follow or support her example.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

May 14th, 2013 at 10:35 PM

I am so glad I have found this website…I had no idea there were so many of us
going thru the similar heart breaking issues. In most of the comments I've
read it would be just a matter of changing the name of the adult child to our
own son/daughter's name. My daughter is 22 and will turn 23 at the end of May.
She is an alcoholic and a drug addict and is not interested in going into
rehab…she says she can give up drinking and doing drugs without help from
anyone.

I have been on stress leave from work for the last 2 months. It was just
terrible breaking down in tears in front of some of my co-workers, running out
because she needed gas for her car, or paying one of those cash & dash places
that were hounding her for money. I have paid $400 monthly cell phone bills,
I've also been paying her $500 monthly car insurance. I have no jewellery
left. It has been stolen and sold for money to support her habits.

I thought she had been doing better the last few weeks but tonight I've
figured out that she's been playing me for a fool once again. I am so tired of
the sleepless nights with the phone under my pillow just waiting for "the
terrible phone call". There is so much more but I will stop for now.

Reply

  * ![shirley](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### shirley

May 17th, 2013 at 11:15 PM

I am one of you. My daughter is 30, an only child and she hates me.  
I have enabled her. I always have. What on earth am I going to do? I am at the
age of 60 trying to hold on to my house and I have just got a new job while
supporting her. Nothing is helping our relationship now. She just takes the
money for beer and ? I reluctantly give her money because she wants it . (
usually after yelling and screaming and bullying ) I am beaten down and only
trying to survive. She has stolen from me and now frankly I am worried that
she will steal more. She has no profession and has just been let go from her
job. I feel so alone it is killing me.

Reply

  * ![Teri](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Teri

June 21st, 2013 at 7:35 AM

I also am the mother of an only child, son 31. It is so easy to enable an only
child because you have no other children to draw your attention away. It is so
sad watching our nieces and nephews marry and have careers and children. Our
life seems doomed to this horrible roller coaster. We have decided we are
going to ask our son to leave. He is working only sporadically so going to set
a date. Not sure which one of us this is going to kill first! He is taking the
life out of us!

Reply

  * ![Pat](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Pat

November 23rd, 2013 at 9:51 AM

I have a 31 year old son and 42 year old step son. My son is an alcholic and
my stepson has been sober for 5 years. He won't have anything to do with my
son now. My son lives in an apartment I have been paying for. I can't stand
the thought of him being on the street, but can't tolerate him living here
with my ( functional alcholic) husband and me. My son lost his last job and is
probably going to lose this one, too. No skills. Depressed. I told him last
night when he was complaining about his "asshole" boss that I couldn't take it
anymore and just wanted to kill myself. My husband stormed into the room and
pushed me and said it was"criminal" to say that. I really can't think of one
reason to live. I know it was terrible to say that to him, but I really would
rather be dead than to live like this.

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

May 21st, 2013 at 10:43 PM

Shirley,

I can totally relate to the "feeling alone" it's killing me too…I'm so tired
of crying, the heartache and watching my daughter destroy her life. I feel so
helpless. I have been reading blogs for the last 2 hours again. God how I want
off this roller coaster ride. I'm so so tired of being taken advantage of…I
have to find the strength to put a stop to the enabling. At what point do you
say enough is enough ?? My 22 year old daughter is collecting unemployment and
her payment gets deposited to my account. I just can't say no to her when she
asks for cash since it really is her money. I never should have bought her
that car…seems like she needs gas money every day !! She says there must be a
hole in the gas tank…yeah right…I feel like such an idiot…but how can I tell
her she can't have her own money ??

I must say it is good to hear there are some happy endings…wish we all could
say the same.

Reply

  * ![Dr Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr Mary Ellen Barnes

May 22nd, 2013 at 12:25 PM

Lynn:  
Why are you putting yourself in the middle between your daughter's money and
her? She needs her own bank account and the unemployment check goes right in
there. Also, why is she living with you? She could get a cheap apartment with
friends or rent a room and use her unemployment money for rent.

If she has no expenses except her drugs/alcohol, then what can you really
expect?

Most parents feel that they have to continue doing these things because if
they don't, then their child will either die from their addiction or end up on
the street. But keeping her home and enabling her is not helping her addiction
problem at all. Has there been any improvement? You may keep her off the
streets all night, but just barely. She still is going where ever she needs to
go to get her drugs.

At some point you need to decide if you want to live or if you want your
daughter to kill you. She is killing you now. It is your choice. Many parents
choose to let their children kill them. And it is a slow and painful death.
And it is a death that is needless and pointless and doesn't even save your
child.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

May 23rd, 2013 at 9:26 AM

I know what you're sayng is true - I'm having a hard time detaching myself. I
posted bond for her a couple of months ago and one of the conditions of this
bond is that she has to live with me. She is going thru the court diversion
program and has until the end of June to follow thru with the other conditions
of going to AA meetings (that are documented) and meeting with a
counsellor/doctor. I am trying to hold off until then since the charges will
be dismissed if she can follow thru. She started hanging out with a guy who
she met at a detox centre. While we were sleepng or at work he was breaking
into vehicles in our neighbourhood and other places. Her stupid mistake was
driving him to pawn shops to sell the stuff he stole (yes, absolutely she
should have known better). He is well known to police and went to jail when
they were arrested. My daughter has no criminal record. When we received the
discovery documents, I was mortified to see he has a 7 page rap sheet which
include drug possession, theft and armed burglaries.

We started having her pay deposited to my account as a way of her paying me
back some of the $$ she owed me and to cover the cost of her car insurance -
it just seemed easier.

To answer your question, she has good days followed by bad but I'm hoping we
can make it to the end of June then am off the hook for the bond money and at
that point she can get a place of her own. I guess I'm still hopeful…and
wishing she will see the light !

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

June 5th, 2013 at 12:22 AM

Does anyone know how sober housing works financially? My son ( the armed
robbery charge was an error thank god) is back out of 3 recent hospital stays.
Twice, I had him arrested and put on 48 hour psychiatric holds. From there he
was put back in rehab and sent to facilities. He had no insurance except a
county program so these stays are usually brief and he is discharged with
prescriptions he neither can afford or intends to take. Instead, he goes right
back to his old friends, Vodka & Rum.

He has been on & off the streets, and in and out of shelters & programs for 3
years now. He is back to calling me day & night or calling his siblings for
money…he still doesn't work-

The last episode was the worst. He shoplifted little bottles of booze and ran
down a Main Street in our town talking to himself and threatening to lay down
on the railroad tracks. We have learned that these episodes are manipulative
but in his state I do fear he is going to pass out on the tracks.

This is so devastating & embarrassing to my other kids. He is purposefully
making a huge show of his condition hoping we will give him anything to make
him stop. He always makes it back here. He says there are no benefits or
programs to help him with housing & healthcare. We had him in an excellent
program last year but he left because of the "micromanaging."

We have no more money to give him. He is the never ending pit and all he does
is spend the money on booze & bars and strip clubs. We gave him his last $3000
in bonds so he could start a new life elsewhere with the understanding he
would leave us alone but it all went to bars & clubs and he says the police
took a lot of it.

He is hanging this on me again/says he has no "support structure" like other
addicts and that his situation is our fault because we think drinking is a big
deal.  
He has an opportunity for a factory job (his brother arranged) and needs a
place to live. There is sober housing in the community but he says he needs
the money up front for rent. My Husband will not allow me to give him another
nickel. To do so, puts my already strained marriage on the breaking point.
But, I can see how you can't hold a job with nowhere to live. Do they make
arrangements with their clients to wait to collect rent at first- til they can
get a paycheck. He says no, but everything Out of his mouth is a lie anyway.
Thanks….

Reply

  * ![Cindy Washbourne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cindy Washbourne

June 5th, 2013 at 10:41 AM

I am in the same boat as all of you are. I sometimes compare myself to a
parent of a child with cancer…the ups and downs that they go through. I'm
afraid of putting my child out on the street because she will be killed for
certain. I could never live with that. We have a wonderful relationship aside
from the substance abuse. I'm just relieved to know that others are feeling
the same frustrations.

Reply

  * ![Lucy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucy

June 5th, 2013 at 10:49 AM

BLAH BLAH…NOTHING WORKS! IT IS WHAT IT IS.

Reply

  * ![Cheri](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cheri

June 13th, 2013 at 2:22 PM

My beloved alcoholic 43 year old son died January 15, 2013. My heart is broken
and will never be mended. The last 10 years were excruciating. I want him
back. I wish I had known what was going on sooner. If only I had the power to
do it all over again. I wonder what the next ten years will be like.

Reply

  * ![Jed](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jed

August 6th, 2013 at 7:20 PM

Dear Cheri,

I mostly want to express my deep sorrow for your loss. I wish only peace for
you, and I know it's probably not what you are feeling right now, yet - little
by little peace will come. You mentioned that the past 10 yrs have been just
terrible, I'm guessing then that you have gone through what so many parents of
addicted children go through; perhaps some of the things mentioned in this
"opinion piece". Despite the shocking ignorance of the author, I'm sure you do
know that your son did indeed have an illness.

The success of a "choice" to get well for anyone with the disease of addiction
depends on many and varied issues and circumstances. It's simply not black or
white. Similar ( not "same" ) to the treatment for any potentially fatal
disease - we always hope that our loved one will be physically strong enough
or lucky enough to react to it in what we call a "successful" way. Yet, when
we loose a loved one to cancer, for example, while a neighbor's loved one is
cured of the exact same cancer - we don't ever think that our loved one was
not strong enough or did not fight hard enough. We accept the fact that we
don't know the reasons why some "make it" and others do not - and we endure
the pain of mourning their loss.

I lost my brother in law to addiction last year Cheri. The pain is not even
comparable to yours as a Mother. He was 39 and, like your Son, he died too
young. One thing that gives his parents some measure of peace is the fact that
(after almost two decades of horrendous struggle) he is in peace.

I know your pain must feel like too much to take at times Cheri, but please
know that your Son is at peace now. He is your child and will always be and
maybe, just maybe, you knowing that he is at peace might give you some of the
same peace you surely deserve.

Reply

  * ![Annabelle](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Annabelle

June 14th, 2013 at 5:18 PM

Individuals such as the author of this article are the reason mental illness
continues to plague such a large part of the world's population. By claiming
that addiction is not a disease, you are claiming that there is no biological
component at play and this is simply erroneous. Individuals who were either
born with or developed mental illness had absolutely no "choice" in the
matter. Furthermore, even if there was a component of "choice", what makes a
patient with melanoma who "chose" to spend more time in the sun, any more/less
to "blame" for their disease than an alcoholic who "chose" to take that first
drink at a high school party? Addiction is the result of mental illness and
has been proven to involve an undeniable genetic component. How someone with a
pHD could be blind to this is beyond me. And with the continuation of the
stigmatization of mental illness by ignorant and judgmental individuals,
people who suffer from it will continue to avoid seeking help as they will
feel ashamed to do so. Let's put an end to shaming and begin to help our sick
relatives, friends and spouses to seek recovery. As a parent of an adult
alcoholic it is not your responsibility to financially support the alcoholic,
in fact, you are likely doing them a disservice by doing so. But it IS your
responsibility to aide your child in understanding that he/she is not a bad
person who enjoys making bad choices, but rather an ill person who is making
the only choices he/she knows to make. Tell your child that while they may
lack power over their addiction, they DO have the power to seek professional
help…and hold them to that responsibility while loving them unconditionally.

Reply

  * ![Dee troeller](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dee troeller

July 6th, 2013 at 10:15 AM

What a shame to see so many of us with the same life altering issues.

I want to tell you my story and hope to get your input.

My 33 yr old daughter & her husband slowly started the decline about 5 years
ago.. losing good jobs, one at a time, losing beautiful apartments, rent
issues.. lies , lies, lies… Four yrs ago his mother allowed them to move into
her home. I voiced my opinion that it was a very bad idea cause there was so
much more going on than we were privy to but she didn't agree, she said she
would always help her son…She has helped them to the point of no return… Over
the past few yrs they've had a baby, got married, have had many jobs that
didn't last very long. Things are an absolute messand now his mother doesn't
want to support them anymore, yet is still somewhat in denial about her son,
she wants to call me to complain, yet will never meet me half way when I say
they are in serious need of professional help, she just wants me to take my
daughter home, My daughter wormed her way into my home a few days ago pleading
for a place to take a break from her mother in law. she tells me she is clean,
not true.. but her husband still has issues, but she has to worry about
herself now and not him, last nite she took her son and spent the nite at her
mother in laws house with her husband while the mother is away for the
weekend.. Iknow I have just been sucked into a lose -lose situation that I
don't know how to handle and his mother now says "its your daughter so why
should I deal with her" I do know she believes if they don't live together
everything will be ok, because my daughter is the real problem. I just don't
know what I will do now.. My daughter will be back here tmw -like everything
is just normal and this is a perfect solution for everyone, but me

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

July 10th, 2013 at 11:53 PM

The biggest problem is the lies…how can you help if you never know the truth.
It's just one manipulation after another. They jump from person to person
sucking what they can and when they've exhausted one source- they move to
another.

It may sound strange, but I actually envy you for having the mother-in-law to
share this pain and burden with. She may be gumming things up, but she had
provided a respite from all this being on your doorstep 24/7. Your daughter
and husband won't stand a chance of getting clean until they want to - so in
the meantime they move around milking everybody in their path. My son is
homeless now - he has no friends, the family is done with him- my husband has
cut him off completely. So he calls me…threatens suicide, blames me, pours on
the guilt, threatens to become a violent criminal because I'm pushing him into
it…

He has sucked us dry…we have 3 other kids in college - the resources I was
funneling to him have put us in financial trouble. After one of his phone
calls tonight where he just tortures me..I was almost hysterical. My husband
says I can choose to go with my son or stay in this marriage. He is my high-
school sweetheart- I can't imagine my life without him. We had so many plans
for our "empty-nest" years, so many dreams. But I feel empty right now - just
beaten up by all of this. It has been going on with this child since he was a
troubled adolescent- he's 26 now, with the emotional maturity of a 10 year
old.

I used to get down on my hands and knees and plead with him to stop the
drinking, gambling, lying and the other risky behaviors. I told him he was
going too far- his father said he would never live in another dysfunctional
home (his mother and 2 brothers were alcoholics). Home is supposed to be a
safe haven from the world - not a place of chaos, pain and despair. We tried
to help. He had many, many chances. There seems to be no end to this
nightmare. I know I have to learn to live with it. But I am up tonight,
feeling ill, tortured by his latest phone call. They put us in horrible, no-
win situations and because of the pain and stress, it alters our relationships
with all the other people in our lives. Let the other mom step in
sometimes…maybe it gives you the briefest of respites…maybe it doesn't solve
anything…but it's something…Strength and peace…

Reply

  * ![Paula](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Paula

February 5th, 2014 at 7:19 PM

Having no family to speak of and no husband, I stand alone fighting the
battle. My son is 22, on and off of meth, currently in drug court and. 5 mo
behind on fines, jobless, carless, a baby on the way in 8 weeks and homeless.
His relationship with this girl is toxic and she has done meth with him while
pregnant. They lie, cheat, and create chaos everywhere they go. I have given
him countless chances and cannot allow him to come home for fear he will wreak
havoc in my home where i am raising my younger son alone. It is so very hard
not knowing what to do and having no one to turn to. The girlfriend has tons
of family and support but my son only has me but he blames me for every bad
thing in his life and alienates me because I give him tough love which is
tougher on me. Just wish I knew what to do….

  * ![Bev](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Bev

August 18th, 2013 at 10:01 AM

Annabelle - comment #443

Hallelujah!!! Thank you : D Your comment is an excellent explanation of what
addiction is and how a parent should react to it. Believe it or not… addiction
is a disease. The American Medical Association deemed addiction a disease back
in 1956. 1956 !!!!!!! AA states that addiction is a disease !!!!!! Why some
professionals continue to say that addiction is not a disease is beyond me, as
it only adds to the confusion and frustration.

Think about it. Why would anyone choose to continue drinking or drugging
themselves to death? Because their just having too much darn fun or because
they are too stubborn to change? Does that make any sense to you? Any at all?

I don't mean to be hurtful to the parents who are commenting here. I am a
parent of two addicted adult children. We've gone through the late night
calls, the deceit, the crushed hope, the pain, the doubts, the anger, the
hopeless and despair and it's not over yet. My comment is focused on those who
insist that addiction is a choice. Honestly, sometimes I wish it was but it's
not - it just isn't.  
And to say it is is hurtful and destructive to both the addict and those who
love the addict. It's time to take a second look at the facts.

Reply

  * ![Jenni](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jenni

August 23rd, 2013 at 3:28 AM

We have been struggling with our son's addiction for seven years, since he was
sixteen and it has been a long harrowing road that has cost us our financial
security, support from extended family members and in my case my career
progression. We have moved countries to try to help but still the same
pervasive and insidious disease condition, that is addiction, clings to our
family and drags us down. I have been reading this board for a long time and
have identified closely with many of the stories. Recently though I read David
Sheff's recent book "Clean" which he has spent ten years researching and
writing. It presents the most evidence-based synthesis of research and
practice that I have ever seen, and as the father of a drug addicted son he
really really knows. I recommend this book to everyone struggling in the dark.
This book has provided me with the courage to go on and finally take the steps
that are needed with our son. I cannot recommend it strongly enough.

Reply

  * ![Marilyn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Marilyn

October 28th, 2013 at 4:04 PM

Bev and Annabelle (#443 and #448 above): I completely agree. There is some
good "tough love" advice in the article, but the assertion that addiction is
not a disease _goes against_ much current research, the American Medical
Association, the National Institute on Drug Abuse, etc. For those parents,
like myself, who are dealing with an addicted loved one, please find an Al-
Anon meeting or a Families Anonymous meeting near you. Start by going to their
web sites (the FA site is only partially up right now, but the list of
meetings is still there). There is help and support out there -- you are not
alone!

Reply

  * ![Methadone Clinic Woodbury Mn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Methadone Clinic Woodbury Mn

November 1st, 2013 at 7:58 PM

As for example, the color may seem more vivid methadone pills for sale  
and bright, the sounds can be crystal clear.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

November 5th, 2013 at 1:40 PM

So many times I have thought about reaching out to other parents such as you
all, but felt my story wasn’t as significant. I am really glad I found this
web site. Prayers to all of you. There is so much history. I will try and give
a short version. My son is 24 and is addicted to marijuana. He has also been
known to use Ecstasy and recently, Xanax. He also drinks alcohol excessively.
He left home at age 18 and dropped out of school his senior year and lived
with friends. He was arrested in 2010 for possession with intent to sell
Ecstasy. He served 45 days in jail and was released. At that time he was in TX
and we were in CA. He called fearful and complaining police were harassing
him, so we moved him here with us. Yes I see now that was my first mistake,
but I am his parent and felt I needed to protect him. Him moving here has been
negative. As I am sure most of you know, marijuana in all forms is plentiful
here in CA. I have begged, pleaded, bribed, put him through school, of which
he succeeded, graduated, was hired in the dental field, and fired two days
later because he was too hung over to make it to work by 10AM. He has had many
jobs that have not lasted due to not showing up, repeated tardiness, and being
under the influence. We have been patient, understanding and supportive, we
have ranted and raved, we have threatened to kick him out, set guidelines and
when it comes down to it, we can’t kick him out because we are afraid
something bad will happen to him and we couldn’t live with the guilt. In 2012,
he was admitted to a mental health facility and was diagnosed with Bipolar
disorder with auditory psychotic features. He was admitted for 15 days and
released. He saw a Psychiatrist on an out- patient basis and was prescribed
meds he stopped taking. I would take him to those appointments and when I
asked to speak with the doctor and asked if he had disclosed his drug use, I
was told he was of age and it was not my problem now. Really? Not my problem?
He is living with us! We have discussed rehab, but he expresses he like
marijuana and he is “grown” and can do what he wants. We have three daughters,
ages 21, 17, and 15 who also lives with us. I sought therapy and ended up
being her therapist. We talked more about her kids than mine. We are all a
mess. Recently, our 17 yr. old told us she used marijuana introduced by her
brother. She sees a therapist for depression and has not used again. Our 21
yr. old went and lived with grandma, my husband’s mother, because she couldn’t
cope. The 15 yr. old starts therapy next week for anger issues and depression.
I realize I am responsible, I just need help.

Reply

  * ![Shari](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Shari

November 8th, 2013 at 6:23 PM

My daughter has 2 DUI's and her dads a judge. We are divorced. No matter what
I did he interfered in the legal process and in a small town its impossible.
He let her smoke pot and drink in his house as a teen and she just would not
listen to me. I would have been fine with her spending time in jail as it is
she has no consequence. Scared straight might have worked. Dad is an alcoholic
too and encourages her behavior. I cannot fix stupid (him) but I tried to get
her to treatment and now she hates me. Maybe some day she will decide to
change. My 4 other children don't drink and are respectful and on their way to
wonderful futures. My advice: Do not marry someone who is an alcoholic. I
didn't realize he was and now my child is.

Reply

  * ![Dawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dawn

November 11th, 2013 at 6:40 PM

Friday both of my daughter's pediatrician told me the cause of depression with
them was my son's drug use and the disruption he is causing in our family. I
thought seriously about that and had always known that before, but was always
conflicted what to do. This Wednesday he moves out into a motel for three
days. He has a job, so I'm hoping he will stay there and continue to take care
of himself. I also hope and pray he comes to a realization he needs to get
clean and sober and grows up.

Reply

  * ![Jenni](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jenni

November 16th, 2013 at 2:06 AM

I relate to your story Dawn. Your son (like ours) is clearly a dual diagnosis
and so the rules are different. In his excellent book, "Clean", David Sheff
makes the point that the "rock bottom" paradigm just doesn't work with many
people. They will be dead before they ever reach this point. This is the
problem I have always had with the tough love model. Oftentimes, the kids who
have had tough love practiced on them because someone else's headache. I have
known of parents who have kicked their dual diagnosis children out of the
house and gone on an overseas holiday, while other people take their children
in and deal with the day to day crisis. Having said that, we still haven't got
on top of our issues with our son. But we are trying each day to stop enabling
him. This is a battle royale for me. I am wondering if there are connections
between families with drug problems and bullying. I was bullied as child at
school, had a violent father, bullied in the workplace. Does this make it very
hard to deal with a drug addicted adult child? You bet it does. Everyone in
this family has some degree of impulse-control/ADHD type problem as well. That
is also a marker. The problems are intergenerational and interdependent, there
are no easy answers. But I am determined to make some small achievable goals
that are moving in the right direction. I can't win the war but I will win
some battles. Like refusing to take him or accompany him ever on trips to get
the synthetic cannabis he is addicted to (still legal here in Australia). The
rehab services (which he refuses to consider) tell me that this stuff is
similar to meth. The withdrawal is hideous. He has become so skinny - and he
is not a skinny person. I will also refuse to pawn any more of my possessions
to provide the money he needs to buy tobacco, because he has spent all his
tobacco money on drugs. Yep, baby steps but I will grow stronger.

Reply

  * ![Julie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Julie

November 28th, 2013 at 3:02 PM

I have tears running down my face as I read all your stories. They are all a
mixture of what is happening in my life. Even though it doesn't fix the
problem, it is a great comfort to know you are not the only one going through
it. We can all learn from each others experiences. Good luck to us all and try
to look forward to better times.

Reply

  * ![Debbie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debbie

December 27th, 2013 at 6:27 AM

My heart breaks for each and every one of you going thru this. We have dealt
with my 44 yr-old son's bi-polar disorder and his drug of choice-alcohol , for
years, With 3 hospitalization for detox. Twice to rehab. And he chooses to
live the life that he feels makes him happiest, though he is many times
suicidal. It breaks a mothers heart……..2014 will be the year for ME. I have
decided to do the tough love, no matter what, change the locks, call the cops,
no more money. Whatever HIS choices are, HE will pay the piper. I have dealt
with the stress and guilt long enough. I will no longer allow his choices to
affect my own Heath thru stress. Stress kills, it causes inflammation within
the body which can kill. I will not allow him to take me down that road any
longer. When I have feelings of guilt I will take a walk, do some bicep curls
with cans of soup or something. I will do something for myself to get my mind
off him. It has not been an easy decision, but it have been getting mentally
preparing for this day.

Reply

  * ![Odd man out](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Odd man out

November 30th, 2013 at 11:32 PM

"Many parents choose to let their children kill them. And it is a slow and
painful death. And it is a death that is needless and pointless and doesn’t
even save your child." Watching this play out, day by day; year by year, is
quite painful.

Reply

  * ![Linda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Linda

December 2nd, 2013 at 11:09 AM

My son is 29 years old and a meth addict. Trust me when I say "this drug knows
no boundaries" it is the truth. My son was a gifted student all through
school, never any behavioral problems, he would play games to keep him self
interested in school such as letting his grades drop as low as they could go
to see how quickly he could bring them back up to a B or better. He started
using "Pot" in high school, married at 18 and had a son by the time he was 19.
He worked hard, had a nice home, beautiful wife and a son who is as smart as
his dad. Everything seemed perfect until his wife came to me and said that my
son has changed, he is hateful, moody, won't sleep, keeps her up all hours of
the night etc..she told me she thought it was drugs. So after 8 years of
marriage they get a divorce, within months he is out of a job and looses
everything. He lived with me and my husband for a year until one day my
husband finds my son using meth at our house, So we kicked him out he is now
homeless. I have begged, cried, pleaded, given him a vehicle ( which he
trashed in 6 months) constantly given him money, until there is nothing else
to give the only thing left is love. If he needs to to talk, I am here if he
needs something to eat or a shower my door is open as long as the drugs don't
come with him. If he needs medical care I will carry him, but no longer is he
going to hold me responsible for his life being what it is. He has shown me
the monster that meth has made of him and then he can turn right around and
show me the sweet man he is but when that monster raises his head, his
problems are everybody else's fault. He made a choice to use this drug not as
a child but as a 26 year old man, I have told him cleaning up has to be his
decision and I pray everyday that he calls to tell me today is the day. What
else can a parent do?

Reply

  * ![Andrew](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Andrew

December 2nd, 2013 at 11:33 PM

Linda,what can I say..its truly pathetic.I can feel your pain being a dad. I
can understand what kind of situation you both are going through.I think you
should see a expert Councillor.Sometimes Yoga or Reiki works. One more
suggestion is take him home because if he is outside he will somehow manage
money and he will again take that.Make him understand in every way you can but
don't let him go outside..I dont this site can help you or not but you can
take a look..  
Dnt worrry, everything will be fine.

Reply

  * ![michael](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### michael

December 12th, 2013 at 8:58 PM

your telling me that being an alchoholic is a choice… wise up

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

December 16th, 2013 at 8:45 AM

I was searching again today, lost as usual on how to deal with my son or
looking for an answer that assures me I am doing the right thing. I think I
found a community of people that are going through the same things as me and
these messages do tell me that I am doing the right thing. I'm scared to death
but feel I am doing the right thing.

My story is a about a son that seems to have always struggled with emotional
issues. I think I tended to be overly cautious when he was younger because he
seemed so fragile. I was always fearing suicide so I tried not to rock the
boat too much.

Now I find myself not wanting to rock the boat because of emotional outburst.
It seems that it take nothing at all to make him completely freak out. I don't
know his history with drugs but I feel in my heart that there is an issue
there. I don't know what he's tried or what he has done aside from pot. I do
know that about 2 years ago I agreed to have him tested for ADD. He said he
just couldn't concentrate and one of his friends took Vyvanse and he felt that
was what he needed. So, we went to the doctor and then to get tested and
everyone signed off on ADD and Vyvanse. Since he has been on Vyvanse, he has
become a stranger to me. At first, it really helped him, and by at first I
mean, maybe a month? I believe he has developed a dependency to this drug and
I think he likely abuses it. His mood swings are out of control, he disappears
for days, he sneaks in and out of the house avoiding us. His pills run out
before his refills and when I've tried to keep them from him he has taken them
from my purse when I am not looking.

Last year our holidays were ruined by his behavior. He broke up with his
girlfriend or she with him and he totally lost it. I ended up calling the
ambulance to come get him but of course he had to consent since he is over 18.
He did go and checked out and said he would go to counseling but never did.

Just like you have all said, talk is cheap. I have given him so many
opportunities and he always says he agrees and then he disappears. I don't
trust him in my home, I have to lock up my purse at night or he steals money
from me. We have put locks on all important doors in the house. Even this year
as we begin wrapping gifts, I wonder if he will take something from under the
tree and pawn it for cash. His car is about to break down and his tags are
about to expire. We've offered to pay for both as a gift but he cannot care
enough to even show up at the mechanics.

It is so sad that he asks me for quarters for gas, but it is also so pitiful.
I feel like he manipulates me by saying "do you have any quarters?" I am angry
and hurt. I'm angry at him for continuing to make the wrong choses when he has
all the support and love in the world. And I'm hurt that he won't let me help
him.

I've prayed for him and I'm trying to be strong as I completely cut him off
financially. Over the last few months I've gotten better at saying no and
finally today I told him he had to go. It's not fair to my other son, my
husband, or myself to have him here taking and never giving. He doesn't work,
he doesn't clean up after himself, he is disrespectful, he is lazy, he doesn't
work, he doesn't have a plan, and he has given up. I cannot help him and
giving him money for gas or anything else is just keeping him from having to
face it himself.

I have to realize now that he may be homeless, without a car, without food,
without clothes, but it is all his choice. Like everyone else, he was offered
treatment. I told him treatment or move out, that was his choice. He said he
wanted to move out so now he has to face that. I can give him love, but no
more financial support. In several days, his Vyvanse will need to be refilled
and I'm sure I'll get a call that day. I told him 2 months ago to begin the
weaning process, he agreed he would and pulled down the ml dosage by 10 ml. He
then had a doctor appointment and I have no idea how that went since he is an
adult, he is protected by privacy laws. I reminded him that I would not
support the drug anymore and that he needed to talk to the doctor about coming
off of medicatin. I will not be paying for his pills this month. Part of me is
worried that if he is dependent on the medication, the cut off is going to
trigger violence. I'm afraid for my home that he will break in or detroy
property. I'm having the locks changed today just to keep him from coming in
when I'm not here, but if he flips out, no lock will protect my home. At that
point I'll have to call the police and that breaks my heart. Why can't he just
see what he is doing and what he is giving up?

My hope is that one day he will come through this and we will look back and be
thankful it all worked out. But I know that it may not work out, it could end
very very badly and that is the hardest part.

Thanks for your site and thanks for giving me a place to share.

Reply

  * ![Sharon M.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sharon M.

December 16th, 2013 at 2:01 PM

I found this site and am glad I did.

I have been struggling for years with a daughter, now 27 years old. Like so
many others, I wanted to believe the promises, looked hopefully at the
infrequent signs of improvement, only to die a bit more when my daughter would
take two (or three) steps back for every step that was forward.

And because she has children, for the last several years I've constantly been
bombarded with "if you don't pay my heating bill, my family will freeze"… "I
have no food for my children"… "All I have is rice to feed my dogs, they are
wasting away"… "if you don't pay for my psychiatric meds, I'll go insane and
kill myself and everyone around me"… and the moments of hope: "please pay for
this dental assisting program so I can get a real job" (there went $3,000…. I
drove her to every class, she passed the course and never bothered taking the
state exam… and never got a job).

Although I am in my 50's, I even killed my meager retirement funds for the
downpayment of a modest rowhome - which she was supposed to pay a rental
amount equal to the monthly loan payments that I am now stuck with. She paid a
few months, and has now left me high and dry with the loan payments, refusing
to pay anything at all and claiming she can't work.

She got married earlier this year (to another person who can't work on account
of emotional disability) and he ended up calling the local Child Protective
Services who took the children away!

I have the eldest child, who is now excelling in school, making friends,
getting the proper medical/dental care she hadn't been. Since I just recently
told her I am not giving her any more money and that if she can't come up with
a realistic plan to start paying rent, I will evict her - our already bad
relationship is now full of hate.

My daughter now hates me to the point that she even asked for her husband to
kill me and is constantly making outrageous lies about me to the Child
Protective Services agency. Her lies are now putting the stability of the
eldest grandchild at risk, as the agency is considering moving her to a
stranger's foster home, just to shut my daughter up.

My elder granddaughter and I gave this year's holiday presents to my daughter
in front of the caseworker so she could give it to her youngest daughter - and
two days later her spouse messages me that my daughter sold all the presents
and went bar-hopping instead.

I'm very frightened that the agency is getting too exasperated dealing with
all these issues and constant allegations. I'm still stuck paying the mortgage
loans for the property she is living in (and that she is slowly destroying,
from what I've heard). I recently contacted the real estate agent who sold me
the property to ask her to do a market analysis…. and my daughter won't allow
her in. Still, the agent said I probably will not even break even - I may even
have to have the mortgage company agree to a short sale. Unfortunately, it's
the same mortgage company I have for my own personal residence, so even that
could be at risk.

I told my daughter I will have to file to evict her - I've gone over $20,000
in credit card debt trying to help her out during the past two years. It's
almost always something that starts out sounding reasonable: "I need
eyeglasses so that I can see to get a job and to be able to easily read
printed material, please pay for them" - there went over $400 for a pair of
eyeglasses because supposedly there was nothing that was right at a lower
price. This past April, I ended up buying buying over $2,300 in food and baby
supplies so they wouldn't starve and so that the newborn baby would have what
she needed - but I can't pay the mortgages and the loans - and she constantly
demands money.

When I told her (less than two weeks ago) that I can't give her any more money
and I will file to evict her if she doesn't come up with a better plan (her
current plan is she wants to file for SSI and get something like $700 a month
from Social Security - which isn't even enough to cover the loans I have to
pay on the property) - she turned around and alleged to the child protective
agency that I am a drug addict (which I am not).

Now, the caseworker has to do an investigation, she is pissed off about yet
another waste of her time, has told me before that she can't wait to get rid
of our case but she can't dump it on anyone else, no one else in the agency is
willing to take it.

And at the end of the day, I hate to say it, I love my daughter, but I hate
who she has become - a 20-something willing to rip apart the life and
stability that her young daughter has found living with me this year.

Rather than her taking this time to get into treatment and focus on improving
her own situation without having to also be responsible for children to care
for, she has the chance to make meaningful changes to her life so that she can
become the wonderful, resourceful mother that I know she COULD be… she wants
to destroy me and if her children are in the way, that's collateral damage,
too bad, in her view. She won't admit she has any problems, except anxiety. On
one of our parent-child visits (the agency caseworker wasn't there), I arrived
and she wasn't at home - instead I got a call that she was in at an address
and needed a ride. We went to the address, found out it was a bar, and she was
so drunk, two people had to assist her out of the bar. And she fell down in
the street, drunk and we had to stop traffic to get her out of the street, in
front of her child.

I am so angry with the situation and so fearful of what may happen to her
children if they start being moved around from foster home to foster home,
that if my daughter were to die today I would probably feel relief that this
nightmare is over, that she can't hurt her children anymore, and sadness that
what was once a promising life went the way it is.

I've also found out she has been lying to everyone - she was prosecuted and
plead guilty to prostitution, gets money sometimes working in dive strip bars
(where she drinks most of her earnings away), and I'm just at wit's end. My
daughter is so out-of-touch with reality that she honestly believes if she can
discredit me or drive the agency nuts by constantly attempting to discredit
me, that she thinks they'll return the children to her - even though she has
no way to support herself, let alone them.

Not only do I feel ready to give up on her, I feel it is necessary to give up
on her in order to try to save at least her older child. The youngest, an
infant, appears to be safe at least for now with her husband's parents.

Reply

  * ![Renee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Renee

December 17th, 2013 at 9:52 PM

As I lay here grief stricken, I am comforted to know I am not alone. My
daughter turned 18 in August and decided she wanted to be free. So, she moved
out and moved in with her registered sex offender boyfriend. I begged,
pleaded, and threatened to take away her car. She bought the car from me and
found support in this boyfriend and his enabling mother. The last time I saw
my "free" child was Oct 15. She smelled bad, weighed 85 pounds, and looked
terrible. I took her to a fancy restaurant. She seemed to understand how I
worried and felt she was in a bad place. As soon as that boyfriend heard her
say she was spending time with me, he put a stop to it. On Oct 28, my daughter
told her boyfriend she was moving out and moving in with her grandparents. He
reported her to the police because "he feared for her life". I got a text from
the police out of concern at 3:00 am the next morning. My daughter was
arrested for meth possession and paraphernalia. She was also drugged up on
klonopin and had snorted hydrocodone. That was the least of my worries. More
of her story from the past 2 1/2 months of freedom came out. The boyfriend was
prostituting her. Some other thugs decided to help her out by committing armed
robbery on the johns so she could bring back money to her "boyfriend". She has
been charged with 8 felony counts and two misdemeanors. She faces at max 105
years in prison without chance for parole. I got permission to take her
straight from jail to rehab. She said she was turning her back on the
boyfriend and thugs. She did well for four weeks. Now she is in trouble in
rehab for communicating with these thugs. I made the decision tonight not to
pay for secondary rehab and will be taking her back to jail on Christmas Day.
I'm tired of being lied to, manipulated, and having my life threatened by two
thugs and the mom of the boyfriend. My panic attacks break through my meds.
She has hurt me, her brother, and the rest of our family with her behavior.
It's just more than a mother's heart can take.

Reply

  * ![dolores](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### dolores

December 18th, 2013 at 9:12 AM

Sharon M your story says it all! I don't know why we all think our addict is
different…In 3 months I have been robbed of all my jewelry including my moms
wedding ring - she just passed away 2 months ago- family members were robbed
while visiting, drugs and drinking blatantly obvious everyday, complete denial
and attitude if I say a word. I have become a prisoner in my own home and my
grandson is a hostage, im afraid to go to sleep at nite and icant do a thing
without jeopardizing my grandsons well being with temps below freezing…
Worried about tough love? really I cant stomach this captor in my life if I
were any of you without grandchildren. I wouldn't lose a wink of sleep by
throwing her out, changing my name number and moving faraway..

Reply

  * ![raaj](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### raaj

December 23rd, 2013 at 11:22 PM

Hi Friends,  
its so shaking to go through all these devastating stories, our boat seems to
be almost in the same situation, though I am not a parent here, I am sibling
of addict, and the frightening experiences of my mother have always been
keeping me sleepless recently.  
Though I managed to pull myself from the affect of my brother, its my mother's
safety that is worrying me badly these days. my 35yr old alcoholic brother
often visits my mom and keeps verbally abusing her, until his financial
demands are met. some times even I came to knew the situations when he
physically hurted her, though she keeps those things knowing from me.  
when ever I call her on phone, I could here a deeply troubled and panic voice
from otherside if my brother is at home, she being a widowed housewife without
any other financial support, I have no choice than supporting her, but
eventually my support to her is indirectly enabling him.  
I am now searching for the ways to pull my mother out of his influence, any
suggestions friends?  
Thanks & Regards,  
Raaj

Reply

  * ![Debbie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debbie

December 27th, 2013 at 6:07 AM

I sympathize with you. It is so hard. I just posted a reply above to Susan.
You may want to read that too. She said something that was very meaningful…..
You have to let go of the person you wanted (your brother) to be? That person
doesn't exist If there is any way you can assist your mom to relocate to
something affordable, only large enough for her, no extra bedrooms. You both
have to agree that he has to start taking responsibility for himself. Give
your brother ample warning that he now has to make it any way he can! It may
seem cruel but it is for the best.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

January 19th, 2014 at 6:48 PM

That's what I was told. I must grieve for the "child" I thought I had..the
unrealized potential..the dreams of his happy and fulfilled adult life that is
never going to happen. At least WE can't make it happen. I am still grieving
but I stopped asking "why"..there is no answer and it doesn't matter. Now, I
only ask "how". How to best cope and move on…just tonight he told me he is
putting his head on the railroad tracks…just the latest threat from an
alcoholic/heroin and cocaine addled 27 year old, who never intends to take
care of himself and threatens to kill himself multiple times daily. The truly
sad part is..I have run out of reasons to tell him why not to…he has made a
bigger mess out of his life and all of ours as collateral damage that I am
numb and hopeless. Thanks for listening.

  * ![Susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan

December 26th, 2013 at 11:13 AM

Hello to Everyone,  
This website was recently emailed to me by a dear friend who is genuinely
concerned for my health and well-being. I cannot thank her enough. I started
to read the entries at the beginning and had to scroll down to the end to make
sure that the community was ongoing. What a relief when I saw the 2013
postings. I have been living in denial for so long that I am really rather in
shock to read reflections of my only son in so many of these truly heart
wrenching stories, stories that I am/we are indeed, in one form or another,
living. On Christmas Eve we paid to have the locks changed on our home, just
in case my non-violent 25 y/o intelligent, well educated, charming,
charismatic, good looking, manipulative, lying, drug and alcohol addicted son
tries to reenter our home (we have evicted him) while we are on vacation. Last
weekend, after he had stolen our car (his vehicle has a breath monitor in it)
stolen cash - again - was arrested on a bench warrant and got our car
impounded, I was horrified to hear myself say…. "I wish that I had never given
birth to him". I have blamed myself for not being enough… while working my
arse off to pay for private schools, therapists, rehab programs, personal
trainers, paying his rent, utilities, car payments (we have no choice on that
one - we co-signed) and insurance. I bless my husband, who isn't my son's
father everyday for putting up with this man/child and my - it isn't that bad
denial - everyday for the last 10 years . I didn't realize how extensive my
tolerance for pain was until I equated my son's behavior with how I felt
adapting to and caring for my schizophrenic mother. Then I knew…. While my
heart is aching for the son that I had before he chose drugs and alcohol over
authentic honoring relationships that do not engender what I imagine must
cause him terrible guilt, I now know that that person no longer exists and
both my husband and I have to let go of everything but our hope that he will
one day return to health. Until then we are battening down the hatches,
affirming our love for him, refraining from enabling him and getting on with
our own lives as best we can, honoring our fear for his life or death, knowing
that this too is his choice.  
I am so grateful that this community exists, I will keep reading the posts to
gain insight and strength to stay the course.

Reply

  * ![Debbie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debbie

December 27th, 2013 at 5:56 AM

Susan, I could relate to your sinking feeling. Christmas morning was again
ruined. My divorced 44 yr old son was downstairs starting to drink at 6 am. He
usually doesn't drink that early but "he hates Christmas" and he was suicidal
"again"! He is bipolar, has had endless counseling, rehab and we have allowed
him to drain us dry. We felt abundantly blessed and realized our guilt allowed
us to sink into his manipulative ways. He chose to support his addiction
rather than his children . I could relate when you said you almost wish you
had never given birth to your son. I have realized that I have NO happy
memories of my son. He has caused us trouble since 3rd grade. Once he
graduated high school he moved out and chose never to take medication since.
It has been a very rocky road. I love him only because I have to. He is an
only child and that is my job. We live in virginia and plan to retire in a
couple of years. We plan to move far, far away. We feel this will help. my
husbands job took us to Alabama for a year and it was the most peace we have
had in years. We were not around to see the daily issues, the self-
destructive behaviors, to feel compelled to bail him out of his financial
crises. We can hardly wait to move ! I lost my mom to Alzeheimers related
illness earlier this year. I had been her long-distance care-giver. Though
that in itself was hard and watching her succomb to that horrible thief of
life; dealing with a bi-polar, addictive adult child has been the hardest
thing I have ever faced. My heart goes out to anyone who is dealing with this.
Best advice…….cut off all support,allow them to face the consequences of their
decisions and if possible geographical distance ! You can directly help
support the grand-children in other ways.

Reply

  * ![Mom](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mom

January 3rd, 2014 at 3:52 PM

I, too, am thankful to have stumbled upon this forum. It shocks and saddens me
to read the multitude of souls with the same pain from the same story (with
the names changed to protect the innocent). The drugs do indeed transform our
son to an unrecognizable, hurtful wretch. Susan, I feel the son I loved is no
longer inside his body-he has been figuratively murdered by "the lifestyle."

Reply

  * ![helyn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### helyn

January 20th, 2014 at 1:05 AM

Amen I struggle everyday. My heart breaks everyday for my daughter who is
lost. Thanks for sharing your story.

Reply

  * ![charmelle peffer](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### charmelle peffer

December 27th, 2013 at 3:19 AM

I am starting to dislike my 18 year old addicted on meth and dagga for 4 years
struggling, 2 rehabs, family car stolen and smashed, selling of clothes,
violence, stealing, we can't take it anymore, we have asked him to leave the
home if he does not want treatment, he refuses, I decided to get a court
interdict in January cause this past Christmas it was so painful and sad to
see what monster he changes into ,it hurts and thank you every one for
sharing, im so angry and sad.

Reply

  * ![Mikki](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mikki

January 1st, 2014 at 2:41 PM

Charmelle, thanks for sharing. I wish we could have a cup of tea, hug and cry.
I do most of that alone these days.

Reply

  * ![Shauna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Shauna

December 27th, 2013 at 1:43 PM

I am so thankful for the support your posts have given me. I have been dealing
with my 26 year old son an addict for over 10 years. He has been in and out of
jail, constantly draining me financial by using every form of manipulation
possible. Again he convinced me he wanted to change, he came home a little
over a month ago and de-toxed on his own, I was so hopeful because it was his
choice. He did really well for about 2 weeks he went to the doctor to the
phycoligest, back to school to finish up his high school packets and started a
new job. Wow was this really the end of the decade of shear Hell?? No! I had
lent him a phone to use for the past 2 weeks, on Monday the day before
Christmas Eve he started his new job, we were in such a hurry that he forgot
his phone. When we got to his new job he was frantic about the phone, to a
point of craziness. When I got home and looked and the phone, there were
multiple texts to 2 different friends from a week ago saying “Come and pick me
up fast before my stepfather or mother get home, I have $30,000 worth of
jewelry we can sell! Come get me I will get you high! My heart sunk! He had
found the hiding place with my jewelry and coins and had taken them. When
confronted he said, I just got a loan I was going to get them back, I could
pick up one of them at a local pawn shop, I told him he could no longer stay
at our home and that he needed to bring however had signed the loan slip to
the pawn shop at 9 am when they opened. He did not show up, then called at
12:00 and said he could probably meet me now. I had already called the police
and made arrangements to pay the loan to get part of my property back. When I
asked him were the diamond and Safire and my Jade necklace had hone, he said
he had sold them for the price of gold to Check City and Shane Company. Myself
and my other 5 children where devastated and our Christmas was sadly tainted.
He continues to call and ask if he could just get his Christmas presents.
Sadly enough he is only mad that he was caught. I am feeling so bad for my
feelings towards my son; I want to move away and change my number and not let
him know where I have gone. This is impossible because I have 5 other children
adult and minor that’s life’s are here. No More! I know that I need to stop
letting him put the guilt on me and start moving forward.  
I have felt like I am drowning and every time I come up for a breath of air he
pulls me back down and holds me under just long enough that I think I am
dyeing, and then once again lets me up just to start over with the same
routine again. It’s exhausting!!! I am so done!!

Reply

  * ![helyn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### helyn

January 20th, 2014 at 12:58 AM

Be strong I struggle everyday with my twenty year oldsdaughter. I'm praying
for you and you're family..

Reply

  * ![Sally M](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally M

January 1st, 2014 at 10:59 AM

Ok, so I have a question. My story is like all of yours with a 28yo daughter
is a mile high mental health issues, brittle alcoholism/Rx drug use and to top
it off a butt load of medical problems. Been in and out of rehabs/detox's and
all others for the last 8 years. Most ETOH levels have been in the .3+ t .4+.
Tried suicide more than once and etc. etc. I don't need to give everyone the
grusome details as we have all been there and felt the same pains. I have been
pretty proud of myself in regards to not enabling her in the last few years.
She was temporarily staying with us and started drinking again and I
physically locked her out of our house a while back. Currently for the last
two weeks has been sober but I believe is now drinking again. Well now I live
in a climate that is -10 below zero with -25 wind chill and in the country.
How do I kick her out..only to freeze to death? I always have this conundrum
(regardless of the scenerio) of where does "not enabling" cross paths with
giving them a death sentence…such as my current situation?

Reply

  * ![Mikki](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mikki

January 1st, 2014 at 2:38 PM

You know I'm so glad to have found you all. I have literally been searching
for someone to talk to who shares my experiences and pains of parenting. I
feel like I haven't done anything right for my sons. I feel suicidal many
days. I'm fearful of phone calls, visitors, mail. Every one of those brings
ever worse news. I have tried to get some peace from their constant poor
choices, but even my family say I "choose to see only bad." Fact is, there
isn't much good to speak of unless I count being alive. I cat really talk to
them because I end up in the defendants seat. This life can be very lonely
when no one identifies with your pain. My husbands family's kids all seem so
perfect and beautiful, never straying off track. Their biggest worry is which
college to accept the scholarship from or being tired from golf practice. And
all of this and the constant bragging by my coworkers about their perfect
little lives can be so hard to deal with. I feel so alienated and many days I
want to stay in bed and cry. People tell you you're enabling. You do too much,
you didn't do enough, you seek out pain, yada yada yada. But they normally
haven't been faced with this kind of road on which to travel. The worse part
is you can't see an end in sight.

Reply

  * ![Lady](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lady

January 3rd, 2014 at 9:51 AM

We have two ends in sight. Death or life and the hardest is the rollercoaster
ride that goes with both. Then you get the guilt. I am in the same position as
everyone else. One second at a time! Good minutes and worse! Little things
become so appreciated. The sun on my face, a colorful bird out the window, my
favorite is how i notice laughter everywhere. It makes me smile! Seek out
happy people and laughter and be a joiner! Good luck!

Reply

  * ![Mom](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mom

January 3rd, 2014 at 3:38 PM

I know exactly what you mean. Our 24 year old, adopted son has been in and out
of jail, wasting his life. I am a teacher, and my colleagues don't have to
deal with the legal system and all the wonderful new experiences our son has
given us. It can be alienating. On New Year's Eve, the dear, who had been
permitted to come home in April, decided to blow up over nothing and just
left. We haven't heard from him, and my husband and I are having our usual
talk about "When is enough, enough?". My heart is broken from watching my
husband, plus my own grief. You are not alone.

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

February 15th, 2014 at 4:27 PM

Mikki… You are so NOT alone…I have had that fact reinforced over and over
these past 20 years. Yes, I said 20…. 64 years old now and been waiting for my
42 year old alcoholic son to sober up and become a functioning member of
society all these years… Had every advantage and opportunity… So that has
NOTHING to do with this horrific problem… Strikes anyone! My saving grace is
my husband of 20 years who will not allow me to enable or finance him… But he
drained my poor mother dry… After her death, the true scope of his problems
became evident as he lost his wife, children, home, car….she had been
financing it all! We have now lost all touch with him… And will never have
anything to do with him or allow him to hurt us in any way other than the hurt
and sadness he has left me to deal with. I live life by finding coping
mechanisms to fill every day. (Praying, reading, yoga, golf, healthy
relationships). I do believe knowing you are not alone helps…

Reply

  * ![Eric](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eric

January 1st, 2014 at 5:24 PM

Vodka seems to be a very popular drink-of-choice among the young alcoholic
set.

Reply

  * ![Eric](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eric

January 1st, 2014 at 5:30 PM

I don't even see the point in writing my own comments on this blog - at least
half of the ones already written could have been written by me.

Still working through the pages, looking to see if people who get jaded by the
typical stuff ever get set off by the "straw that broke the camel's back" such
as: vomit EVERYWHERE when the kid drinks, ruining carpet, furniture, and
sating the concrete driveway.

Anyone ever been told by their alcoholic, drug-dealing kid that, if you try
and kick them out of your house, they will sue you for failing to comply with
eviction laws?

Or how about the classic move, where they try and provoke a conflict, then
attempt to get an order of protection to get you thrown out of your own house?
I've heard about that one and suspect that he has too…

Reply

  * ![Susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan

January 3rd, 2014 at 5:51 PM

Hi Eric,  
The situation with my son isn't as awful as yours reads, I am saddened by all
of our stories but am struck by the absence of dialogue around utilizing
whatever local/state resources are available to protect us from our adult
children. I know that most of us are grappling with so many varied emotions
about how we feel/treat these seriously dis-eased/misguided/abusive adults,
for whom little else remains -for us - but our memories of them as children.
But… where did we sign our lives away and enslave ourselves to them? I for one
believe that, as much as I would fight to protect my son's rights I will fight
even harder to protect myself, the healthy relationships that I do have, our
assets, even from my son - even if that means utilizing the legal system
against him. I don't know if this exists in other county's/states, but in
Missouri there are community action police officers, police outreach programs,
Legal Aid to name but a few of the resources. Legal and professional
counseling are elements of survival when dealing with the myriad problems that
we each face, often hourly - let alone daily - with these ADULTS who are
failing to thrive. Connecting with others and all of you is proving
invaluable, it is helping build my resolve to return to a healthier well
balanced prospective that includes my son, albeit in small and controlled
doses, but doesn't centralize him in my/our life.

Reply

  * ![Susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan

January 3rd, 2014 at 6:18 PM

Hi Sally M.  
When my husband and I decided that my son had to leave our home, in December
in Missouri, we had already determined that he is going to have to solve this
problem on his own, but I do have a list of the available shelters if he
contacts us. Our resolve to survive our sons addiction is and must be our
priority. I don't have a painless answer to the conundrum you have posited, I
just know that even while my heart was breaking, I had to do
something/anything to change the dynamic in our home and I wasn't going to
collude with my abuser any longer.

Reply

  * ![Eric](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eric

January 3rd, 2014 at 10:19 PM

Alienating - yes indeed. Even friends with the best intentions are alienated.
They feel bad for you, but its awkward; they don't know what to do or say
about the situation, so they drift away.

A lot of the pain is about the grieving process that doesn't happen. The
person who was your child is standing there, walking and talking and
breathing, so it is hard to accept that the person you knew no longer exists;
killed by the evil that is alcohol & drug abuse.

It's easier now to move on with life because I understand that my son is gone.
I can forgive him and love him, because this alcoholic, druggie monster that
merely LOOKS like my son, and causes so much heartache and misery, is NOT my
son.

Reply

  * ![Eric](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eric

January 3rd, 2014 at 10:21 PM

(And, because he's NOT my son, it also makes it easier to make the hard
decisions that may look cold-hearted, but are necessary to protect the
remainder of the family from him.)

Reply

  * ![Gabby](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gabby

January 4th, 2014 at 11:38 AM

I need help in dealing with my 25yr old son and his girlfriend of 8 years.
They live with me and have two children 6 and 3mos. I want them out of my
house but i fear for the safety of the kids. As i am writing this it is 2:30
pm and the mother is still in the bed. I have seen her sleep till 5pm. They
have No car, No jobs. My husband and I both work, pay all the bills, and
anything the children need. We want them out but are afraid that the babies
will be homeless. She steals our money, has pawned my things, and they sleep
all the time. The do not clean up after themselves or do anything period! I
want them out but I want the babies to stay. How can I do this?

Reply

  * ![Linda Rucker](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Linda Rucker

January 5th, 2014 at 4:03 PM

I have a 40 year old daughter who is an alcoholic. She wasn't always one; in
fact until 10 years ago she barely ever touched a drop. Then, in 2003 she had
by-pass surgery for obesity. Everything was fine fir the first 6-8 months and
then she started hanging out in the neighborhood bar. As the weight fell off,
and guys started noticing her, she spent more and more time in the bar. Then,
she met him. He was very good looking, much more so than any guy she'd ever
dated before and he was her Waterloo. Every night she left her four children
the oldest 14 the youngest 5 year old twins to fend for themselves while she
sat at that bar drinking with him.  
Eventually, it got to the point, where this guy and beer were all she worried
about.  
She slept all day, often not even getting up to feed her kids or get them off
to school. Within a year she married this guy,and things only got worse. He
was an abusive drunk, a coke head and a control freak. She gad no phone, no
car, no TV, very little communication with her family and he controlled every
aspect of her life. He decided when and how much she could drink, how much
come she could use, when she talked to her family, and he beat her. Twice very
severely. Once, so severely he actually did prison time. That was the only
thing that saved her life, because when he got out if prison, he never looked
back.  
But, the damage was done. My daughter moped around over him, drinking more and
more. She went for days without eating, drinking till she passed out and then
starting all over again. Her children were taken away from her by the state
and given to her younger is ter to raise.  
For years she stayed drunk, staying here or there, but always with another
drunk.  
Her sister took her in ten times trying to help her and ten times she blew it
off, got drunk, stoke from her and even sugared her gas tank, destroying her
sisters only made if transportation.  
We finally got her into rehab, and she did great in that controlled
environment for 9 months. When she left, she came to live with my husband and
I and for two months she was fine, but it didn't Kay's. She started sneaking
beer into her room, hiding the empties in her dresser drawer, the back of her
closet, under her mattress. And then one day, she took off and was back on the
street, hustling drinks and drugs.  
She took up with a guy, another abuser who's first wife died under mysterious
circumstances, and he nearly killed her by trying to chose her to death.  
After that, her brother took her in and again she did well for about 10
months, but when she got out on her own, it was the same story.  
Other family members have tried to help,but the end results have always been
the same.  
Now, she wants me to help her yet again and I just don't know.my husband,my
other kids and other family members say not to put myself through this again,
and I know their right, but it kills me to hear her beg and to help her.  
I am just so tired of being torn and so tired of worrying about her.  
But, what if I don't help and that phone call comes? How do you cope with that
kind guilt!

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

January 6th, 2014 at 6:23 AM

Thanks Lady and Mom.

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

January 7th, 2014 at 6:57 AM

Linda R. My daughter also had a Gastric Bypass and ever since that, her
addiction is out of control. Like your daughter, does well in a controlled
environment but when discharged, hardly makes it a day. When she starts
drinking, has this uncontrollable need to continue until she ends up in Detox,
the ER or other. I have heard, and do believe that the gastric bypass does
play a significant role in the body/brains addiction. My daughter has been
State committed twice and near death more times that I can count. She knows
she is an addict and knows she cannot stop. Another State commitment and/or
adult guardianship is ok as it keeps them safe for a while but if they want
they can just go to another State to avoid it. I really have resolved…and told
her, that I have accepted that she will die, and that I love her but only she
can help herself. I think about her many times every day. It just saddens my
heart to see her suffer. Even though I have accepted that she will die,
knowing that she is hurting and suffering herself is a worse pain…as when she
is dead, she will be free from it all. What a sad life for them and us as
parents.

Reply

  * ![Susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan

January 8th, 2014 at 6:44 PM

Hi Debbie,  
I have been rereading the postings to reaffirm my conviction to this very
complex separation from my son. Like you I have committed to 2014 being about
health for myself and and my husband. Just like everyone else here, my heart
is broken by the seemingly relentless battles to gain autonomy from my ADULT
child. The longer I am away from him the harder it is for me to hold onto the
"THIS IS A TERRRIBLE REALATIONSHIP and I am not going to tolerate the
intolerable". Today I spoke with him for quite a while, via phone, he asked to
come home - using rationalized lies while admitting nothing. My stomach hurt
so bad after this conversation, thank god that it did, otherwise I may have
wasted time listening to and wanting to believe the well honed charm of this
very manipulative person that I so want to have an honest relationship with
but have to remember that that is a two way street and he doesn't even live on
the same planet as me. Namaste, S.

Reply

  * ![Susan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan

January 8th, 2014 at 7:25 PM

Hi Gabby,  
Get a BATTLE PLAN, there are no two ways about it - we are at WAR with our
ADULT children and their behaviors - chosen, adaptive or genetic. Get legal
advise, talk to your minister, contact The Department of Children and family
services, call the police. Where are the mother's parents and can they be
recruited? We are all supporting each other here on this page and we all need
to know what OUR RIGHTS ARE while we toughen up and stop expecting these once
beloved children to change. The family dynamic, that many of us battle with,
will not change if we are not prepared to fight for and put ourselves first.
And in your case, the lives of innocent grandchildren too.

Reply

  * ![Alcohol Rehab Centers](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Alcohol Rehab Centers

January 16th, 2014 at 4:26 AM

What i preferably say is that don't let your children so alone and independent
that he/she will take any kind of decision without your permission…there
should be some what involvement of parents required.

Reply

  * ![Robyn Pasqualucci](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Robyn Pasqualucci

January 17th, 2014 at 11:12 PM

I have a daughter26 whom we have watched sink into hell our help doesn't help.
We are at the "your on your own honey!" For she has had a stroke, over 20 spin
drys, suboxzone, unarmed robbery etc she is currently in jail. She is VERY
VERY SKILLED AT MANIPULATING courts, police, PO, us, she is still an
attractive girl but her teeth, which were gorgeous, are getting BLK cracks
between spaces. She has Hep C, a 3 yr old daughter(no custody) and has been
found in abandoned projects in a rough area, South Boston Old Colony projects.
While she was with others she went into full nod and it was winter time and
they took everything, purse,sneakers, winter coat, pants and just left her…but
that's the way of the street. Every now and then I get sucked back in and will
get custody of her daughter, visit jail,detox rides, picked up her things
after she gets bounced. I get lots of support from people very experienced in
recovery and I'm told I MUST NOT INTERFEAR WITH HER BOTTOM OR THE BOTTOM WILL
NEVER COME. OK…….. I have an 18 yr old son who has said things like ARE YOU
FRIGGEN FRIED when I warn him of the grip these drugs take on the willing
victims that NEVER BELIEVED it would happen to them. He is very arrogant. I
believe he thinks I'm not firing on all pistons when that is the furthest from
the truth. I have been,seen,watched hard core life events of others pass by.
About 2 months ago I went into my private bathroom and first thing I noticed
was an oily vomit ring in toilet then on further inspection I could see that
someone projectile vomit. A little on the wall floor, under seat cover. I
believed at the time it was a friend of his whom was trying to go clean,
change the people places and things. My son has known him all his life. Said
he had no friends and being nice. OK we live in an upper scale affluent
neighborhood and I'm saying this because where our properties touch on four
corners EVERY SINGLE HOME HAS CLAIM TO AN OPIATE ADDICT!!! This is crazy!!
None of them chum together either. Boys are arriving at detox so young they
don't even have facial hair!! Wrong wrong wrong and I'm stopping myself from
going on a political tangent. Lobbyists for drug co just recently brought
before Congress there steadfast opinion NOT TO MANUFACTURE a new opiate dose
of form so it can't be crushed snorted injected. WTF? Why???? Then the same
congress retires will FULL LIFETIME PENSIONS and guess what they do, as of the
last decade, become lobbyists for these same drug co and get a big chunk of
change to come on board??? Is America sleeping? Conflict of interest you
think. A must read that will leave you in horror if your unaware of what's
going on , "This Town, two parties and a funeral plus plenty of valet parking!
In Americas gilded capital BY Mark Leibovich. quite a title…. QUITE AN EYE
OPENER. We don't have enough programs, beds, resources etc etc. Ok my "little
tangent is done. My sons attitude is caustic, temper is explosive, believes he
always right and my poor mild mannered husband is caught In the crossfire.
I'll conk him on the head eventually! He smashes things in the house and I'm
always to blame as the reason. 0-60 temper! My husband has made many mistakes
taking his side because that's just the way he was raised. Example- son
screaming and yelling about not getting paid for his hours, father says write
it down and retreats leaving the ticking time bomb a whirling dervish
screaming F this on the front lawn top of lungs F that. My thinking is what's
up w husband letting him carry on. I mind my business after a while I hear a
Big Bang. Oh forgot to tell you he's punching walls etc. I rush out HERE COMES
MOMMY!! I will take a stand. He kicked a hole in my huge terra cotta planter!
I'm aghast. Holding my head in disbelief. He's done and just going to pull
out. I was somewhere between let's rumble and OMG look what you did!!! He
starts pulling away I make mention how'd he like the planter on his Audi. He
slams it into park and is headed right for me like a demented rhino full
speed. I'm not stupid I run inside. My husbands take was if only you didn't go
out there?!??! HUH? He's been breaking things and I'm now involved!!! I said
in no way shape or form is he staying here tonight and go hide and cry for a
number of reasons, fright, is my husband nuts??? Like the out of control scene
problem began when I went out there. SOMEHOW IM TO BLAME. It was august warm
out we have a screen house he has a car. What happened next flabbergasted me.
I come back upstairs and they are gone to a hotel cause "he had nowhere to
go!!!" Great message your sending there. the following evening my son
sauntered up to me w a half assed sorry with no sorrowful ness , just a get
this out of the way. I'm still reeling over if I didn't go outside!!! (no I'll
cower inside and let him run rampant) and he took him to a hotel??? Big
mistakes being made. Message to the wild one should have been," that's not how
a good man behaves" let him taste a little consequence but NOOOOOOO I come
upstairs to a dark house and they are motel bound!! The following evening he's
going to say sorry, not heart felt either. I said get away from me. Days later
my husband said "Well he did try to apologize and you sent him away!" Am I
crazy or am I being pinned as the scapegoat. Today I was gone all day as was
my daughter home on school break. The phone has 7 missed collect calls from, I
don't even know what to call her. I go into the guest bathroom and there is a
poorly cleaned up greasy ring. I'm pretty observant as would most people. WE
ALL HAVE BEEN SICK FLUSHED IT AWAY BUT A RING REMAINS!!! I don't even have the
strength for another battle into a lying face. Or is it the friend. I am so
sick of the constant state of upheaval I'm in. And why didn't my husband stick
up for or do the right thing. I don't need protecting but handle it with a
firm conviction of a stand. There's more more more. Thanks for listening! I
hope I didn't crash your site. Read the book. And we need to put an end to
Americas priorities abroad. I don't mean be merciless but there's woman and
children homeless and the mentally ill are being bounced onto the street w no
resources. Thnx again XXOO I think I touched on 10 topics. Hope to get
feedback. Peace Robyn

Reply

  * ![HOPE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### HOPE

July 27th, 2014 at 3:38 PM

Hi Robbin..

I have jus left a very similiar experience to urs ..u explained it so much
better..

There r no word, not even a hug to comfort us when our children r is so much
pain.

As much help and distance from the situation it still is a big part of my life
that I know I am grieving the loss of a child who is living under extreme
addiction . Time will never erase the pain.

Many blessings & healing prayers sent UR way.

Reply

  * ![Robyn Pasqualucci](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Robyn Pasqualucci

January 17th, 2014 at 11:50 PM

PS I do believe some make it out. The disease is tricky cunning and baffling,
waiting in the tall grass for one mistake. Constant vigilance, a higher power
, support of others, a group, a sponsor, get active. ETC it's swallowing these
poor kids whole. There not happy! They detest what they have become and the
never ending hunt for more. Lowering your personal standard bar a little more
each day. Opiates rewire the receptors in the brain and it takes just about a
year to form new bonds. The fact is they come out of jail rehab wherever and
they are not physically addicted but they are prisoners and the Grace Of God,
hitting your bottom hard, and a back pocket to jump into till they can
think/see clearly. Poor kids!!! I have met many, listened to many stories and
hands down they hate what and who they have become. 4 day detox and if your
uber lucky there's a space at the very few halfway houses or off to a holding
to wait to get into a halfway house and learn how to love themselves and
basically learn how to live. Addicts stay at the age when addicted and as the
body ages, 28 they still think like a 16 yr old. The thing that behooves me
the most is you have to go to a halfway house from a detox. Straight there,
not from the street, I couldn't even give my daughter a ride. Must be
transported and if sent to an overcrowded holding with day passes that is so
dangerous. If they are kicked out of the holding for something like taking
someone's shampoo…… They have to start at step 1 a detox and the only way into
a detox is to test positive? How many parents have come to me feeling dirty,
guilty and mad as hell at the system because they MUST GET THEIR CHILD HIGH TO
START AT SQUARE ONE= detox. Even if they test clean!!! You CANT GO FROM THE
STREET TO A HALFWAY HOUSE! C-R-A-Z-Y!! I will be celebrating 8 years sober in
March and the stories are mostly very sad but I have been to some YP mtg that
rock! Nekipa(sp) they learn to live laugh meet others be an inspiration to
others. We must give back what was so freely given to us and that's the
blueprint of suggestions and love. XO Robyn

Reply

  * ![Robyn Pasqualucci](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Robyn Pasqualucci

January 18th, 2014 at 12:44 AM

Thanks for all you and your team are doing for us w the forum and referrals.
Was showing to a co-worker who is in CA! Can't find my comments? Were they
deleted?

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

January 20th, 2014 at 9:41 AM

I have been writing on this forum for years..I can't believe this is still
going on..still our reality. I wanted very much to be the one to say that
things can and did get better but reality is a cruel mistress…

Son not doing well at all. Police put him on another psychiatric hold because
he was running in front of cars on a busy street. The Social Worker called me
at midnight the other night to get info. When I gave her the background…he
won't work, lies about everything, is a substance abuser the last 8-10 years,
he has been hospitalized 25-30 times in the last 4 years.. She said they were
going to admit him. I begged for help, said we were afraid of him. The next
morning he was out..calling for a ride back to the city where he is
homeless..I refused to to so..my husband had a procedure that day related to
his stroke. He was furious and demanded I come anyway for him ..when I
wouldn't he called my sister. She did go to hospital & overheard that he
signed himself out AMA..He left a place where he could get help to go back on
the street.

I now have no contact with him. I did tell him that he needs to sign himself
into a psychiatric facility - I just can't handle any more. The police were
talking about us going to Probate Court, getting guardianship- am I horrible
if I just don't have that fight left in me anymore? The one cop told me that
the saddest thing is seeing an 80 year old mom still doing this with a
50-something son. I could see that happening to me if I don't walk away now.
He was supposed to get into sober housing in 6 weeks if he complies with
outpatient program but he will have to stay in shelter in the meantime. My son
heard they are sick of him in the program..he has interfered with the progress
of others. They are testing his sincerity & resolve and he is failing. I feel
sick..but I keep your voices in my head..my job is to do nothing..he has to do
everything …but apparently he won't even do one thing..

Reply

  * ![Debi from VA](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debi from VA

August 15th, 2014 at 9:16 AM

Diane, I have read & reread this forum at least a dozen times. I feel like I
could have written every post on here, but I can relate more closely to your
story than all of the others. My son is 33 & suffers from alcoholism, OCD,
depression, anxiety & bipolar disorder. His dad has totally disowned him, his
brother is thoroughly disgusted with him, all of his friends have abandoned
him & honestly I'm ALL he has in this world. I've offered to get him into a
long-term facility, but he has completely given up & says there is "no hope".
He's been in many 30 day programs, but they were only temporary "vacations" &
a way to make new "friends". I KNOW he could turn his life around & be happy,
but without his consent, I KNOW a forceful move will never work!!! I'm 63,
still working full-time & never feel happy or safe in my own home. (He lives
in a weekly hotel which I pay for, just to keep him out of my house. I hear
all of you saying to stop paying for his place, but I'm not quite at that
point yet. I have a hole in every wall & door - a daily reminder of his
violent outbursts.) Thanks for letting me vent, Diane, & please give us an
update on your son.

Reply

  * ![glenda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### glenda

January 20th, 2014 at 1:02 PM

I've spent a good part of my day off reading through the comments here. I, too
have a child (31) who can't seem to function without some kind of mind
altering drug, be it alcohol, prescription drugs or the illegal drugs off the
street. My ex-husband (with whom my son currently lives) and I are getting
ready to lay down the law, so to speak. We have been dealing with this for the
last 6 years (although he has probably be using for a lot longer). We thought
he had turned himself around and now we are back at square one. He went to
school, graduated and we thought all this was behind us. But he lost his job
(because of past drug conviction and driving record), lost his girlfriend of 6
years(tired of waiting for him to get a job and marry her) and then he got a
DWI on NY's Eve. We had been giving him a little money for gas, etc., but now
we strongly believe he is back to buying pills or something on the street to
cope with his depression about his situation. He begs, literally begs for
money for first one thing and then another. We know something isn't right.
It's like he has given up and we are ready to give up on him! He does nothing
to help out his dad, trashes his room and feels entitled because he is
"depressed".I even wish to go to sleep and never wake up from the emotional
roller coaster ride. I cry just about every day and can hardly get through
doing my daily tasks. My ex and I hate to kick him to the curb but we can't
take much more. Reading these comments has been of some comfort. Diane, I feel
your pain because I know this life we are living is not only draining us
emotionally, but can effect our health if we are not careful. I am 62 years
old and was hoping to have peace in my last years of life and it doesn't look
as if I can ever have it. When I share these thoughts with him, he doesn't
seem to care. I guess with someone who has made the choices he has made, it is
always and will always be about HIM and no one else.

Reply

  * ![Susan Duncan](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Susan Duncan

January 23rd, 2014 at 2:14 PM

I am so desperate for my sons safety. I don't know what else to do. He is
30yrs old and I can't do this anymore. If I don't abandon him by tough love I
feel I'll still be doing this heartbreak road when he's 50. I am 63 and this
is not what I want for the rest of my life. I am totally drained of emotion,
financially helping him is killing me. I've tried to email a desperate plea
for help this day and my heartfelt letter bounced back. l just want some
support here on port macqaurie. Can you suggest someone who can help. Just
talking to another sufferer will help

Reply

  * ![admin2](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### admin2

January 23rd, 2014 at 2:43 PM

Hi Susan,  
Thank you for your comment. We regret to say that it doesn't look like we
currently list therapists in Australia, but this site may provide helpful
information if you are experiencing a crisis situation, or you feel your son
is suicidal or in crisis: lifeline.org.au/Get-Help/Facts--Information/Facts-
and-Information

We wish you and your son all the best,  
The GoodTherapy.org Team

  * ![Mom](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mom

January 24th, 2014 at 3:32 PM

Susan, you deserve happiness in your life. It sounds as if you have done
everything you can. I am in a similar situation, and I now understand that
severing ties is the best thing for our son, not to mention my husband and
myself.

  * ![Jill Petronio](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jill Petronio

January 25th, 2014 at 4:53 PM

I am seeking information that will:  
1) Help me help my 36 yr old, married (separated from spouse & 3 kids) who all
live in Metairie, LA.  
2) HELP my daughter to 'possibly' recognize the CRISIS she is in AND accept or
seek help  
3) direct me and others in her life toward resources in Metairie, La and/ or
Houston, Texas.

She has said that she is coming to my home, Houston, TX, tomorrow, Sun.,
1/26/2014. She 'plans' to stay "a day or so" & then go to her dad's for "a day
or so". He lives in a very small (no resources) west texas town. I would hope
to offer her an option (or more) upon her arriving at my home tomorrow.

She has abused street rx's, illegal drugs & alcohol in her past. I cannot
confirm any current substance abuse(s), but history says it's most likely. She
denies, of course. We DO NOT give her money or any other assistance.

Reply

  * ![Louise Rogers](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Louise Rogers

February 2nd, 2014 at 11:08 PM

I am the mother of one son aged 41. He has been in and out of treatment
centers too many times to count. This began at age 14 and has progressed since
then. He was sent 3 years in prison for his part in a car theft ring. He has
stolen from everyone, including myself and no one dares let him in. Money,
jewelry,alcohol… anything he can get his hands on

He was in yet another treatment center just two weeks ago but within days was
kicked out and now he is in yet another willing facility. I talked to him
today and asked how he is doing and his response was, "I haven't had any
heroin for awhile so that's good!

I have told him that this yo yo lifestyle for me is tearing me apart and that
he won't get better until hr really commits to recovery and he is running out
of options. I said for him to forget calling me until he is clean….am I wrong.

Reply

  * ![Alcohol & Drug Treatment](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Alcohol & Drug Treatment

February 3rd, 2014 at 7:37 PM

It is always not too late for parents to help their son/daughter who has
problems in substance abuse. there's a lot of option to be consider. One of
this is a rehab treatment.

Reply

  * ![Jennie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jennie

February 21st, 2014 at 10:54 PM

I can't let go. I pray morning and night.  
I'm scared  
I find little SINCERE help available - in Plano (and surrounding) it 's all
about the $$  
I need to go somewhere and cry for hours  
Seizure after seizure  
Will it ever stop?

Reply

  * ![Tandi Nel](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tandi Nel

February 4th, 2014 at 5:49 AM

To Louise, NO, DEFINATELY NO.  
I wish I can get my poor mother of 61 to see that she has to cut the strings
supporting my 40 year old addicted brother. He stays in their home and is
wrecking their life. Destroying my once wonderful relationship with my mother
because she rather avoids everybody than to hear the truth.  
I have printed this whole site, comments and all, and gave it to her to read.  
What else can I do to make her see that he is NEVER going to change?

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

February 6th, 2014 at 7:25 PM

Hi Tandi,

I feel your pain and frustration. I am in the same boat. My brother is 45
years old and has ruined all our lives, along with his own. I pray and
struggle with the emotions this disease brings everyday, even though I am
(geographically) far from the situation. The stress of the situation killed my
father and my mother is alone dealing with this adult addict, and she is in
her mid70s. I wish there was a solution. My brother is not a bad person, but
he is lost in this disease and cannot break free. My parents spent all of
their savings (and more) trying to help him, but to no avail. It is just
heartbreaking. I have read all of the comments on this site and I can relate
to each and every one of them. Thank you all for sharing.  
Lisa

Reply

  * ![Kenny B.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kenny B.

February 5th, 2014 at 6:27 PM

To Tandi Nel.

Sorry about your situation, just always be strong and hope the best to your
family. Yes maybe if you brother read this conversation there is a chance that
he makes realize to change and think that he has to go to a drug treatment
center. Not really sure about it, buy it may give the idea.

Reply

  * ![Mary Lane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mary Lane

February 8th, 2014 at 1:04 PM

Our son has stolen….lied….cheated…and broken our hearts. He successfully
completed rehab, spent successful time in a halfway house, eventually moved
into his own little apartment and is employed. He attends meetings…..and keeps
in touch…from afar. Rehab was his idea. ….he even made all the phone calls. No
think that is why it worked. Of course….time will tell. One never forgets the
distrust issues…we forgive…but willed ably always have our guard up. We
insisted he move far away…out of state…and never come back " home." He has
agreed.

His drug of choice? Heroine. Lots of it. I share…to give hope. My husband and
I completely detached from him THE MINUTE we knew he was doing drugs. Period.
We did not do the roller coaster….because our son is over 21….. And an adult.

We decided very early not to let his addiction…become our habit.

We are hopeful…but forever cautious.

Reply

  * ![A](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### A

February 11th, 2014 at 1:03 AM

What happens when the addict continuously tells the parent to "stop paying for
stuff" or "you're enabling me" or "giving me money is not helping anything".
Or the parent doles out money without you even asking for it, quite the
contrary, when you have specifically told them not to do it?

And then, years later, you try to get yourself help after years and years of
trying to figure out how to get yourself off stuff. You try to get yourself
off prescription pills that initially helped you turn your life around. You go
to rehab. And that is sabotaged and not supported by your parents. Because
they want to see you as perfect. The problem is, years of trying to appear
perfect and please your parents, be the parent to them, has taken its toll.
And now you need help again, you are choosing sobriety. But nobody is being or
knows how to be supportive, so you feel stuck trying to figure it all out on
yet again on your own.

Because you don't want to burden them financially. Because you can see that
it's taken a toll on their health. You just want to get help discreetly, pay
for it yourself, move on with life in a more healthy manner. But your drug use
is interfering with so many different aspects.

How do you dig yourself out of that hole? Drug addicts and alcoholics are not
all liars and thieves. There are all kinds of us. Normal people are not
perfect either. We all have good and bad, light and dark qualities. Sometimes
it's easiest to blame the person with the most obvious problem than to look at
your own role, or to be truly compassionate for a fellow human being who is
struggling and genuinely trying to change.

I feel for people, for friends, family members, and significant others, whose
lives are affected by addicts and alcoholics. I truly do. Beautiful things
happen though, once those people get help and turn things around. Just give us
a chance. Please never turn your back on a family member who is reaching out
to you for help, trying to be as honest as possible about what is going on. We
realize after a while that we create our own problems. What it comes down to
is, what can be done about it? How can we fix this? Before the person loses
the motivation because they don't have the support to pull it off.

Reply

  * ![Mzurita](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mzurita

February 15th, 2014 at 6:20 PM

This is for a. How would a parent or loved one know when it's really time to
help the addict?after so many many chances, how are we to know when they are
truly serious about changing? Our son also is a master at lies! It's
impossible to know truth from lie. Thanks

Reply

  * ![Dora](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dora

September 24th, 2014 at 10:15 AM

I know exactly how you feel my son is a master of lies that is unbelievable he
is now 40 with 5 children to a girl who has 5 other children previously they
all live off welfare I constantly worry about the children are they getting
fed properly etc their mother is indigenous and some indigenous friends say
don't worry the kids won't starve !

  * ![Chris](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chris

February 11th, 2014 at 8:11 AM

thanks for this article - and the comments help, too, if only to realize I am
not alone in this struggle to maintain. I know I have to get off the coaster,
but it's my 'addiction' that I feel like there must be some way to help. As
your article mentions, I worry about him living in his car or under a bridge
and losing contact with me. I've had personal contact with others who have
succeeded with this,and they are helping me gain strength.

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

February 11th, 2014 at 11:34 AM

It seems so simple when reading others stories the right thing to do, but it
is really hard when it is your child.  
Crying again this am over my daughter who has been sober for about a month
now. (Been in and out of treatment about 15 or so times) She's burned so many
bridges with me and her father (different household) that neither of us trust
her to live with us again. She is broke and homeless and is so depressed now
that I worry about her living or dying. Again, wondering if I should take her
in since she's been sober for over a month or should I keep to my guns and
leave her on the streets? Can I live with myself knowing she is sober and
kills herself cuz no one was there for her? Augh! help!

Reply

  * ![Melissa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Melissa

February 21st, 2014 at 8:32 AM

Sally, I have two children currently 8 months sober and I refuse to ever let
them live with me again…not because I don't want to help them as I do want to
help them. I made this decision because I know that I don't have the strength
to kick them out if they relapse. I made this decision because I can't watch
and live this lifestyle and it was ruining my very existence…I was starting to
question if life was worth living if this is the life I was going to be forced
to live….only another parent of an addict can understand our feelings of
desperation. The guilt of it…even today what if they relapse because I didn't
let them come home. If they are not going to make it, living in my home isn't
going to change that. I have spent hours upon hours crying, beating myself up,
praying and begging god to save my children. I mostly want to tell you not
only is it ok to not let her come home its probably in the end will do more
good than harm. My daughter thanked me one day for not enabling her, she said
thank you for doing the hard thing…it helped me even though I hated you at the
time. Today they are both doing well and I live for today. Be strong Sally…if
she is going to succeed she will succeed not living with you.

Reply

  * ![Dolores](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dolores

February 13th, 2014 at 6:43 PM

Please read "Don't Let your Kids Kill You" by Charles Rubin.. It has helped me
tremendously. I have started to DETACH and move on with my own life.. It has
been like my Bible. I pick it up everytime I feel weak, or mad or sad.
Codependent No More has been helpful too.. My therapists' recommendation.

Thank you for being here! Dolores

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

February 15th, 2014 at 3:54 PM

"Don't Let Your Kids Kill You" has been my go to stress reliever for some
time… I have probably purchased 10-15 copies for people I know who are
hurting. My other dress reliever is Yoga!

Reply

  * ![Shawn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Shawn

February 14th, 2014 at 2:25 PM

I agree 100% that this is not the parents fault. I disagree 100 % that it is
not a disease. Thank you for sharing.

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

February 18th, 2014 at 7:09 PM

Mzurita. I don't know. A worker told me: "as long as they are breathing, there
is hope." As of today, my daughter is wandering the streets, alone with no one
to turn to for support, no place to go, with no money in the middle of the
winter. I hope she is still breathing…. I cannot stop my tears.

Reply

  * ![Willy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Willy

February 22nd, 2014 at 6:59 PM

I amm 63 years old. My adult 38 year old son just got out of jail (for the
umpteenth time). I have not spoken to him in over 4 years and I don't want him
to know where I am. He has been in trouble with drugs, theft, etc. since he
was 16 years old. Nothing has helped. I've tried to get him jobs, therapy,
counseling, even got him a car and a place to live and paid for school as long
as he would stay in school. He never went,never made a single car payment or
rent payment and I had to legally evict him. He has threatened me and his
verbal abuse is substantial towards me and his grandmother. I feel incrediblly
guilty for being a rotten mother. I worked all my life and my "househusband"
took care of him … I was not involved much til he was in the teens and then it
was difficult to get him to do anything righteous. I pray for him to find God
every day. I don't want him to find me though. I feel awful for even saying
that. I have found him on facebook but I keep up with his whereabouts and
well-being (?) on his page. He has sent me another "friend request" which I
repeatedly ignore and do not answer his emails.. He always says the same
thing… Mom I am clean…please call me. Then two months later is in jail for
theft/using a deceased persons identity. His father and I divorcedd long ago.
I have to no avail tried my best to get him into meth treatment and into a
rehab center. He has left both of them, totalled cars, wrecked homes, and the
list goes on. I just got another note from him begging me to call yesterday.
How do I handle this. I am at my rope's end. Please help me.

Reply

  * ![Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn

February 22nd, 2014 at 9:26 PM

As of tonight I now realize there is no winning against this drug and alcohol
demon.

I give up…..I can't do it anymore…..I'm throwing in the towel in defeat !

For a while I really thought there was hope…now I see this is a losing battle
! It makes me so sad !

I hope you all have better luck with your children than I have had with my 23
year old daughter.

Reply

  * ![Mel](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mel

March 2nd, 2014 at 6:51 PM

I read this and I thought i had written this but then I realizes I've never
been on this site. I have the same problem. I feel completely defeated

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

February 23rd, 2014 at 3:36 PM

Melissa, your words were of such comfort. Thank you, thank you.

Reply

  * ![Robert](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Robert

February 23rd, 2014 at 6:11 PM

My brother is a heroin addict. He will be turning 34 this year (maybe) and
lives with my mom, a widow. He is unemployed and has no driver's license as a
result of a DUI. The home we grew up is in an area that is not serviced by
public transportation. My mother works 12 hour shifts as a hospice nurse.

My brother was "successfully completed" a court ordered rehab program about 8
months ago. Prior to that, he spent 90 days in jail for the DUI and
possession. The only time he has been clean in the last 5 years or so was
while he was locked up.

My mother does everything for him, except hand him money. She cooks, cleans,
does his laundry, buys him cigarettes, and is in constant desperation
wondering if she will find him dead one day in the bathroom. She has
physically dragged him to the bathroom on 2 separate occasions to run cold
water on him because she feared he was OD'ing.

He has pawned / sold everything of value in my mom's house - her possessions -
to support his addiction. He has no desire to even attempt to change. He
manipulates everyone around him to make himself look like the victim.

It's all I can do not to literally beat the crap out of him. I don't even see
him as my brother anymore, and as cold as it seems, it doesn't bother me. I'm
at the point where I feel that he will die of an overdose - and, I just want
him to get it over with already. It's awful, I know. But, that is how I feel.

Here's my plan…  
1\. Get the process for a new court-ordered rehab started. It's called the
"Baker Act" her in Flori-duh.  
2\. Look for a condo in a 55+ community for my mother.  
3\. Once my brother is sent in, get my mother to move into the retirement
community, where he can't live with her.  
4\. Let my brother sink or swim. He will find his way if he has the desire.

I talked to my mom about it last night, and she was apprehensive. But, I'm
hopeful that will be able to convince her.

Please, share your thoughts.

Reply

  * ![Eileen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eileen

March 2nd, 2014 at 8:57 PM

My daughter is 28 , just got arrested this weekend. Do I go to the court to
support her?

Reply

  * ![FJ](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### FJ

March 3rd, 2014 at 4:13 PM

I believe you should go to support her. It's good to show your support and
love and hope. Do not bail her out or offer any financial assistance though.
Just had this conversation with some friends. Have lived this conversation
with my step daughter and she has been doing drugs foer about 12 years. It's
important that you allow her to work out her problems. She is an adult and is
very capable regardless how you feel with guilt, responsibility, etc. these
are her problems so let her solve them. Support her but do not remedy them.
You can not work harder for her sobriety than she is willing to.. This will
only cause you to go insane . "You do not have to attend every argument or
disfunction you are invited to.

Reply

  * ![MaryAnn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### MaryAnn

March 11th, 2014 at 2:00 PM

I do believe it is a disease…..due to the simple fact, it has been recognized
by the medical association in 1970 or very early 70's. The minute an
alcoholic/addict ingests booze or drugs, they experience an allergic reaction
which causes a physical dependence & mental obsession. Now they cannot stop.
Now, they have no choice. I do however, believe, that after one has managed to
obtain & maintain a certain period of abstinence, accompanied with 12 step
programs &/or therapy, that should they use alcohol &/or drugs again, it was a
conscious decision to do so; it was a choice.

Reply

  * ![Viki](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Viki

May 1st, 2014 at 6:46 AM

My 41 year old daughter lives in our basement for the past two years, today
she is mad at me because I asked her to volunteer at the veterans home a
couple of hours a month. She doesn't work, no hobbies except fishing. She
drinks daily and often comes home drunk I am at the end of my rope, she won't
get an apartment, job or volunteer and of course "doesn't have a problem
everyone else does. What can we do to get her to get on with her life?

Reply

  * ![Sandra](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandra

May 13th, 2014 at 9:44 AM

Viki, you can give her a deadline to get a job or she has to move out. You can
also make a boundary that she is required to at least volunteer or do
something constructive if she wants to live there. Start with small steps.
Don't react to her argument against anything. Simply say these are your rules
for your house and she will have to leave if these aren't followed. Don't make
empty threats. Be kind but firm with your words. It takes alot of courage and
strength. Best wishes to you. Hope this helps a little

Reply

  * ![Linda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Linda

May 16th, 2014 at 2:53 PM

Our 30 year old daughter had suffered from an eating disorder since age 19.
She is also an alcoholic. My husband and I have attended classes at an eating
disorder clinic through a local hospital, tried a family intervention, which
she refused to go to with her brother, sister and us to a licensed specialist,
so we all went anyway without her. She has gone to some private counseling on
2 occasions, but the problems continue. She presently lives out of the country
with her husband and they seem to enjoy drinking in the evening, but she
drinks in secret when visiting our home all day long. Should we discuss her
problems with him? They are now discussing the desire to start a family. Two
other therapists have said that we would be crossing the boundaries of adults
and it is up to him to figure it out on his own. Do you agree?

Reply

  * ![Linda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Linda

May 16th, 2014 at 5:06 PM

Our daughter always smells of vodka, keeps a large bottle in her bedroom and I
found new paper liquor bags in the trash about every 4-5 days while she stayed
with us for a month. I also saw her drink mouthwash. Ten years ago her college
roommate called us about her concern for the excessive amount of beer she
drank and classes she was skipping. Her tolerance level seems so high that she
isn't staggering or usually slurring her words. She still restricts her food
intake or vomits.  
She got highly angry when I tried to talk with her about getting help and
angry when I wouldn't drink a drink at a restaurant that she really ordered
for herself. She then chose to stay with her sister for 3 days and her sister
noticed the same things. Do I limit the amt. of time she can stay or ban her
from staying with us on subsequent visits? It is heart wrenching to have her
visit. She is/was so smart and kind. We now don't want to visit her in Europe
this summer like she thinks. Are we wrong?

Reply

  * ![Dr. Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr. Mary Ellen Barnes

May 16th, 2014 at 5:22 PM

I don't agree. She is your daughter and you have every right to mention to her
and your son-in-law that you are concerned about her secret drinking.He may
not know or he may not know what to do about it. It is possible that he would
welcome your concern because he doesn't know what to do. Be gentle, kind and
concerned. Don't dictate what must be done. Ask how you can help. But, if they
reject your help, then there is little you can do, since they are adults.

Reply

  * ![Raven](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Raven

May 17th, 2014 at 10:18 AM

I feel like I am losing the battle. My daughter is 23 and is beautiful and
uses her beauty to manipulate and get money. i feel like i am watching her
slowly kill herself. She has been using for a few years. She has shot up so
much her veins are blown. My heart hurts everyday. i am so afraid i am going
to get a call that shes gone. She comes home for a few days then she leaves.
She has been baker acted more times than i can count. She doesn't work doesnt
do anything but look for her next fix. I love her more than words can say, but
she sucks the life out of me. I feel helpless because i cant help her. I wish
I would wake up and she would be my little girl again. My entire family has
written her off. i am all she has. I cant turn my back on her too. But I need
to have my own life too. Right now she is living in a horrible situation. i
wish i could just go grab her out of it and say what are you doing? If anyone
reads this and has any advice at all. please help.

Reply

  * ![gayle](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### gayle

August 29th, 2014 at 11:28 PM

Charles, we do need a bail out!!! What would that look like? I think I'm ready
to bail out!!! I could have written your story & so many others on this page.
This is a sad sad situation. I can't do this any more. I won't do this any
more. Hope floats, right? Well, my hope can float on out the door. I've done
all I can. I need to save myself. Tough love is tough on the parent. No more
blackmail. No more abuse. No more rescuing. No more crying myself to sleep.No
more missing work because I'm sick about my sick daughter. No more talking
about my sick daughter. I'm sick of my own story. I don't want this story. I'm
changing my story. No more money given to somebody that spits in my face,
bites my hand & stabs me to the deepesd layers of my heart & flesh. I'm going
to get off this crazy wheel, I'm gonna love myself enough to let her go. The
little girl is gone. I can't hold onto that any more. I'm bailing out. And I'm
o.k. with that. I'm sick & tired of being sick & tired.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

May 31st, 2014 at 4:36 AM

I have a dilemma - my daughter is 19 and living with her heroin addicted
boyfriend. I believe she is now using as she has stolen a credit card off of
us. I immediately called the police as I will not tolerate this. Her goal in
life before this mess was to become a police officer. Now- I find out that
stealing a credit card is a felony and she only got away with five dollars off
the credit card because they suspected fraud and shut the card down before she
could get much. She also has a failure to appear for a expired license coming
up and now the college might be pressing charges for an ipad that she pawned
and did not return to the school. So- my question is do I go through with
pressing charges and give her a felony or do I let her get into trouble on her
own- she is doing a great job herself.

Reply

  * ![Dr. Mary Ellen Barnes](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/mary-ellen-barnes.jpg)

### Dr. Mary Ellen Barnes

May 31st, 2014 at 4:03 PM

Laura:  
That is an interesting dilemma. If you prosecute her for the $5.00 credit card
fraud - she will forever blame you for "ruining her life", if you don't, you
may send her then message that she is not accountable (within your family) for
her actions. I would not press charges this time around, since that seems to
be the only felony pending. If she continues on this course, she will have
other felonies but she will not be able to blame them one you. She will blame
you anyway, because all children blame their parents, but at least you will be
able to know it is bogus.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 1st, 2014 at 8:06 AM

Thanks you for your advice:) I agree with your reasoning. And she loves to
blame ME for everything.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 5th, 2014 at 9:31 AM

Okay- Now my daughters wants help. I do not have much money and have no idea
where to start…any advise please! She is 19 and has state funded insurance.

Reply

  * ![Sherri Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sherri Lynn

June 6th, 2014 at 5:51 AM

I found this as I was searching for answers. Last night an old friend of my
son messaged me and told me that he is doing Meth and Heroin. He is a felon
and currently on probation. This person said that he hasn't gone to probation
for 4 months now. They said he is really in deep. I assumed something was
wrong because he would always text me or call me everyday. Now he can go for
weeks without contacting me. What do I do to try and save him? Turn him in to
the authorities? Let him do what he wants? I just don't know any more, but I
feel if I do nothing he will end up dead. I think I had rather him be in jail
for 10 years than lose him forever. Please help me. I feel so lost. He is only
23 years old and used to be such a good person. I want the son I raised back.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 6th, 2014 at 8:51 PM

Sherri Lynn-  
I feel your pain as my daughter has just admitted to using Percocet's even
though I know she is shooting heroin. At first - I felt relief that she
admitted finally that she has a problem and I know for sure she is using- but
now I am here tonight, sick to my stomach wondering if I should be finding a
rehab for her- will she even go? Should I go in debt for her and then she
might go back to using as this is usually the case with most research that I
have seen. My daughter used to call me everyday too and now she cannot keep a
phone anymore- probably trades it for drugs. So- my life has become waiting
for the phone call which will come one day that she is in jail, dead or ready
for rehab. I have been trying to research rehabs- not finding any reviews or
ratings. Don't have a clue. The only thing I know for sure is that we need to
disconnect so we don't implode with them. I try to set apart a certain part of
my day to think of her and the rest of the day I try real hard to forget her,
so maybe I might laugh or smile again.

Reply

  * ![Sherri Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sherri Lynn

June 7th, 2014 at 5:32 PM

Thank you so much for responding! I don't know exactly where he is, but I can
find out. It's a very small town. I think I really want to turn him in, for
his own safety and my sanity. Maybe I just needed my thoughts to be validated
by another mother. I love him with all of my heart and I don't want to lose
him completely. If he's in jail, at least I know he is alive and not doing
drugs. It just seems so hard to do. He will be there probably for the
remainder of his probation, which is 9 1/2 years. I will be 64 when he gets
out (if God grants me life until then). I never dreamed this would happen to
one of my children. I, too, try and forget about this situation. I'm getting
better at it. Good luck with your daughter and I thank you from the bottom of
my heart!

Reply

  * ![Louisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Louisa

July 21st, 2014 at 2:56 PM

Dont go into debt for a fancy rehab. If they are sincere any place will work.
There should be some publicly funded places.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 6th, 2014 at 8:53 PM

Sherri- Also if you can turn him in - I would. At least you know he would be
safe. But do you even know where he is?

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 8th, 2014 at 3:54 AM

Sherri Lynn-  
I have turned daughter in- for stealing my credit card. I gave her an
ultimatum which was go to treatment or I will press charges. She chose -so
far- for me to press charges. I was going to cave and drop them as it will be
a felony on her clean record, but I cannot live like this - wondering if she
is going to die everyday. So- I did not drop charges, but have not heard
anything about it. They have her address. Sherri he will probably not have to
serve all that time due to the jails being completely full. My daughters
boyfriend is a felon and on probation and uses everyday- I wonder continuously
why he is not in jail. Sherri- I would look at it like well if he goes to jail
he might have a chance. It might be a few years but then he has a chance for a
life- if he is using all chances are taken away for life and death is going to
come much sooner. My step-brother died of an overdose. I know it will be hard
to see him in jail- but I believe you will sleep better at night knowing where
he is. Don't feel guilty- these are HIS choices. We had little to do with it.

Reply

  * ![Sherri Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sherri Lynn

June 11th, 2014 at 8:19 PM

Thank you! I know that must have been very hard for you, but I agree….. It is
the best for them and us as parents. I'm in the process of locating my dear
son. It's really weird. He's called me everyday for the past few days, telling
me how much he loves us. It's like he feels something is about to happen. As
far as I know, he has never stolen anything from us (except sleep!). I guess
that's one good thing. I'm still trying. I will do it when I find out his
whereabouts. Good luck with your daughter. Question…. Does she talk to you
knowing that you turned her in, or is she extremely mad at you and
unforgiving? I know it doesn't matter in the long run, I'm just curious about
her reaction.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 13th, 2014 at 3:34 AM

Sherri Lynn-  
It is weird - she is not mad at me for turning her in, but they have yet to do
anything about it. And ever since she admitted to me that she is using - she
has been rather nice to me and quit blaming me for everything. .for now, it
has only been a couple of weeks.I told her "about turning her in" that I would
be worried about her future- but right now I am worried about your life. Your
son does love you. He is just suffering and does not know how to stop.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 13th, 2014 at 3:40 AM

Sherri Lynn- I read on another site a post from a previous addict who said it
was easier to get help when he was able to talk truthful to his parents about
his drug use, so I am trying to make it easy for my daughter to talk to me. I
try to be truthful but loving to my daughter when she calls. I don't know what
really works- but we will see.

Reply

  * ![Sherri Lynn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sherri Lynn

June 14th, 2014 at 8:52 PM

I saw my son two days ago and confronted him about his using. He said he is
taking Xanex and smoking marijuana. He said he isn't doing meth or heroin. I
think I actually believe him. He looks really good and he wasn't high when I
saw him. I know Xanex is really bas too. I do know that he loves me and the
good thing is that he knows I love him too. I told him I will be here for him
when he decides he needs help. He wouldn't tell me where he is living and I
can't seem to find out either. So I guess I'll just keep trying. More than
likely he will get caught before I turn him in because he's driving and going
places. One of these days, it will be a simple traffic stop that gets him.
Thanks or chatting with me.

Reply

  * ![Laura](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Laura

June 28th, 2014 at 2:02 PM

Sherri Lynn-  
Just checking in with you to see how things are with your son? A lot has
transpired here. Daughter first in hospital for a week with infection for
shooting up in her foot. Then got out and went back to boyfriends and ended up
back at the hospital for overdose. She was lucky and went back to boyfriends
that night and they were all mad at her because when the ambulance was called
for overdose- the police came in and searched the place with dogs. So after
almost dying and then her new family being pissed because of the cops- she
finally got the courage to leave. She has entered outpatient treatment (I
think she needs more) and appears to really be trying. She was only doing
heroin for six months but it can get really bad fast. So praying for her to
continue to have strength.

Reply

  * ![Tracy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tracy

June 28th, 2014 at 3:14 PM

Does anyone have knowledge, experience or an opinion about Delancey Street in
San Francisco or Teen Challenge program for adult addicts???

Reply

  * ![Ellie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ellie

July 3rd, 2014 at 7:56 PM

I have been reading the stories here. I am wondering where non AA type help is
available in Indiana?  
I got sucked into the alcoholic dance and I feel like such a fool. The story
is too long to get into and frankly the stories are mostly the same and mine
isn't much different. My son was nearly homeless and like an idiot, I got him
a cheap cell phone, some food, and helped him get signed up for food stamps.

He claimed to not be able to access the net from his phone and none of his
friends had internet. Really?  
That is why he couldn't apply for jobs.

So like a dummy, i forgo my plans and things I am doing to write a resume and
apply for jobs for him. It landed him 3 interviews for really good entry level
jobs and so he complained he needed a haircut and clothes for the interviews
so I gave him some money for the bus and clothes and of course what happened
is so predictable. He took to bus to a friend's house and called me from there
drunk and his friend was going on about how he would take him to his
interviews and of course he never showed up and hasn't called me so I imagine
he blew the money on alcohol.

It is 100% a choice because he quit taking xanax just like that and he has not
drunk for more than a year before and he gets a little money and he spends it
on alcohol.

I need to stop being a sucker falling for his guilt trips and lies.

Reply

  * ![Mimi](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mimi

January 31st, 2015 at 9:44 AM

Ellie I am just now reading your story. Someone wrote earlier about the
alcoholic brain cravings and others write it's all about choice. I have no
doubts that all substances deteriorate the brain, but I also believe that even
with that physiological change, it is ultimately a choice. I am not saying it
is easy for an alcoholic to choose not to drink. It's a very complex situation
and trying to figure it all out and analyze years of our relationship dynamics
is yet another black hole we parents fall into. As humans I suppose it's
natural to search for the "why" of everything. I'm to the point where I don't
care why. I also suspect that the 3D brain scans were done on well established
users…not newbies. What I am saying is I agree. It does boil down to choice.
It's a sad sad situation we have here. Watching our kids destroy themselves.
Some of us get lucky. Others do not. I hope you're one of the lucky ones. I've
already lost my son. Have two daughters left. One uses, one got clean. They
both suck the life out of me. Do what you need to do to stay sane and as
healthy as possible. You can only control your own choices. Godspeed. Mimi.

Reply

  * ![Rita](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rita

July 5th, 2014 at 1:39 AM

My 35 year old has moved back home. She is abusive and doing damage to my
home. I found myself wanting to make excuses for her behavior…but, I don't
think there are any. She can't keep a job. She hates me & thinks I am the the
reason for most of her problems. She has many false memories. I don't know how
to make her get help. Both of us need it…HELP

Reply

  * ![GoodTherapy.org Support](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### GoodTherapy.org Support

July 5th, 2014 at 10:14 AM

Please use this for comments where people are in crisis:

Thank you for your comment, Rita. We wanted to provide links to some resources
that may be relevant to you here. We have more information about what to do in
a crisis at https://www.goodtherapy.org/in-crisis.html

Warm regards,  
The GoodTherapy.org Team

Reply

  * ![Lynn N.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynn N.

July 6th, 2014 at 9:57 AM

I loved this article. However I am happy they have defined addiction as an
incurable disease insurance companies will get them help. But that is just the
beginning. Some never get out of that "pity party" and alot of addiction
switching goes along, alcohol to pills etc. However our systems are flawed I
do believe detox is a great help but that where it end and a new life begins.
Which rarely happens from what I see. I found it and it was extremely hard. I
can get addicted to anything and everything. The problem was the core which
even with five years out I still need help with but at least now I recognize
them before making the choice to pick up.  
Thank you for this article.

Reply

  * ![Ceci](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ceci

July 7th, 2014 at 3:59 AM

Hi my name CECI I am a mother of 5 adult children, to make the story short my
young 21 year old son is a drug addict, schizophrenic and sometimes due to
drugs he used 4 years ago he is not all there. I had been supporting him in
different ways but nothing seems to work instead he came to the point of
beating up his dad and finally I told him if you ever touch any of us again I
will call the cops, press charges and kick you out of the house. To make the
story short four days ago we had an argument and he punched me on my face and
did exactly what I told him I would do. This past four days has been hard for
me since I adore my son and have put up with stealing, lying, insults etc.. I
cry at night when I look at his bed and see it empty always wondering if his
ok. I know where he is usually at and from far away I watch him to see what he
is doing and all I see him do is riding his bike into circle in a small area
at the park. I spoke to my other kids not to give him shelter or food since I
want him to learn and see for himself that life out there is hard. Before
throwing him out of the house I told him that he is not welcome in the house
until he gets rehab. My daughter and I will take him as soon as he is ready,
but he needs to let us know. I stand firm and strong even though it is killing
me inside in every way. I don't know if what I did or what I am doing is right
or the appropriate way to do it. I would really like and appreciate anyone's
comment and most of all from any professional who can guide me or tell me if
what I am doing is correct or what else I can do or how I should proceed. I
don' t know what else to do and I am desperate and it's killing me inside that
I feel like dying. Please help me and provide me with strength and support.
Thank you in advance to all those who takes the time in responding to my sad
situation. God bless you all!!

Reply

  * ![Andrea](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Andrea

July 16th, 2014 at 12:13 AM

I just wanted to say I'm in the same situation as you almost. I'm having a
hard time cutting my 23 yo son off from money etc…but I'm at a loss. Do I kick
him out. Do I expose our other kids to this craziness he chooses? He hasn't
become violent by he is not productive at all. It is just a matter of time
before the other things start.  
I believe you are courageous and right in what you are doing.

Reply

  * ![Tedda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tedda

July 17th, 2014 at 4:32 PM

Cici,  
Many years ago my husband and I experienced almost exactly what you're going
thru. It takes much more love and strength to kick your child out than it does
to continue tolerating his behavior. My husband and I outlined exactly what
would happen if he were to use drugs again while in our home. When he CHOSE to
do it anyway, we had to follow thru. It was not us who made that choice, only
him. It was hard for him for awhile but he eventually straightened himself
out, finished collage and has been happily married for the last 10 years. Hang
tough and find an Alanon  
Group and GO. God bless you. Tedda

Reply

  * ![Kim](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kim

October 26th, 2014 at 4:08 AM

Prayers are with you.  
You are doing the right thing.  
Please make sure the rehab is dual diagnosis to deal with his mental illness
too.  
Our son finally agreed to detox and rehab and after 30 days in a regular rehab
we switched him to a dual diagnosis facility where he is thriving. He is
bipolar. They do group therapy and private therapy 6 days a week and AA and NA
meetings every night. He will have intensive outpatient treatment after with
continued AA and NA meetings daily.  
Go to Al-anon for yourself too. It really helps to be around others with
similar issues. I was really afraid to go but it's been great. There is no
judgment…only support.

Reply

  * ![HOPE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### HOPE

July 27th, 2014 at 3:25 PM

Alcoholism is not a choice it is a Disease. No one would ever choose to live
in that much pain in the depths of madness and addiction.  
My son was in a coma woke up three weeks later from life support. Two more
weeks in recovery learning to breathe after a serious lung infection almost
killed him. All he could think about after given a second chance at life was
when is he going to get out of the hospital and get a drink.. He passed out
where he lived and then was drenched in so much bleach that the police on the
call had to call the fire dept. to clear the area with oxygen masks before my
son could be released to the ambulance. On the police report it was noted that
the bleach smell was prevalent over a block away. The neighbors were cleared
from the area. This is drama to the max! This was my beautiful, kind,loving
son…now with years of alcohol abuse suffers profoundly from mental
illness..someone tried to kill him…

Alcohol is an addiction thru constant cravings in the brain. It is not not a
choice there is a big difference. It's not like choosing a piece of cake vs a
salad..eat what's better for you.. Please google pictures of the alcoholic
brain vs a normal brain.. It's all there in living color. The mind of an
alcoholic is driven and controlled by cravings. Alcohol is classified as a
mind altering drug. The health system has got to change the treatment system
for addictions. Many large companies can send their workers into rehab long
term thru group insurance coverage. That's a start. The rest of the insurance
& health coverage needs work for those adults with addictions with no
coverage, before the disease causes serious medical condition costing tens of
thousands of dollars more to treat.  
The hospital had my son on do not resuscitate. Why is the question no one at
the hospital had a answer nothing's in his med records giving consent. My son
is at the bottom of the bottom. Destitute & no where to turn for help. The do
not resuscitate order was changed immediately by my authority. He is not
better off dead as some my think. He is a beautiful young man with an
addiction. He is treated worse that a dog. I have seen a dog picked up off the
streets given luv food and a safe place to sleep. My son is never given what a
stray dog receives, he is the, "town drunk", & treated with zero respect by
the police, the medical profession and society and that is where the disgrace
begins and ends.

I was thinking about who my son used to be before alcoholism over 20 yrs. and
counting. This is what I heard in my heart & Im going to offer it to u..I
heard that a absent son enslaves his mothers soul to sorrow in suffering in
questions I never get answers.  
I have felt that for years. I will never abandon my son. I feel a horrible
detachment from my child. I am no longer in his life in any way.  
There is no try there is only do or don't do's. I'm still doing….the beat I
know how! The pain that sent me to thru the roof opened my eyes. I realized
that I was all my son had and yet I could not be there for him any longer. I
was the one who never gave up and never betrayed him as I was by him over &
over. I have no regrets with my choice. At least I had a choice my son does
not.

To use my heart I want to tell u what I feel. I am so full of grief yet I know
I have forgiven my son. I am still a work in progress. He is still a work in
progress. I may never see my son again before he or I die. I want him to know
that I never left his side. I always had faith in him and I always believed in
his strength.

What I missed from my son I had lost him years ago and missed out on all the
XYZ's of life with him…

The biggest thing now, I can never trust him with my heart. Now all the horrid
details affirms betrayal thru addiction. My work is not done I will always be
waiting for his soul to heal. It's a work in progress as sobriety is a fog in
the distance.

I could tell u how many years I tried to help my son. I could tell u all the
professional help I got him.  
I could tell u how many times he relapsed.  
I could tell u no matter what I will always luv him.  
I could make a long story short fast foreword 20 years.. his is a black out
alcoholic.  
I could tell u he has been in jail over 32 times.  
I could tell u he lives on the streets.  
I could tell u someone poured bleach over him while he was passed out.  
I could tell u it killed me to see him on life support.  
I could tell u he was given a 2nd chance at life.  
I can tell u that he threw it down the drain for a drink.  
I can tell u how broken my heart is for him.  
I can tell u how much I love him no matter what..  
I can tell u life is a gift!  
i wrote the above for other alcoholics or families to read how the spiraling
down addiction can take not just the alcoholic but his family destroy all
those who love them.. It's ugly & evil not the pretty picture most people
could not even imagine. The cravings take over the alcoholics soul. A mothers
love craves the life of her child. That is my choice!

As usual a alcoholic child is always blamed on the parent. Unless others have
been thru it. As many here have. They could not possibly get it or show the
slightest concern. Society blames the alcoholic for the addiction and they are
socially castrated. Because most beleive they are weak and cannot put the
drink down that is so on fair.my children all grew up in the same home and the
is addictive character disorder to be considered in most cases. There is no
shame in addiction. The only time there is shame is when sobriety is found and
thrown away.

My heart is broken I know that my son is one who just cannot find sobriety. I
love him no matter what !

Reply

  * ![Brenda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Brenda

August 7th, 2014 at 12:52 PM

“At least I had a choice my son does not.” What a profound statement that I
think almost sums it all up. I am not much of a writer, I am more of a science
person so I'm going to share my experience with hyperthyroidism. It's a
biochemical imbalance that makes a person so “wired” they can't settle down
hence booze (weed, heroin, all downers) I have felt it plays a strong role in
addiction but unfortunately most doctors don't know how to diagnosis it and it
goes untreated. I feel how can so many independent people everywhere exhibit
the same behavior. I think thyroid is the common denominator. HAVE YOUR SON
EVALUATED BY AN ENDOCRINOLIGIST and make sure they do a complete thyroid panel
(blood test). People with hyperthyroidism can't sleep, thinking is all over
the place, anxiety is thru the roof, etc.

There are temporary fixes like eating lots of brocolli, peaches, that block
excess production of thyroid hormone but these are ony TEMPORARY as is the
acetyl l carnitine I would get from vitamin shoppe but it at least allowed me
to sleep at night..Carnitine is used in Italy for hyperthyroidism. This too is
TEMPORARY until real treatment is had. Soy too is a blocker.

WE HAVE TOO STOP THE PRIMITIVE AND BARBARIC PRACTICE OFMAKING CRIMINALS OUT OF
SICK PEOLPE IN THIS COUNTRY.

They don't choose this and healthy people put into our society instead of take
out. These people are some of our best and brightest who have a vulnerability
they have address.

Reply

  * ![gayle](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### gayle

August 29th, 2014 at 10:53 PM

Dearest Hope,You are a brave mother whom I admire because you had the courage
to finally let go & not let your child kill you. I know it's killing you to
keep him out of your life but letting him stay is a killer too. I relate to
every word you write. I am at this very moment praying for the courage to do
the same thing to my 26 year old daughter. I don't like my daughter. I don't
want her in my life any more. Not like this. Not with drugs in her life & the
stinking thinking that goes with it. I'm embarrassed by all I've allowed her
to put me through. I'm horrified at the names she's called me. I'm ashamed.
I'm mad. I'm disgusted. Love the addict hate the addiction: is there truly a
difference? I don't think so anymore. I have to accept her free will. I have
to accept that I cannot love her into being well. I have to accept that this
is her life, Her choices, her consequences. I keep watering her grass while
mine has been long dead. I have to accept that I truely don't want this girl,
who I've loved so much, who I will love literally to death, in my life. Not
this way. Not her way. I've done her way. Her way is killing me. Stealing my
soul. God be with you & your son. Thank you for sharing. We are not alone.

Reply

  * ![jeanne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### jeanne

September 9th, 2014 at 6:55 PM

I feel the same way. My 30 year old son (only child) has just about destroyed
me. I have tried to be there for him but I can't take the hurt anymore. I
sometimes question if I still love him. He was given the best if
everything…and choses to throw his life away. He treats me horribly and I have
loved him inspite if it. No more.

  * ![Man](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Man

October 12th, 2014 at 2:38 PM

No we are not alone! My husband and I are raising our 12 year old grandson and
have been his legal guardians for the last 5 years! The decision to do what we
had go do to remove him from her and her boyfriend is something I do not
regret ever!! She is 38 and for the last 10to12 years has been an out of
control drug addict. It esculated from Vicodin to cocain to heroine with every
type of pill the doctors gave her in between. We spent every penny having her
in our home with Jay just to have her steal our checks credit cards cars etc.
That you can live with but when she and boyfriend started putting my little
guy in danger by leaving him at drug houses making him afraid and using him to
get what they needed then you have to choose !! This was her choice and not
Jays! Our other daughter worked in family court and guided us through this
process . We have been to court and spent most of our savings to keep him safe
and when I look at him playing baseball , football, and having friends over, I
would do it again in a heart beat! Yes this is not how we intended to spend
our retirement but jay did not ask for this either! We have little or no
contact with my daughter but have to deal with the drug addicted father on an
occasional basis but do what we have to do legally to keep him safe. If you
are going to save someone let it be the helpless child that never asked for
any of this!!

  * ![linda](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### linda

May 25th, 2015 at 10:34 PM

Your thoughts on this are breathtaking. .. compassionate. Certainly there must
be middle ground in this where we can love, express love, and live with this
disease process. It is painful to watch my son feel tortured thoughts and the
results of poor choices. I do not know what to do other than love and pray
….and your words give me hope and strength.

Reply

  * ![kim](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### kim

August 5th, 2014 at 11:25 AM

Thank you so much. .I have been trying to survive this alone

Reply

  * ![Bill](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Bill

August 8th, 2014 at 2:51 AM

My Son had been a drug addict for 5 years.He was addicted to cocaine meth and
many other substances.He used to steal all my power tools to pay for his
horrific addiction, he even used to steal my wife's"his mothers" jewelry to
pay for his drugs.He was not a rational person at this stage of his life and
let me tell you it was a living hell what he put us through emotionally and
mentally. He is clean now and has been for 3 years.I thank God every day.We
sent him to this residential Rehab that a friend had told us about. The
programme and staff there where terrific they are all recovering addicts
themselves so they can relate to their patients. The number for the treatment
center is 877-635-4969. I have read most of the comments here and I know what
you are all going through. I hope this can help you as it has helped my family
and saved our son.

Reply

  * ![nicolesmom](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### nicolesmom

August 13th, 2014 at 12:10 PM

Hi, I have been reading the comments for a few days and was looking for post
similar to my situation but haven't found any. My daughter and son in law got
into trouble for drugs (meth) the 1st of the year. They have 2 sons. my
grandsons had to come live with me or go to foster care because cps removed
them. They have been in out patient tx since Feb. My daughter has been a big
drinker since late teens and I have in the last couple of years thought she
was an alcoholic and she is. It has been living hell for me with her because
she continues to drink even though the court says she can't in order to get
her sons back. Now she just got put on probation too. She comes smelling like
alcohol to visit her boys. I had finally had enough and reported to cps and
they went back to supervised visits. I get so frustrated with her not
commiting to stopping even for her boys. If she doesn't stop she will lose
them or go to jail for parole vialation.I don't know if I should keep
reporting everytime I smell it on her or just wait for her to get caught by
the athorities ? I don't know if I have the right to keep her kids from her if
she continues because there are plenty of alcoholic parents out there and
their kids are fine right? I really don't know what to think anymore.I want
the best for my daughter and grandsons.

Reply

  * ![nicolesmom](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### nicolesmom

August 13th, 2014 at 1:21 PM

Hi, I have been reading the comments for a few days and was looking for post
similar to my situation but haven't found any. My daughter and son in law got
into trouble for drugs (meth) the 1st of the year. They have 2 son my
grandsons had to come live with me or go to foster care because cps removed
them. The have been in out patient tx since Feb. My daughter has beena big
drinker since late teens and I have in the last couple of years thought she
was an alcoholic and she is. It has been living hell for me with her because
she continues to drink even though the court says she can't in order to get
her sons back. Now she just got put on probation too. She comes smelling like
alcohol to visit her boys. I had finally had enough and reported to cps and
they went back to supervised visits. I get so frustrated with her not
commiting to stopping even for her boys. If she don't stop she will lose them
or go to jail for parole vialation.I don't know if I should keep reporting
everytime I smell it on her or just wait for her to get caught by the
athorities ? I don't know if I have the right to keep her kids from her if she
continues because there are plenty of alcoholic parents out there and their
kids are fine right? I really don't know what to think anymore.I want the best
for my daughter and grandsons. I appreciate any i put.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

September 12th, 2014 at 11:39 AM

Hi!! I'm in the same position as you, my two beautiful Grandchildren have been
in my care (for the 2nd time) since last year. My daughter doesn't seem to be
bothered with them & continues to be on the same destructive path that she's
been on for almost a decade. I have now become to accept the fact that she'll
never be the mother that I hoped she would be. My priority is my
Grandchildren, they're vulnerable & need me, no amount of help/advice/input
that I have offered to my daughter has been accepted. She's almost 26 & quite
frankly has to face her own problems. I suggest that you continue to do your
best for your Grandsons & give them the safe haven that their mother cannot
offer.

Reply

  * ![Eric](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eric

August 26th, 2014 at 5:57 PM

I've posted here before. My son's situation has turned into the no-win
scenario. No longer can he stay in the community while we & the community try
to help him with his escalating drug and alcohol problems.

I had no choice but to force him out of my home in May 2014 with an order of
protection. The day I got it - and before it was served and before he even
knew about it - he attacked a family member in my home with a hammer. He lost,
played victim, and had the real victim arrested. The next day at noon, I had
the order served.

He moved 9 doors down the street to "the old man's house" (and a fellow
alcoholic) and continued to be a terror, and kept luring my youngest son to
keep doing dangerous drugs with him.

We all moved out of town to get away from him.

Turns out, the old man also got an order of protection, in June. My son
violated it and was arrested in July, spent a week in jail, and was placed on
misdemeanor probation.

A few days later he went back AGAIN to the old man's house, confronted him for
calling the police, and stabbed him 18 times. He held the old man hostage in
his room for 3 days, to bleed out. He only offered him water. He cut off his
phone.

Only when he went out 3 days later, did the old man contact a neighbor who
called the ambulance and police. The old man is in the trauma unit, and my son
is facing attempted 1st degree murder & other related charges>

Reply

  * ![Reenie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Reenie

September 3rd, 2014 at 3:39 PM

I can appreciate everyone's comments and stories. I too have an adult son that
for some reason or another I can't say no to. It's as though he's a
recovering/questionable recovering (pill,opiates) addict and my addiction is
him. I have gone through every penny I have. I am now living paycheck to
paycheck and will probably never be able to retire and I'm in my 50s. I find
that I have to turn off my phone in order to go about my evenings after work
in peace. It's the only way I seem to be able to live without worrying about
him constantly. I get so angry at myself for giving in and then I get angry at
him for putting me in the position that I'm in. But who's fault is it really?
I need to cut him off financially and for some reason I have a difficult time
doing that. Someone said earlier their child's grass was green while there's
was brown. This fits my life to a T. I am helping him at the expense of myself
and I always thought I was smarter than that. I'm great at giving advice to
others and would tell someone else in my position that they need to cut them
off, and that as long as he is supported he will never change, why should he?
I find it so hard to say no when his stories and excuses and justifications
seem to be so warranted. But I really do know better. How do I keep a
relationship with him if I cut him off? I'm torn, broke, and sad. If he ends
up dying because I failed to help, then how could I possibly live with myself?
this is where I have the major problem. Heart says one thing and the brain
says another.

Reply

  * ![Ann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ann

October 14th, 2014 at 3:02 PM

Hi Reenie. Your situation is very much like mine. Except in my case it's my 29
year old daughter. She is my oldest and presently is not in my life due to her
heroin addiction. I have two other daughters and my husband of 34 years. It's
been exhausting to say the least and although as a family we agreed that we
could no longer allow my daughter's addiction to control our lives we still
continue to struggle emotionally with the fears and anxiety that comes along
with that decision. It has been over two years and we are all still recovering
from effects of this dreaded disease. I completely agree with you that it is a
painful struggle just to make the decision and then live with it. I think for
our family we don't regret the decision as we felt that there was really
nothing else we could do that we hadn't already done that would help my
daughter to recover and make good choices. Ultimately as you know as parents
of adult children, we have very little control over their lives in general and
completely powerless against the decisions they make as addicts. Which is so
frustrating for us to stand by and watch their lives spiral out of control and
there's absolutely nothing we can do to stop it. But as parents we convince
ourselves that we have to do whatever it takes for as long as it takes to
"help" them. But at the end of the day it is our lives that are destroyed. We
become emotional wrecks, we come down with physical ailments we never had
before, we put ourselves in debt we'll never be able to recover from and the
addict in our lives remains an addict. That is the point we reach when we
realize nothing we've done has helped. It's not because we didn't try hard
enough or care long enough. It's because the addict is not willing or ready to
completely give up control and accept the kind of help that is necessary to
get their lives back which is a lifelong commitment to their sobriety. It can
take years or sometimes a lifetime for them to come to that realization and
some never do. I think as parents when you come to that realization,
especially when you have other children, you have no choice but to let go and
let God take over. Some days are really hard. I try to focus on all the good
things and blessings that are in my life. But then I get that gnawing feeling
when I think of my daughter and I wonder where she is and who she's with and
what she looks like and I remember what a beautiful little girl she was with a
sweet smile and loving ways. I cry and pray to God to keep her safe and help
her find the strength to reach out for the help she so badly needs. Until then
I remain hopeful and I try to take care of myself and my family and keep
myself educated on the subject of addiction and recovery so that I will be
here for her when she is ready to receive help.

Reply

  * ![Chris](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Chris

November 5th, 2014 at 8:13 PM

Thanks for sharing this. Very helpful and I really it tonight.

  * ![Carol](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol

September 10th, 2014 at 2:31 PM

I feel the same way as most of you. I cant believe how common this is and how
painful it is.  
I hurt because this is not the "SON" I gave birth to.  
I know he had a good foundation growing up, but "HIS CHOICES" took him down a
horrible road, that keeps getting worse. I am also awaiting the worse
phonecall a parent could receive, I was in denial for so many years, always
looking at the "good" in my son when it came around, and overlooking "the bad"
just sweeping it under the carpet. I see how it is now the biggest emotional
race, I don't wish on anyone, I pray like I have never prayed before. I cant
stop praying, God is my anchor, he has given me the strength I have now to be
able to wake up and pray again. I cant help anymore, I have really realized
this is out of my control and not any choices I would have made for him. He is
27 and I hope that sooner than later he cleans up. Yes it hurts, but he cant
see that. He is so caught up in himself that no one seems to matter to him. We
will never stop praying for him and never stop loving him, but we do hope he
gets the help he needs. He has no more friends, the ones he use to stand up
for, the ones he use to call"friends" and now no one is available for him.
None of his so called friends, he lost his wife, his friends, has no job,
homeless. God will never leave him.He has left God. SO sad.

Reply

  * ![Joyce](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joyce

September 12th, 2014 at 2:22 AM

I have a 27 year old with one child in foster care and another on the way. I
refused to rescue my addict's child! I told her that her baby doesn't need me;
baby needs her! Glad I did this. She once was clean for a full year and a
half, and then all hell broke loose! Once again, she is now clean for two
months or so and is going to a small church. I found a pastor who is really
involved and helping! It's shocking and wonderful! We parents of addicts get
little support, and the advice we get generally sucks! For years I heard that
she just needs to hit rock bottom, etc. Wrong! I had to coax her out of the
ghetto and into treatment or she would have died (more than once). We must be
ACTIVE! We must not underestimate addiction's power and expect too much. We
often measure success wrongly. A couple of things:  
1\. If you are just realizing your kid is addicted (and under 26), up your
insurance or get insurance that covers treatment if at all possible! If you
can, on your first go in a program, find one that will offer some measure of
relapse protection.  
2\. If that's not possible, try to get this person in with a good drug court
program (or one that has some free scholarships -- they are out there, though
usually just for one ride).  
3\. Pick one that has REAL counseling. Let the counselors begin to break the
psychological hold. You can medicate, though it's usually not the long term
answer.  
4\. Remember many programs are rip-offs, run by former addicts (some recent)
who are unethical. Flee. Some of them are ridiculously legalistic and
controlling. Sorry, it doesn't work!  
5\. Do not let your addict sign a contract that prevents you from getting
refunded if they flee. These are moneymakers for manipulative treatment
centers! Remember, it is the parent who always gets screwed. We are the
industry's cash cow! A lot of the "counselors" are a lot screwier than you
(not to mention, condescending)!  
6\. Addicts are similar, but different. Yours might be the seriously violent
type. Another might be very mental; another more promiscuous, criminal, etc.
Under the influence, they can't process their psychological conflicts! Expect
nuttiness!  
7\. You will lose many battles -- but your goal is to ultimately win the war.  
8\. Never just hand them money. Be clever. Use a clean friend to dispense
funds (Disclaimer: do not completely trust a former addict). Or make them
photograph receipts of purchases and send to you. If they don't do it
correctly or right away, nail them! You know they are using. Start planning
your intervention! Don't doubt yourself! (they love it when you do!) If
they're slipping, they are on their way back!  
9\. If you can afford it, GPS their car. What a great thing this was! Gives me
lots of peace of mind. You can catch them early, or if they're not using,
sleep better. It records their car speed, stops, locations! Ask a sober friend
of theirs about a specific location if you are concerned. Well worth it! If
they are speeding around, they are using. The GPS thingie can then shut the
car off! Wow!  
10\. Your strategy isn't to win -- but to weaken the conduits of their
addiction. It's a more reasonable goal. They do want accountability. They're
trapped. The real person inside really doesn't oppose you trapping what's
trapping them. But boy, their addicted part will whine and rail!  
11\. Stop being judgmental and hurt by them. It's a substance. It's not your
kid. Do you talk to your aspirin bottle and get offended by it?  
12\. It may take quite a few relapses to kick this thing. Brace yourself. Be
creative. Jails in certain states have good programs. Get them to a state
where they have them.  
13\. On doing an intervention. Coax, coddle, and realize they are temporarily
insane. In 6 weeks, viola, you have a glimpse of their former selves. Some in
as little as two weeks. But be forewarned! They feel healed and over it. They
are not. Overconfidence kills.

I am personally NOT a fan of halfway houses. You can do it, but realize it's a
place full of people with the same problem, and it tends to normalize the
dysfunction. I am being completely contrary! But guess what, I was
strengthened in this opinion when a former addict told me how much crap was
going on in their house (including using). I am experimenting with using a
sane, non-user housemate (never been an addict). She doesn't do anything. She
isn't there to judge. Her presence just messes up the addict's plans. She is a
reminder of normal. She doesn't counsel, but provides company and friendship,
for the addict is a lonely soul. A lot of them use alone. Her presence also
keeps a troubled male from arriving with "help." She is no fun at a party! You
have one addict; you don't need two! I know. I've been there. He's gone now.
Sad stuff. His parents, though, were passive. He got one treatment. In his
case, they had the money to hit harder, and they didn't. They just listened to
and believed his lies. His childhood foundation wasn't great, so it
complicated things.  
Addicts traumatize themselves and they traumatize you and others, and then
they have to medicate again to deal with the newest trauma. Do not expect your
addict to want to be sane or to want help. They are insane. They are a royal
pain to deal with, but they are better when you are intervening. The devil is
in the details, unfortunately, and it does hit us hard. Don't lose your
retirement over it or your house. Someone just tried to pull that guilt over
on me, to sell my house for treatment. Glad I didn't bite that apple! Help
them, using your smarts, but don't let them strip your tree. It is a process
for everyone concerned to realize the enormity of the power of these
substances, and for the addict to remain vulnerable, accountable (in a non-
legalistic way), surrounded, and drawn into better relationships. It's such a
sin to be "weak" in our culture. It's really ok to be weak. Then you stay
aware of your vulnerability and more attuned to relapse triggers. The addict
is learning too and realizing the severity of this thing. We had really bad
psychiatrists over the years, then we found a gem! We parents need to
encourage each other. I hope these thoughts are helpful. We have to conserve
resources, both emotional and financial. Though AA can be helpful, I'm not a
great fan. Regarding the guilt trip of "enabling"…. I've tried the hands-off
approach, and watched others do it and it often leads to death. Yes, helping
in wrong ways can also do the same thing. Look, help "smart", but the results
are not in your hands anyway. We parents are a force of sanity, good, and
health. You can't help others if your own health is going down the tubes. So,
like on the plane, put your own mask on first and then put it on your child.
If they take it off, they take it off, but you did a good thing. It counts
even when if it sometimes doesn't work!

Reply

  * ![Bill](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Bill

September 14th, 2014 at 10:06 AM

It's really a great and useful piece of information. I'm glad that you simply
shared  
this useful information with us. Please keep us up to date like this.  
Thank you for sharing.

Reply

  * ![David](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### David

September 16th, 2014 at 1:53 PM

Maybe just typing this will make me feel better…My (our) 29 year old son is a
drunk. Last Saturday night I picked him up at a bar. In his drunken stupor he
yelled that his problems were all my fault and then struck me as I was trying
to talk him into peacefully going to bed. According to him, my long
deployments over the course of a military career left him feeling perpetually
abandoned. I get that, but none of my old colleagues from the military have
children who have acted this way. This was one of a thousand such instances.
He works for me, but is honestly the most unreliable employee in the company.
He threatened to beat his supervisor today and I fired him for the 50th time.
He has 5 children by 3 women. We have raised the oldest of these 5 since her
birth. He always reminds us of what will happen to his children if we don't
help. He threatens to kill himself. When I fired him today, he replied that he
would just go back to selling drugs. My wife is drained. She actually said
that she felt as though she was in a black hole with all of the life being
sucked out of her. Our son always seeks relationships with other addicts and
they consequently have also enjoyed our never ending generosity over many
years. In short, we must be the two biggest idiots on the planet. Nothing we
do ever makes things better. Things only get worse. No amount of prayer, hard
work or good will has ever changes things. They just get worse. I've only
scratched the surface of what we have been through. But thanks for having a
place where I could vent for a moment.

If anyone has the silver bullet, please let me have it. I think it's pretty
fair to say that we are desperate.

David

Reply

  * ![David](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### David

September 17th, 2014 at 1:22 PM

More venting. Today, our son began drinking around 9 am. By the time he called
me at 10, he was drunk again. By 11:30 he had walked, case of beer in hand,
the 2 blocks separating our house from the rental he lives in and that my wife
pays for. By noon he had hitched a ride to the seedier side of town to settle
a score with a meth head. "Settle a score with a meth head"-more words spoken
that I never thought I would never speak. This ended with him being arrested
after he launched three beers through closed windows. The judge released him
several hours later, but with a court order that he undergo a psychiatric and
substance abuse evaluation. Who knows what joyous event awaits us. Hope
springs eternal among fools and parents. I so want for my son to claim the
privilege of life well lived. In the absence of that hope, I could settle for
my wife and I reclaiming our own lives before we become as burdensome to
ourselves, to each other, and to others as our son has become. Still awaiting
the silver bullet that kills the killer within our family.

Reply

  * ![Kim](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kim

October 26th, 2014 at 3:13 AM

I don't know how old your son is but an intervention may be needed.  
Our son is a recovering alcoholic and drug addict. He also has bipolar 2 and
he started by self medicating to relieve symptoms then became an addict. We
gave him a choice of going to rehab or living elsewhere. He chose rehab.  
The first place promised therapy, great programs, etc., but fell short. It was
good though because he stayed sober 30 days. We transferred him to a place
that has an emphasis on dual diagnosis and I remember him calling with his new
therapist at the center saying Mom I am getting more out of this I'm a few
days then I did the whole month at the other place.  
It's still early days but we have hope now. Meanwhile I go to Al-anon and my
husband goes to a different men's group so that we make sure we take care of
ourselves and don't fall back in old habits.  
My son knows it's his choice now and he has all the help and support he needs.
He couldn't see that there was a better way to live until he was forced into
sobriety. He said he is feeling so much better and they have altered his
medication to make his bipolar more manageable. He attends AA or NA each night
as well and they have family night each week for 3 hours for us.  
When he gets out he will be required to do an outpatient program and he also
wants to live at a good sober living place like an Oxford House. They have
zero tolerance and do drug testing weekly. They also require the residents to
work within 2 weeks or if you can't find a job in that time then you have to
do volunteer work and show proof. You also must attend AA or NA for the first
30 days every single day.  
My husband and I joined al-anon and that is really helping. We go to separate
meetings to help ourselves.  
It's all making a huge difference in our lives and my son is becoming the
person we knew. Who knows what the future holds but we know we are all doing
what we can each day. One day at a time.  
Hope is what we have now and we were at the end of our rope before.

Reply

  * ![Catherine](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Catherine

October 28th, 2014 at 10:53 AM

Kim, can you let me know what facility your son is at? I have a 22 year
old,daughter that is anot alcoholic and has been diagnosed as bipolar as well.
Things are not going well and I'd just like to know of other facilities in
case I need to find a new one. I'm just so lost and overwhelmed.

  * ![Carolyn E.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carolyn E.

September 24th, 2014 at 9:54 PM

We are victims of our DNA because that knowledge has been suppressed
throughout the history of humanity. Have no idea as to the possible reasoning
behind such a non-productive suppression. Simply know that is the reason
humanity is suffering at the level it is suffering presently,especially the
so-called, "Addictions"….Sad. Sad legacy to our human potential. :(

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

October 6th, 2014 at 11:22 AM

I have been fighting this battle for years with my 33 year old son. He has two
children that he has completely abandoned, luckily I am still able to see the
children as their mother is a wonderful person. My son will not stop calling
me for money. I gave in for years to his requests and it was always this will
be the last time I swear. I start a new job tomorrow but if I dont' pay my
rent I will be out on the streets. I created a monster by helping him for
years. I have over the last year tried to break away from him as he is not my
son but a stranger. He only wants money from me and there is not enough money
in the world for him. This has caused problems (rightfully so) in my marriage
and I have done everything to not answer his calls etc… But he won't stop
calling - if I don't answer he will call 20 -30 times in a row (work, home and
cell) Or he will come to the house if he knows his Dad is not home and will
not quit ringing the bell or knocking on the door. All peace in my life is
gone. Has anyone else on here been sucessful at getting their addicted child
to laave them alone? I guess I am going to have to contact the police and put
a no contact or something. Just at the end of my rope and not sure how to go
on from here. I am so broken hearted.

Reply

  * ![Lynne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynne

October 29th, 2014 at 8:07 PM

Restraining orders or a non harassment order are a wonderful thing

Reply

  * ![Shelly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Shelly

October 17th, 2014 at 4:22 AM

I was so relieved to come across this site/blog and all the comments. I
thought I was alone. I don't have a single friend or family member that
understands what I am going through with my 29 yr old son. He was just
arrested last week for DUI and child endangerment. He was passed out in a
company van after picking up my grandchild. He thought he was in my nephew's
driveway. I thanked God that neither one was injured. Needless to say, he lost
his job, his house was already foreclosed on and now he is homeless, unless he
stays with me. I had already quit giving him money and helping him, other than
paying for his rehab almost 2 years ago. He seems to be content just being
that way. I am planning on going to a Al Anon meeting this weekend. I hope it
can help me. Does anyone else go to these meetings and has it helped them? Or
is there anything else out there? Thank you

Reply

  * ![senga](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### senga

October 25th, 2014 at 2:28 PM

I go to alanon for people who are affected by anothrr persons drinking i
highly recomend it. My dad and brother and husband w  
are all acoholics. Take care

Reply

  * ![Joanne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Joanne

October 25th, 2014 at 12:52 AM

Does anyone suffer from physical stress symptoms because of the constant worry
and stress of having a drug addicted child? My face, cheeks, eyelids and lips
are numb. I have heart  
Palpitations. I can't sleep. I know it's anxiety. Maybe the addiction will
kill before it kills my son.

Reply

  * ![Lynne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynne

October 29th, 2014 at 8:04 PM

Yes-I developed severe psoriasis that is magnified by stress, depression,
anxiety, heart palpations. One time I was in the hospital for a surgery -
severely constipated - one phone call from my addicted adult child and swoosh
no more constipation. That goes on a lot. Stress from these situations is very
hard on our health.

Reply

  * ![Pauline](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Pauline

November 2nd, 2014 at 12:56 AM

In one word yes

I have migraines stomach and bowel problems anxiety insomnia panic attacks
depression agoraphobia ,I'm on 5,6 7 meds daily and I have constipation
because of the meds I take. Yay me, this is so how I wanted to spend the rest
of my life

Reply

  * ![Rachel](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rachel

December 5th, 2014 at 11:55 PM

Yes… we have been battling opiate addiction with my 22 yr old son for 3 years.
He lost another job yesterday and we have finally said its long term rehab or
move out. My body cant physically and mentally take it anymore. I am on all
sorts of medication and am gaining weight daily it seems. I have pretty much
cut myself off from friends and am finding it hard to work. I pray for Gods
guidance daily. I have got to get myself back

Reply

  * ![Patricia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patricia

January 30th, 2015 at 12:34 AM

I am the 73 year old parent of an adult alcoholic. In high school he started
using drugs, but has turned to alcohol. I see not only him destroying himself,
but it is tearing apart his family. Seeing my daughter in law and
grandchildren suffer is hard. I love my son and his family so very much. I
can't stand the guilt that somewhere in his life we are at fault, although we
loved and cared for our kids. The stress is causing me severe emotional and
physical problems. I don't know how to make things better. I lay awake at
night worrying…I have Addison's disease (pituitary tumor and my adrenal glands
removed in 1971) and am in poor health, so that adds to how the stress affects
me. I feel guilty and selfish when I talk about me, when it's him that I need
to help. And his wife and kids. I can't and don't argue with him or even
kindly ask what we can do to help, because he gets angry. I am super stressed
right now because the wife and children have spoken to me about how stressed
they are. They are not happy. He is not happy…and I am not happy. What to do.

Reply

  * ![Patricia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patricia

January 30th, 2015 at 12:39 AM

I forgot to mention that he is a functioning alcoholic. He has a good job and
supports his family well. When he is at home, he drinks and gets ornery
verbally. I can't stand how it affects his wife and my grandchildren. I know
laying awake at night and trying to figure out a way to help isn't doing any
good.

  * ![Patti](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patti

February 11th, 2015 at 4:04 PM

Oh my gosh, I thought I was the only one! I would like to get my stomach
removed, I'm so nervous and nauseated all the time. I swear this put me into
early menopause as well. It's so unbearable.

Reply

  * ![Carol](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol

October 26th, 2014 at 6:38 AM

We also have been going through a terrible time with our 38 year old son. This
has been going on since he was 16. He is married but now separated with 3
beautiful children. He is very talented..can do almost anything with his
hands..mechanically, electrically, building etc. However, he had a house, was
1/3 owner in 3 rental houses then lost everything and went bankrupt. He has
lived with us on and off during his 15 year rocky relationship. The last time
he lived with us was this year for about 3 weeks when he was supposed to be
going to AA. He had not paid his rent for months, I paid to have his hydro
turned back on but nothing helped. So we let him stay with us. Then he found a
job up north, stayed at our cottage for a week and drank our bar dry. We
didn't say anything until he woke us in the night once again. He had a habit
of sitting at the fire with his 13 year old son. He would get drunk, his son
would go to bed and then he would come in and eat everything in sight. Not
being quiet he would wake us. Some mornings we would find him on the floor
with a plate of food. Other mornings there was food all over the place. The
last straw was when my husband got up and there he was drunk as drunk could
be. We knew he was back into it as my daughter had told us when we arrived at
the cottage that morning "be careful he's in a bad mood." He had been
screaming at her earlier. He goes right off the deep end especially when he
has a hangover. His children were there and heard everything. The next morning
we got up and I told him (in front of the children) that he was no longer
welcome at the cottage and I did not want to see his face until he changed his
life! I have spoke to him twice since then and he totally blames my husband
and I for everything. He said my actions were totally unacceptable in front of
his children. Yet over all these years he has never contained his mouth at all
with his wife or myself in front of the children. If he is angry he screams
like a lunatic. He told my daughter and my step-daughter and his ex that he
was into drugs as well. Now he says he isn't. I feel sick about it but I have
to admit that we had the best summer at the cottage in years! We were able to
sleep not worrying if he was going to burn the cottage down or listening for
his kids during the night. We take his children as much as possible as his ex
will not allow him to have the kids as he has given her no address.  
He has no car, no phone and boards somewhere up north. My husband and I have
given him thousands of dollars over the years and that too is a relief. I feel
terrible because I love him but we have exhausted all avenues.

Reply

  * ![Pauline](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Pauline

November 2nd, 2014 at 12:30 AM

Wow does it ever even get any better?  
My story consists of 2 husband's 4 children (adults now) I know,I'm a glutton
for punishment but who I feel the most for is my kids. They are the ones who
suffered the most. I kick myself hard many many times. Now I'm free from the
toxic relationships.. I live alone now. And one of my kid's is on the heroin
and meth combo, and that's why I'm here now..

Reply

  * ![dee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### dee

November 5th, 2014 at 5:03 AM

Watching my daughter drink herself to death, is affecting our family. We are
in the middle of tough love, and it's hard on us. But yesterday she self
checked out of the detox center and is refusing any treatment. She is 29
married less than a year, thank God no children, and her husband asked n filed
for divorce. He got a pfa, because she punched him in the face. I'm scared
because she has no job, no money, no place to live, no place to eat, be warm,
it's very upsetting. Tough love is sucking the life from us. There is nothing
else we can do. Her alcohol level was .509 last admitted, she'll die, her
liver is shot, she's not eating, skin n bones. How are we supposed to let this
happen and not interfere? I just don't think I can.

Reply

  * ![Lynne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lynne

November 8th, 2014 at 8:56 PM

Has anything you done to date worked? It hasn't for me and tonight I get a
call from er dr that my 22.5 year old son who is suppose to be on methadone,
smokes pot and is a herion & meth addict with severe re/occurring MRSA and hep
C is now being committed due to comments he made in the er about wanting to
poison water and kill people. He is skin and bones, homeless. His addict
brother sits in jail again and will be out in two or three weeks. It is too
much for me and nothing I do helps either.

Reply

  * ![amy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### amy

November 13th, 2014 at 10:36 AM

I am currently going thru that tough love process myself. My daughter is 29
and recently divorced from a police officer and does actually have two
beautiful children ages 6 and 4 whom she lost custody of a year ago. She
started out on depression and anxiety pills and is now into heroine. I've put
away away thru court processes but that didn't work either. She is also in
same boat…no job..lost car cause of multiple accidents…always high…very
verbally abusive. .I recently had to call police to get her out of my house
for beating up a neighbor's son for his drugs…she's now homeless too. It's
just so hard..I'm also wondering how far I can do the tough love process. I
keep asking myself. ..can I bury her? Cause this is the point we've reached

Reply

  * ![Gmaw](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gmaw

January 25th, 2015 at 6:42 AM

I deal with a daughter who behaves the same Her son is 4'Md lives with us his
father is in jail  
Check out The Healing Place

  * ![Carol](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol

November 9th, 2014 at 6:36 AM

Has anyone gone to Al-Anon and has it helped. I remember many years ago going
to one meeting but I felt very out of place.

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

November 22nd, 2014 at 5:39 PM

Carol,  
I tried al-anon but unfortunately felt out of place as well. Its very
uncomfortable to discuss this in the presence of strangers, then realize
you're not following aa etiquette when soeaking and that the small group has
been together for years and you feel kike an outsider. I found better advice
and help with online alanon.  
Ive also found that I have to set my daughter aside-Let go Let God in order to
save my sanity, be able to work, and to be happy myself. My husband deals with
very little from her, its mostly on me. I found that delving into too much on
a daily basis was bringing Me down. Shes threatening suicide the past two
weeks but is going to seek help she says on Monday. I needed online for
helpful reinforcements and found them here.  
Best wishes on your situation.

Reply

  * ![Carol](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol

November 9th, 2014 at 7:08 AM

Dee, I know it is so hard to do to stand by and watch! You are not alone.

Reply

  * ![Holly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Holly

November 10th, 2014 at 5:12 PM

Hello… I just stumbled onto this site this evening. My 31 year old son just
moved back in with me and is trying to kick heroin and other substances he has
been injecting the last few years. He was hospitalized for an overdose early
this spring… of course I didn't know until his younger sister told me. I had
him arrested the first time when he was 16. He was expelled from highschool
his junior year. I left his father (a STILL enabling police officer) about a
year after I had the boy arrested. He has a beautiful daughter aged 12 who he
has no contact with anymore. He hasn't steadily in at least 6 or 7 years. He's
hasn't had a job in over a year. Obviously he pays no child support and his
daughter chooses not to see him anymore because when he did hitch a ride to
see her he was drunk/high and out of his mind. I've had to steel myself from
all of his drama and jail times and learn to accept the fact that this son of
mine will probably die. He has been hateful to me for years. He seems so
extremely lazy and like he just doesn't give a damn about anything. He used to
attempt to father his girl and did o.k. with it… visitation always at my home.
Months go by and he and we do not speak or see each other. I gave up. His
police officer father has gotten him out of so much over the years. This has
not taught him a damn thing. I could give you a long, long, long list of
times. The last few years he lets our son just show up at his house stay
whenever our son needs a place. Well.. his police officer father's current
wife said "no more" and that's when the call came asking to come up here with
me. I maintain strict rules like no drugs, not even pot, no drinking, none of
your shady friends get to come out here, and if you leave for one night, you
aren't coming back. I'll drive you to a men's shelter. (he doesn't drive - no
job = no vehicle) He went thru withdrawal on his own this past week and
-surprise- he hasn't verbally abused me one time! He's been easy to get along
with and as he is beginning to feel physically better is helping out. It's a
financial burden. I'm single and live way out in the country on 15 acres. He
can't walk to town to see his buddies. I have post traumatic stress disorder
from dealing with him and the heartbreak for so many years… and then I went
thru a meth addiction with my youngest and only daughter 5 years ago. She is
clean now and has been for some time. She works a decent job and seems to be
getting her life on track with two young children. I'll continue to help this
son IF he follows the rules at my house. If he goes back to his past lifestyle
I will be done. I know I seem like a hard case…. but after so much pain,
verbal abuse, terrible decisions, and no desire to help himself I have learned
to let go if necessary to protect my own mental health. Such a pity. When he
was expelled back in high school his GPA was 1.0… quite terrible… however, he
had taken the PSAT for college entrance and was in the 95th percentile. He's
no dummy. Go figure. Anyway…. I may post or read from time to time. Thanks for
this site!

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

November 15th, 2014 at 11:12 AM

Dee, My thoughts and prayers are with you. My husband and I are living through
similar hell. It's a night,are that won't stop.

Reply

  * ![Debi from VA](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debi from VA

November 17th, 2014 at 7:52 AM

Debi from VA says:  
August 15, 2014 at 9:16 AM  
Diane, I have read & reread this forum at least a dozen times. I feel like I
could have written every post on here, but I can relate more closely to your
story than all of the others. My son is 33 & suffers from alcoholism, OCD,
depression, anxiety & bipolar disorder. His dad has totally disowned him, his
brother is thoroughly disgusted with him, all of his friends have abandoned
him & honestly I’m ALL he has in this world. I’ve offered to get him into a
long-term facility, but he has completely given up & says there is “no hope”.
He’s been in many 30 day programs, but they were only temporary “vacations” &
a way to make new “friends”. I KNOW he could turn his life around & be happy,
but without his consent, I KNOW a forceful move will never work!!! I’m 63,
still working full-time & never feel happy or safe in my own home. (He lives
in a weekly hotel which I pay for, just to keep him out of my house. I hear
all of you saying to stop paying for his place, but I’m not quite at that
point yet. I have a hole in every wall & door – a daily reminder of his
violent outbursts.) Thanks for letting me vent, Diane, & please give us an
update on your son.

Reply

  * ![Darcy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Darcy

December 7th, 2014 at 6:38 PM

I feel your pain and fear. My son 's alcoholism cost him his marriage today.
She stood by and took care of him for 16 years. The cost for anyone to live
with an alcoholic is too high emotionally physicall and financially. Please
don't lose hope. It is scary but it is their path they must find the way. Let
go let God or just have faith in your adult child. My heart breaks so often I
had to get tough not on him on me. We have to know in our hearts it could be
different if they wanted it to be. I can't expect him to know that if I don't
believe it. You sound like a good mom thank you for sharing

  * ![Nik](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Nik

October 23rd, 2015 at 6:49 AM

Thank you. I help with her rent too,so she cannot live and steal from me and
her sisters. I have decided to live my own life. There is free mental health
and SA care for those who need it or are forced. My daughter finally went
inpatient. I like what Eric said. Get the hell outta Dodge. I work away from
home and home every other week. I am distancing myself for my sanity.  
Thanks

  * ![Holly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Holly

November 16th, 2014 at 7:47 AM

I can't figure it out. Like I said, I've been going thru this for over 15
years and have tried to help dozens of times. At my age and financial
situation I cannot anymore. It's never appreciated so why bother? My son has
been out here with me for two weeks. He is clean now… sober. Still, he chooses
to go back to where he was… thinking he can handle it now. This is a giant
circle that goes round and round. Get clean… go back and use…. get clean….
etc. I offer him a home out here with me and my old truck to get a job the
"other direction" where I work. A fresh start. Nope… he's going back. It's
like: whatever. I hope that sooner or later you all can get to the point where
it just is a shame and sickens you so it's easier to let the pieces fall where
they may. You have NO control over it. It's all up to them. You can serve up
the chance on your best china and silver… but it's still their choice.

Reply

  * ![cherie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### cherie

November 16th, 2014 at 1:21 PM

Finally found a place to share. Nobody can really understand without the
experience. And everyone has an opinion, well intended but so inadequate. I
learn something everyday. Today I realized how very much my day is effected by
my son's success or lack of it. My son is sweet and kind but his life is ruled
by his addiction to alcohol or narcotics.. Do not have the money to help him
with adequate professional treatment. Has tried so many free programs but none
of them have necessary training. He also suffers from deep depression and
anxiety. Again the decent meds are expensive so do with what can afford. He is
the hospital at moment and will not give me he code so I just wait. He tells
me not to worry and to live my life but how does a mother do that.

Reply

  * ![SP](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### SP

February 24th, 2015 at 3:05 AM

Cherie……live your life. Think about yourself for a change. The stress, the
heartache ……the pain. Haven't you had enough? Isn't it time to let go?

Reply

  * ![Dr Basim E.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dr Basim E.

November 17th, 2014 at 4:04 AM

Drug addiction treatment helps thousands of addicts across the United States
achieve lasting sobriety every year. Due to recent advances in neuroscience
and psychology, rehab clinics are able to use a variety of proven methods in
their drug addiction treatment programs for quit your drinking habit alcohol
Teen Rehab.

Reply

  * ![cherie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### cherie

November 21st, 2014 at 10:25 AM

I agree. The correct rehab program is wonderful. The programs that treat the
body and mind and delve deeply into the cause of the addiction are often
successful. But just locking someone up for 30 days while they wait for the
day they can walk out to the nearest source of their drug of choice is nothing
but a very sorry bandaid to make others hope. Correct therapy takes several
months and after care when it ends…and family support and inclusion helps. It
also takes thousands of dollars and so many of us do not have the luxury of
these facilities. When our works realizes it is much less expensive and more
productive to assist the addicts in becoming healed and healthy maybe more
will be helped. Until then they will remain on the streets and go to the ER
when cannot cope. Those of us that love them will be required to watch and
worry. As for tough love, I have two friends that recently lost daughters when
tried tough love. I will not enable my son but I will help him any time he
meets me half way.

Reply

  * ![Holly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Holly

November 19th, 2014 at 6:35 PM

Dr. Basim E. - I realize that rehabs help lots of people WHO WANT TO CHANGE. I
also believe that there are those people who do not. My 31 year old son got
kicked out of his first one back when he was 17 years old after I had him
arrested and a chain of events immediately after. He just flat doesn't WANT to
change. It may come to him eventually but as I told him the last two weeks….
his time is running out. He was helping me move furniture and it was the first
time I'd seen his arms bare. Oh my God. The track marks and bruises. For 15
years his drug use and types of things he uses has steadily increased. He
chose to go back to the environment that keeps him in his never-ending circle
of drug use, rock bottom, etc. I don't have to enable this anymore. There is a
home here for him so long as he stays clean. There is a vehicle for him to use
to get a job. I can't do any more than that anymore. It used to just drop my
heart and soul to the bottom of the well in grief. I guess I've gotten used to
it. Sure, many times I feel guilty about his situation. But I also know he's
had many chances and if he wanted to change there have been many opportunities
for him to do so. In jail, in counseling, in rehab. I went thru hell with his
younger sister when she was 17 and did a 180 degree change suddenly by not
coming home, showing up at school, stealing from me and stores…. then just
before her 18th birthday the judge in the adjoining county put her in juvey….
where she learned she was pregnant. She turned 18 in that juvey. Meth. She
came back home to me and was clean and home during her pregnancy… but when the
baby was 3 months old she went insisted on leaving to go to her father's
house. (a cop). In less than a year she was arrested after a high speed chase
in the middle of the night. The baby was in a car seat. Needles were on the
floor. Baby went to foster care. Daughter went to jail…. then rehab. It worked
for her. She's been straight for over 5 years now. She has custody of her
daughter again, a decent job, and has her life on track. Two kids… same mother
and father and environmental upbringing. The difference was she WANTED to
change. Her older brother doesn't have that determination. It breaks her
heart, too. But we have all come to realize the choice has got to come from
him - and it may not. And we may bury him.

Reply

  * ![tiffh](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### tiffh

November 21st, 2014 at 8:02 AM

This article is now outdated and scientifically inaccurate. For instance, it
has been well established that the heritability of alcoholism is quite high.
This is known from studies of identical twins (look at the concordance rates
for twins reared together versus those for twins raised apart) and from
adoption studies (look at non-related siblings who grow up in the same
family). It is clear that nature absolutely trumps nurture (what behavioral
geneticists refer to as the "shared environmental component of the variance").
In fact, alcoholism is a disease, and recent studies from 2014 are honing in
on the exact physiological causes. It is time to start looking at real
scientific evidence rather than continuing to pretend that everything is
always the parents' fault. Let's forget about silly "theories" that
psychologists come up with and look instead at the hard-core findings provided
to us by behavioral geneticists (who actually understand the difference
between correlation and causation, unlike most psychologists) and neurologists
(i.e., real scientists).

Reply

  * ![Rose P](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rose P

November 25th, 2014 at 5:32 AM

I somewhat agree with your comment. I have been dealing with guilt for so
long, I have a son who is bleeding me dry emotionally and financially. What is
your advice?

Reply

  * ![Rose P](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rose P

November 25th, 2014 at 5:28 AM

My Son has been homeless for so long, I can't remember. .. I am so sorry for
some reason, I feel so guilty for how is life unfolded. He is 31 I have been
trying to get him to go to a rescue mission,I know I shouldn't keep saying
that. . I guess I do all the research cause it makes me feel better. I have
sent him money all summer and into the fall . Now with Christmas coming, I get
so depressed. He messaged me yesterday all caps that he wanted to come here
for Xmas, I found myself lying to him. I can't see him the way he is right
now. It just hurts to much. Am I wrong for feeling this way.. so lost. … Thank
you for taking the time to read this.

Reply

  * ![The GoodTherapy.org Team](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/GoodTherapylogo6.jpg)

### The GoodTherapy.org Team

November 25th, 2014 at 9:21 AM

Thanks for your comment, Rose. If you would like to consult with a mental
health professional, please feel free to return to our homepage,
https://www.goodtherapy.org/, and enter your zip code into the search field to
find therapists in your area. If you're looking for a counselor that practices
a specific type of therapy, or who deals with specific concerns, you can make
an advanced search by clicking here: https://www.goodtherapy.org/advanced-
search.html

Once you enter your information, you'll be directed to a list of therapists
and counselors who meet your criteria. From this list you can click to view
our members' full profiles and contact the therapists themselves for more
information. You are also welcome to call us for assistance finding a
therapist. We are in the office Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Pacific Time; our phone number is 888-563-2112 ext. 1.

Warm Regards,

The GoodTherapy.org Team

Reply

  * ![SP](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### SP

February 24th, 2015 at 2:59 AM

Hang in there Rose…….it is so distracting, so unfair, and just plain wrong. I
know this first hand. I feel so angry at times.  
The anger I feel keeps me strong…….reinforces my boundaries. Pray and know
there is nothing you can do. He is  
An adult and must find his own way to freedom. Once you accept this you will
find peace. Do not enable. Just find strength  
Somehow….someway and pray.

Reply

  * ![christie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### christie

November 28th, 2014 at 11:38 AM

i would like to know if it is possible to gain legal control over an adult who
is addicted to alcohol and is killing themselves. I wont go into the story,
but we are out of options and he wont get help I do not want to loose my
brother. please advise. thank you.

Reply

  * ![Mimi](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mimi

January 31st, 2015 at 7:26 AM

I would like to make known "casey's law." Google it. Basically it is the story
of Casey Wethington and subsequent enaction of the law named after him.  
My personal take on my adult daughter's situation is that if she's using, she
is not competent to make decisions that are in her best interest. Caseys Law
is how to get this done, and has helped a lot of people get help. There are a
few hoops to jump through, but if you can do it then you'll have a start.
Personally I don't believe that one must always hit bottom or desire to get
help. For some, they might need to be pushed in the right direction. It may or
may not work for you but at least it's a chance.

Reply

  * ![Geraldine and Vladimir D.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Geraldine and Vladimir D.

December 2nd, 2014 at 11:48 AM

Our son Peter is 37 years old,is father of two sons  
(14 and 6 years old)Truths about life of his family and him was hidden from
us,up till last year Christmas.His wife left him and was half dead in his
bed.In this situation we took him to ours house and care, with hope to get him
better.He lost everything his family,house,job,friends,passport,any Id,cell
phone,and what is most important even his mind.We tried to look for help any
imaginable ways with no luck.Peter after being in detox and rehab centers is
refusing to take any more rehabilitation.The situation is so bed now,he is
drinking rubbing alcohol,taking anything what he thinks gets him
high,including sniffing gasoline.He is dying again,as a fact.Temperatures
turned nasty lately and we are afraid of him passed out outside and freeze.We
are old seniors and this situation is taking lots from our fragile health.Our
story is too long and sad to put it on the paper.Please advice us if there is
some help for us and our son.Thanks.

Reply

  * ![The GoodTherapy.org Team](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/GoodTherapylogo6.jpg)

### The GoodTherapy.org Team

December 2nd, 2014 at 3:58 PM

Thank you for your comment, Geraldine and Vladimir. If you would like to
consult with a mental health professional, please feel free to return to our
homepage, https://www.goodtherapy.org/, and enter your zip code into the
search field to find therapists in your area. If you're looking for a
counselor that practices a specific type of therapy, or who deals with
specific concerns, you can make an advanced search by clicking here:
https://www.goodtherapy.org/advanced-search.html

Once you enter your information, you'll be directed to a list of therapists
and counselors who meet your criteria. From this list you can click to view
our members' full profiles and contact the therapists themselves for more
information. You are also welcome to call us for assistance finding a
therapist. We are in the office Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Pacific Time; our phone number is 888-563-2112 ext. 1.

Warm Regards,

The GoodTherapy.org Team

Reply

  * ![Elizabeth](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Elizabeth

December 12th, 2014 at 5:07 PM

My 35 year old nephew has come here to seek treatment for drug abuse. His
parents insisted he come, and his dad (who has very deep pockets is finding
his rehab). I have come to learn that our nephew is a master manipulator, and
keeps extending his time because he loves being away from his reality back
east. He is playing in to everyone's wheelhouse; he has found god because his
dad is very religious, he will be a much better husband to his wife, and this
all sounds promising except for one thing, and this is where I need advice.

Today, my sister, (my nephew's mother) arrived to see her son. She just called
and said he will be staying here after treatment because he cannot go back
east because he knows he will use again. Although he has a house, a $100,000
debt-load, and a job that is being held for him, family etc., he says he is
"living the dream" out here. He has always wanted to live out west and I fear
he is using his addiction to achieve this goal.

Her is my question: Should my nephew go back, face his old life, wrap it up,
THEN move here? I get the feeling he is running away  
because his dad will finance him to do so. Am I being judgemental? Our
experiences with our nephew have not been good, yet I feel his family expect
us to prop him up out here. I am simply not convinced he is being truthful
with anyone, what should we do?  
This is starting to stress us out. Our nephew just e-mailed today us and told
us he used our home address as his residence so he can apply for a job
(without asking us first). He just wanted to give us a "head's up". While we
are thrilled he is sober, his behaviour and motives are worrisome.

What to do?

Reply

  * ![Carol](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carol

December 15th, 2014 at 5:11 PM

Lisa,  
Thanks for your reply. I will try Al-Anon on line. My daughter just mentioned
yesterday that she would like to go to Al-Anon. Her brother reappeared
yesterday after 7 months and came to her house and stayed the weekend. He
looks like a bum and didn't even have a dollar on him. My heart aches!! We had
coffee with him but he is emotionless…it's a terrible situation and I feel for
you and all the others too. If only there was an answer. I guess we have to
leave it to God.

Reply

  * ![Pilar](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Pilar

December 30th, 2014 at 6:14 PM

I am really enjoying the theme/design of your web site.  
Do you ever run into any internet browser  
compatibility problems? A couple of my blog audience have complained about my
website not operating  
correctly in Explorer but looks great in Safari. Do you have any  
ideas to help fix this problem?

Reply

  * ![Mimi](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mimi

January 31st, 2015 at 8:04 AM

The number of people addicted to drugs and/or alcohol is astounding. The
"reasons" why this happens to some and not others are too complex to say it's
a disease or hereditary or environmental. I mentioned Caseys Law before as a
potential resource for others. I was not able to pursue it because in my state
I had to pay for a psych evaluation and I couldn't afford it. Unfortunately,
my daughter continues to use. My other daughter, though, had gotten addicted
to opiates and now she does go to the suboxone clinic and she's great. Holding
down a job for 1 1/2 yr now. The using daughter was on suboxone for a year and
during that time she was her normal sweet self and didn't steal. I don't know
exactly why she went back to heroin and it doesn't matter now. I finally had
to ban her from the house when she stole my last penny and left me with nearly
no groceries. Anyway this problem is a total epidemic. We could all be each
other. I don't think there's an answer. I do not believe there is any
solution. Jail doesn't help. New laws don't help. Rehab helps some but not
others. We must save ourselves. I love my daughter infinitely but I may have
to do it from a distance now. Its like I'm addicted the way I get sucked into
it. I hope I can stick to my guns this time. It's not easy. I feel for every
one of you here.

Reply

  * ![michelle](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### michelle

February 7th, 2015 at 2:30 AM

I hope you stick to your guns too but it is hard to do sometimes. They know
how to push our buttons. God bless you and I pray the Lord protects you and
your girls!

Reply

  * ![michelle](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### michelle

February 7th, 2015 at 2:26 AM

I am so confused, I let my son move back in with me, he is 27 years old and I
know he drinks but I forgot how mean he is when he drinks. He came home
tonight drunk, jumped on my bed and bite me….then yelled at me for being mean.
I am so sad and confused, I am trying to help him and he pulls this on me. I
can not argue with a drunk, I can't do anything he does not want to stop
drinking and does not care. He.gets mad at me because his dog like me and
wants to be around me more than him. I don't want to call the law or anything
like that but I also don't deserves to have to live like this. Not sure how to
fix it

Reply

  * ![SP](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### SP

February 24th, 2015 at 2:44 AM

Michele…..you must call the police for intervention if your son is verbally
and physically attacking you.  
He is an adult. As an adult he must learn to live without drama in a normal
sense, and if  
He cannot then he put himself into this system now he must work on getting
himself out.  
System meaning once you call the police…….jail, mental evaluation, court etc.
I know because  
I have been there with my 29 year son and his wife. Stay strong, be tough, and
tell yourself  
I have had enough. I refuse to live like this anymore. I love you but I do not
like you.

Reply

  * ![pauline](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### pauline

February 10th, 2015 at 11:38 PM

My husband and I are the darkest stage of our life My son is a drug addicted
and has milked us dry. He liars steals and manipulates us we are at our last
ends. Please someone help us

Reply

  * ![Michele](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Michele

April 6th, 2015 at 6:41 PM

Pauline,  
I have a 21 year old son who has been addicted to drugs for 5 years. It has
been a nightmare, but the day I realized I could no longer control his choices
and actions I completely lost it. I have read several excellent books, the
first being "Don't Let Your Kids Kill You" which was just what I needed. It
gave me the tools I needed to tell my son "no" when he asked, then demanded
money. I have called 911 and had him arrested and put in jail for punching my
wall and damaging property. I do not allow him to live with me and he can only
visit when he is not using. Another excellent book "setting boundaries for
your adult children" and "Clean". Clean by Sheff really helped me understand
addiction and the brain. I learned to offer food to my son, but never, ever
money. Addicts will lie, steal, and manipulate anyone willing to listen to
them, let them hang around, or have pity on them. I do not bail my son out of
jail, as those are the times I sleep the best, knowing where he is and that he
can't use. Read these books, educate yourself on this choice/disease and keep
your Sanity!

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

April 14th, 2015 at 9:25 AM

Michelle, Thank you for the book referrals. I was hoping to get some tools on
this site and am anxious to get started reading. I also read a wonderful book,
Smoke and Mirrors. I also attend a group called PAL (parents of addicted loved
ones). I find this group so helpful and supportive. If there's one thing I've
learnef, but struggling to put in place, we must take care of ourselves
FIRST.If you come from a co dependent family, it's probably more difficult to
understand that concept but I am working towards honoring myself. Blessings
and love to all.

  * ![Karen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Karen

February 13th, 2015 at 5:02 AM

We have been dealing with our 27 year old daughters alcoholism for 10 years
now. She has a 5 year old son who means the world to us. She has been through
rehab 2 times, and every time she is close to being done , she starts drinking
again. We are trying to let go, and let God. It's just so hard when there is a
little boy involved! She is so manipulative and mean .

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

February 18th, 2015 at 10:31 PM

Mimi, many of your words sound a lot like mine this year…it's now 2015, and my
husband and I have been battling with our twin sons addictions since 2001,
give or take a year…doesn't really matter much anymore once you hit that ten
year mark, sad to say.

"Its like I’m addicted the way I get sucked into it."  
I know what you mean…we often say that we are addicted to their addictions.
And it's not hard to become Addict Addicted. Before you realize it, ziiip, 14
years have gone by and you end up being me…I am 61, the twins are 24, and
today I had to go to the bank for the 4th time in 6 months, close out my
account, cancel my debit card, and re-open a new account…all because I got
tired 2 weeks ago and forgot to strap on my heavy hip pack (that holds my
checkbook, wallet, money, credit cards, meds,keys), and one or both of them
accessed the account numbers and enjoyed themselves with our money.

I sleep with the hip pack. When I take a shower, it hangs from a hook on the
tub wall. It is on my body almost 10 hours a day, or slung over my shoulder,
even while I am doing dishes or the laundry. I obsess over it and guard it as
though it were a living thing. I hate that hip pack and the fact I am forced
to haul it everywhere.

"Anyway this problem is a total epidemic. We could all be each other. I don’t
think there’s an answer. I do not believe there is any solution. Jail doesn’t
help. New laws don’t help. Rehab helps some but not others."

I agree again. Therapy, rehab,counseling and private psychiatric care did
nothing. Jail has done nothing, both now have multiple felonies. Lecturing,
tough love, begging, pleading, praying, all produced no reduction or cessation
of their drinking, drugging, or stealing to keep on drinking and drugging.

"The number of people addicted to drugs and/or alcohol is astounding. The
“reasons” why this happens to some and not others are too complex to say it’s
a disease or hereditary or environmental."  
I agree, we can all argue until the cows come home, as my mother used to say,
but it won't produce a verifiable, proven reason WHY people drink or do drugs.  
You come to a point where you realize, a lot of people use simply because they
CAN…and because they ENJOY it. My son stated, "It's no big mystery, Mom. I get
high because I LIKE it."  
So I no longer search for that elusive WHY. I don't care anymore about the
WHY. My sons get high because they can, and because they want to. Simple as
that.

"They both suck the life out of me. Do what you need to do to stay sane and as
healthy as possible"  
When addiction goes on and on, addicts undergo a sort of transformation; they
become vampires. They drain your money, your credit, your health, your sanity,
and anything else left inside you, once they realize they missed Something
That Could Be Drained. Vampires are parasites, just like a tapeworm that eats
and eats and eats and ultimately leaves its unfortunate host starved to death.

For those lucky few parents, whose child makes it free from addiction? You are
rare and lucky people. Ditto for that child/children who free themselves.  
My two guys have no interest in freeing themselves. My response to this in the
year 2015 is basically, "Whatever, dudes."

Our solution: we are buying a cheap place this summer, and re-homing the
Vampire Twins. Renting is useless, they are always evicted and that costs us
money, as we get sued for damages, since we have to sign for the lease (felons
don't get approved much for rentals). I don't care if its in a bad section of
town, or if it's a Fixer-Upper…its two hours away, there are tech schools, a
university, jobs, places to go…that is, if they choose to do those things.

Expense will be less than it costs to feed them in jail, less than treatment
centers, and less than it costs when they steal credit cards or destroy
something in the house or damage my car in a drug fueled rage. The expense is
worth it for our emotional freedom and our physical health-stress can kill,
and we're not quite ready to die yet.

It keeps our sons off the streets, yet out of our home. It won't stop them
from using, but we've realized nothing is going to stop that. If they both end
up in jail again, we'll rent the place out. It's not a perfect solution, and
its not possible for everyone…but we've tried and tried and tried and paid and
paid and paid…geeze, we could have bought a villa in Italy for what we've
spent on trying to "cure" those boys, or had stolen from us. A NICE villa. At
this stage in our lives, I'll settle for buying them a Handy Man special and
getting rid of this hip pack.

Love and hope to all of you, seriously…we have BEEN THERE and know your
suffering…holding each one of you in my thoughts this night…

Reply

  * ![cindy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### cindy

April 21st, 2015 at 3:30 PM

Why do you continue to rescue them? I just stopped, hardest thing ever, no
money, no bail. No rides. No house.

Reply

  * ![Debbie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debbie

March 5th, 2015 at 4:20 AM

Is there a way to get an adult child into treatment when he has no health
insurance? We are in NYS.

Reply

  * ![Lucy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucy

March 15th, 2015 at 6:11 AM

I knew my son was depressed, and addicted to pot, and occasionally would binge
drink, although that made him very sick, so it would be rare. After struggling
to, but finishing his degree, with nothing in perspective, and no money, he
moved back home. It was a battle to keep the smoking under control, and to get
him to see a counsellor, but he did, and he even got a part time job. We left
to go on a camping trip, but had to come back - worst nightmare happening -
phone call recording: our son is in jail for multiple severe charges. He is
now out on bail, has been for 7 month with very strict house restrictions. He
is awaiting verdict in about 6 weeks now, on 3 different meds, he can't kick
th pot habit. Our sense of powerlessness and guilt is profound, and there are
very few days that I am not crying myself to sleep.

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

March 15th, 2015 at 7:37 PM

Debbie, if your child was on a state medical card, would it be accepted by the
treatment facility? Have you checked into disability to see if they qualify?
And is your adult child willing to go to treatment, sign themselves in? Most
treatment centers we looked into for our boys required their willingness and
consent to be there…unless its a psych unit, there are no locks on the doors
of most of the centers we've ever seen. I'd call your local Social Security
office and start there…they usually have listings of some agencies that might
be able to help you.

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

March 15th, 2015 at 7:43 PM

Lucy, I am so sorry to hear that happened to all of you…we've had to rush back
from a few trips ourselves, due to arrests and a few overdoses, where one or
the other of my boys was in the Emergency Room. The bail thing concerns me a
bit, though, as we've also done that multiple times…no more. One of them
almost didn't make it to one of the court appearances, and we would have been
out $30,000, since we signed his bail bond. Anyone who is considering getting
their child out on bail, please, please, do the research…courts can and will
come after you for the money if your child doesn't make a court appearance, if
you signed that bail bond. Some states will even revoke the bail if they have
a positive drug test, or get into trouble while out on bail…and you'll owe the
amount. Please consider this and be cautious…

Reply

  * ![Lucy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucy

March 16th, 2015 at 9:54 AM

Thanks for you reply Cynthia… Yes we where at emerg. as well, in January, be
cause of an overdose attempt. We are also $20 000 potential on bail, and
already $10 000 in lawyer fees. This is so hard. But what are parents supposed
to do? He would have been in jail all this time? We are in Canada, and the
system is slow, so slow. Next court appearance has just been post-poned…  
How do you cope with all of this?

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

March 16th, 2015 at 6:50 PM

Oh, we know how much it costs…we had two of them, and each had to be
represented by a different lawyer, which cost $5000 each for a retainer…that's
not counting the subsequent court appearances and paperwork, etc. We had to
take out multiple credit cards, which 5 years later, we are still trying to
pay off. Had to get one of them a $5000 psychiatric evaluation and report, for
court…which was never used, as the case went to a plea bargain and not a
trial. We're still paying that off as well. Our legal system is not much
faster in some states, Lucy…but the smartest decision we ever made was to say
NO, we're not hiring you a private lawyer anymore.  
The last time one of them was arrested…for breaking and entering a place to
get drugs…he had to declare himself indigent and use the public defender, who
did the same exact thing it had cost us almost $10,000 to do the previous
time…plea bargain.  
We also didn't bail him out…in the USA, if you sit in jail awaiting your trial
or sentencing, the time you spend behind bars is counted as time served…they
take it off of the eventual sentence. May sound cold hearted, but its a matter
of our financial survival…we let them sit in jail now, when they get
arrested…no more bailing out.  
And how do we cope? One day at a time. I clean a lot of closets out and re-
arrange stuff. I find multiple projects to work on. I keep busy, which helps
take my mind off the boys and what's happened. Sometimes it works pretty well.  
But you can bankrupt yourself trying to do it "kindly", as in, bail them out
so they're more comfortable at home than they would be in jail.  
I don't want my boys locked up, either. But neither do I want to stand in
bankruptcy court again.  
We're in Recovery, that's how I view it…and our financial recovery is every
bit as important as my sons.  
You can't let your son run you into ruin, Lucy…and it happens. Huggs, hun.

Reply

  * ![Monica](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Monica

March 23rd, 2015 at 8:23 AM

Hi There,

I have read through some of the comments on this blog trying to find an answer
or advise for my problem. I suspect that my brother has become drug dependent.
This has been coming for some time now, and has been really bad since last
year. The problem is that he is manipulating my Dad so badly it feels like I
am the one lying all the time. But then he goes and lies about having a job
and working and when I start to talk to my Dad about his possible habbits he
comes and shows that he had to do medical tests which includes drug tests and
that it comes back clear. Although I know for a fact that he is still using.
So my Dad just keeps on helping him and I can see hear the worry in his voice
but he is also in denial. I am totally at a loss and dont know what to do. Its
like my brother is manipulating my Dad in such a way so I am now the crazy
one.

Reply

  * ![Sharon](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sharon

March 26th, 2015 at 5:55 PM

Hi: I have been dealing with my 30-something year-old sons' addictions to
drugs and alcoholism for 22 years. They started drinking and using when they
were kids. I have not seen them for ten years. They live in another state. We
don't exchange gifts or cards, and they absolutely flaunt my values in my
face. They aren't interested in me visiting them or vice versa. I'm so tired
of the insanity. There's so much more I could write, but it would take up the
whole coments page. I'm to old and tired to deal with them anymore. I've lost
some grand kids because of this, and some I haven't met. I won't let them come
home, and if they did, zero tolerance for drugs or alcohol. I don't help them
financially because I'm not able, and I don't pay their bails if they go to
jail. Their rejecting me is getting harder to take. I'm so glad I found this
site. Thanks.

Reply

  * ![DIANE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### DIANE

July 23rd, 2015 at 1:01 PM

Sharon, I am truly sorry to hear what you have been thru as Mother. My
daughter was very or is very similiar. In a group, she acted as if I wasnt
there. Hurt worse than I can describe. At womens conference I was speaking,
she came (to Party). God had different agenda. She was saved, came into my
session, ran down isle, grabbed me. Looking me in the eye, I saw her. The real
daughter.  
She apologized for every lie she told, everything she did. I still to this day
do not understand that, but, God Saved and Changed her.

All we have is LOVE and FORGIVNESS! you do not have to give them money. But
you can Forgive, and Love them. It may change their life.

Reply

  * ![Cynthia](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cynthia

March 26th, 2015 at 8:36 PM

Monica, when you say your brother "shows that he had to do medical tests", I'm
not clear on what it is he has shown you…was it a piece of paper from a job,
stating h must get drug tested? Or did you see an actual lab result/printout
from an actual hospital, lab, or drug testing facility? There are a lot of
drugs that are out of a persons system in just a few days, so if he knows the
date of his drug test, he can just stop using for a few days and should get
back a clear test. My boys used to do this.

Not doubting your suspicions or feelings for an instant, but what led you to
the conclusion he's using? Your Dad sounds like he is going to need some
concrete proof other than a feeling, suspicion, or intuition about this…is
there any? Any drug paraphernalia, etc?

Reply

  * ![Dot](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dot

April 13th, 2015 at 12:16 PM

I am using Dot as an alias since my daughter has been known to stalk me, and
the only reason I care is confidential issues dealing with her children.

What a great article Mary Ellen has written. I would be one of the 'bled dry'
parents, and did bail mine out years ago for one thing or another, but I
stopped financially contributing long ago. My problem is seeing daughter
torture my grandchildren, year after year. She has been jailed several times
over the years, but it seems to be getting worse of late, as she seems to
think she is bullet proof more than usual recently. The children watch her
rage, blackmail, extortion tactics until it makes my head spin. Child services
have been involved, but there is only so much they can do, and not much I can
do either but offer to stay with the children while she is incarcerated.
Problem is, she has lots of enablers, including her husband and her father.
They continue to bail her out, she continues to screw up.

I am currently waiting to hear the outcome of today's hearing, which will
probably be they let her out of jail, possibly on probation yet again, or
possibly probation with one of the body monitors like house arrest, who knows.
In the meantime, I sit in limbo waiting to know if I must shut down my home
and fly off to be with the children, or remain here and watch / hear more of
the same horrible issues the children face each day.

I don't know why some of us have children, and adult children like these, I
only know it hurts worse than anything I have ever experienced.

Reply

  * ![Amy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Amy

April 15th, 2015 at 6:01 AM

My son is 22 years old and is addicted to Adderall. He had never been
diagnosed with ADHD but was easily prescribed by our family doctor. 2 weeks
ago he overdosed on Adderall and was in a psychotic state and refused to get
help. We told him if he wouldn't get help he could no longer stay at our
house. He lived out of his for 4 days and showed up at our house and we called
the cops. They convinced him to get help and we drove him to Brooklane. Once
we were there he refused to sign the papers and because of his age we had no
rights. I was able to convince him to check in the following day. He was
admitted but checked himself out after 5 days. Again, because of his age we
weren't shared any of his diagnoses. He is not mentally stable and living out
of his car is not what he needs right now. He is scheduled for outpatient
therapy today. He is very delusional, claiming he is Jesus. It makes me
absolutely sick to my stomach that in his psychotic state that we aren't given
any emergency rights to help him. And that they would allow someone in his
state of mind out on the streets. We called our family doctor and asked that
they please not prescribe him the medicine again, that he is an addict and it
almost killed him. Of course we got that is patient doctor confidentiality.
Are there any medical rights we can get? Does anyone have any advice they can
give? This has been a living hell to watch my son trapped inside this illness
and knowing there is nothing I can do.

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

August 17th, 2015 at 5:51 PM

Amy, the pain of dealing with an adult addict when you are the parent is
unbearable. You asked if their was anything you could do….Yes there is a thing
called the Marchman Act. You go to the clerk of courts in your town an
partition the courts to assess your child. It it's a civil court hearing, they
are required to hear your case within 10 days. You present your side and he is
given a court appointed attorney for his side. If the judge ruled in your
favor he is taken to be evaluated. Once that it's done then they can court
order him 60 days in rehab and it can be extended up to 90 days or more.It
does not go on his record because it's a civil order not a criminal one. My
son is 26 and an herion addict among who knows what else. He just walked out
of a sober house today, my heart is broken and I haven't even begin to sort
through my feelings, just know you are not alone. God Bless and I hope this
information helps.

Reply

  * ![Holly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Holly

April 19th, 2015 at 2:54 PM

Its hard folks. You are damned if you do and damned if you don't in some
cases. Some of these people can change and some cannot. No matter what you do.
If you can't take it… don't. If there are children involved inform social
services and do anything you can to get that child away from the abuser. I've
posted in here before about my oldest son. Since the last post (the week
before Christmas) he overdosed on heroin twice. In one week. The second time
he was clinically dead and the emergency room brought him back. On a vent for
over 24 hours. His father got him into a rehab about 4 hours from here. His
father also went back to get him in 3 days because he didn't want to be there.
He's using again. Still needles. Last I heard he's injecting meth and
methadone now. He never has contact with this daughter (THANK GOD) and told me
to leave him alone in December so I have and haven't heard from him either. I
was a real jerk when I mentioned at the hospital that maybe they shouldn't
have revived him. Everyone (family and friends) hated me for that comment. I
meant it. I still mean it. 17 years of this is long enough. I just want some
peace and for the nightmare to be over. Does it hurt? Oh yes it does!!
Depresses me to no end. Do I have to cope with it? Yes. I can't sugar coat the
situation. It is what it is and I'm very tired of it. He won't help himself
and there is really nothing anyone can do about it. They have to want to help
themselves. Something has to click. Sometimes it just doesn't. You would think
a death experience would wake someone up.

Reply

  * ![Octagonal](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Octagonal

January 2nd, 2016 at 11:25 PM

Wow, Holly, blown away by your honesty that time, about not reviving your son.
I get it. I have had the same feelings at times about my daughter. That all
the pain would end, for her but also for me, if she died. Isn't that a
terrible place to arrive at. I bet it is more common than people are game to
admit.

Reply

  * ![odontoiatra](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### odontoiatra

April 28th, 2015 at 7:42 PM

My brother recommended I may like this website. He was once totally right.
This submit truly made my day. You can't consider just how much time I had
spent looking for this information! Thank you!

Reply

  * ![Betsy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Betsy

May 5th, 2015 at 5:55 PM

Bless all of you. I am a step-mother of a 23 year old who suffered a traumatic
brain injury at 5 years. He has a very hard time getting & holding a job, and
wanted to return to his home state (he came out to go to high school in Los
Angeles with his Dad & me). He lived w/permissive grandparents who have a drug
history (mother also addict) & you can guess the rest of the story. He went
missing on Good Friday & gratefully found on 4/24, having been arrested for
shoplisting w/2 others. Fast forward he is back & condition of the court we
checked him into rehab. Got a good recommendation by an interventionist. We
are at a week and a half. Because of his cognitive disability (family was too
worried about his self-esteem to test him over the years, but he has a low IQ)
I'm worried about his ability to understand. The privacy issue for me is a big
problem, as my son is really probably around 11-12 yrs mentally and that may
be generous. The center is very closed lip about how he is doing, and they
won't even get back to me on when and how to schedule visiting time or family
therapy. His case manager says others are involved on the family day
scheduling and manage his visits. I'm starting to get angry & wondering what
I'm supposed to except in this process. Told he may be moved to transitional
living place this weekend, but haven't been updated to how he is, how bad
addiction etc.

Reply

  * ![Ann](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ann

May 10th, 2015 at 5:38 AM

I don't even know where to start! Daughter is losing everything due to drugs
and drinking. She will be moving in with me this month. Eavh time I see her
she says she wants to be clean, yet she continues to drink while taking drugs
so she doesnt have seizures. She has been in rehab three times. She has me on
emotinal roller coaster. My health is failing because of her addictions and
drinking. Today is Mothers Day, I cant even cry anymore, I have to keep my
strength for my work and husband. She is an only child and I will NEVER give
up on her. Any suggestions?

Reply

  * ![Sandra](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sandra

May 16th, 2015 at 6:48 AM

We've boon on this roller coaster for more years than I can count, and it
think it can't get any worse and it does. We won't give up either Ann, but we
are trying to learn to offer love and support from a distance. There is
NOTHING we can do to change it. "God, grant me the strength to accept the
things I cannot change". We're stuck in his mess, and our lives are going by
so fast. Try to let go with love.

Reply

  * ![Let's still celebrate...](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Let's still celebrate...

May 10th, 2015 at 1:59 PM

Ann I am so sorry to read your pain. As mothers, we have to embrace our
children, for better or for worse, as they are part of humanity, which has all
its beauty and strength, but unfortunately all of its misery, pain and
weaknesses. This is what I am coming to better understand, and to hold on to
as we keep on with the struggle with our son. I am grateful for all of you who
wrote to to me, and who take the time to share their stories in this page. As
painful as it is, I am seeing through all of you such strength. Our son has
been convicted to 20 months in jail, which he will serve starting at the
beginning of the summer in a facility that is supposed to have support and
treatment for men with addiction and who suffer from psychiatric problems. He
will still Carey the criminal record for the rest of his life, as there is not
pardon for these offended in Canada, and yet, the girl who 'conned' him is
running free. Our son can't help but continue to smoke pot daily. Some days he
seems alsmost back to normal, some days, such as today. He does not get up til
mid afternoon, lies on the couch playing his hand held game, smokes. I know he
will be up until late in the night, while I ray to sleep to go to work at 5:30
am. I am trying to wean myself off the meds for depression, but relapses make
it hard. Perhaps some day, this will be in the past… It would be nice to hear
of people who overcome these hardships. Lots of love to you all. Mothers of
the world unite, in joy and in sorrow, because we are together in this
humanity, and perhaps our efforts with the difficult ones somehow will
benefits the others. Xox

Reply

  * ![Carolyn](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carolyn

May 19th, 2015 at 9:41 AM

Every message or comment has the same thread running through it - frustration,
desperation, sadness, hopelessness. I have been experiencing the ups and downs
as a mother with an addicted son for 20 years. There were times when I though
I would die from sadness, guilt, helplessness. I found Naranon, the equivalent
of Al-Anon, for those who love, or have in their lives, drug addicts. The
first thing I learned there was The Three C's - I didn't Cause it, I can't
Control it, and I can't Cure it. I got the support I needed, was able to help
support others, and the same lessons occurred again and again, on a weekly
basis. There were times that Naranon and the website "Ask an Addict" were what
kept me going. I can't say that the pain is less than it was five or seven
years ago, but I am able to manage it now, and live my own life, albeit some
days in a more subdued manner than others. I am still hopeful - sometimes
unrealistically so - when it seems that my son is on the straight and narrow,
but when he again crashes and burns, I don't crash and burn with him. We, as
the loving parents or "affected others" of addicts and alcoholics have
absolutely and positively no control over the acts of anyone else. As far as
giving them money, it's valuable to remember that you could be enabling them
to kill themselves with an overdose with the very funds you provide. Addiction
is absolutely rampant. It is a disease, but a manageable one through the
choice to stop using. I know that I am not an expert on addiction, know that
there is nothing I can say to turn the tide. If an addict/alcoholic wishes to
change, the right place for help is AA, NA, CA, and perhaps there are more. At
those venues, the addict will find others fighting the same battle, will find
camaraderie and hope. I don't know if this will help anyone but my routine is
that I do not try to contact my addicted son when I know he is using because
he won't answer the phone anyway, will be enraged if I manage to contact him
in some other way, and is doing precisely what he wants to be doing at that
moment. I will not (nearly all the time) ask his brother if he has heard from
addicted brother, seen him, etc. My relationship with older brother is
separate and apart, and cannot become about his addicted brother. That just
isn't fair. I have paid for sober house rent, because they are environments
where drugs are not permitted, and the use of them means immediate expulsion.
I have also paid for medications. In both of these instances, the provider was
paid directly. I also paid for a psychologist in the past, and will not do
that again. I believe the addict has to be clean for some period of time
before he is able to benefit from general counseling. My son has been through
5 rehabs, including Betty Ford, which was paid for by insurance through his
employer. At this point, my experience has shown me that nothing will work
unless the addict wants to stop. I love my son and will talk to him whenever
he calls me. I have not issued any ultimatum, nor have I issued any threats. I
am fortunate in that he has no children, because I see from others that the
children are those who suffer. The addict will always satisfy his need to use
first, before he will feed his starving child. But his need is also his
choice. As the saying goes, he will stop using when he is sick and tired of
being sick and tired. And, yes, he may die. But remember the Three C's. And
find a Naranon group, or go to an Al-Anon group if you can't find one. The
principles are the same, but usually you may not identify yourself as the
affected other of an addict. This will not affect your ability to participate.
My heart breaks for each one of us, I pray for all of you, and myself. My wish
is for your strength, your moving on with your life, focusing on the areas
where you can make a difference. One of those areas is not the addict. Good
luck, and blessings.

Reply

  * ![Sheila](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sheila

June 25th, 2015 at 9:20 AM

Thank you for your BRUTAL HONESTY. I needed to read your post.  
God Bless you for your courage and Gods strength to share your journey. I have
began to face the mom looking back in the mirror regarding my son and his life
issues. I pray for God to help me know when to pray and know when to move out
of His way.  
Thank u.

Reply

  * ![Kim](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kim

May 19th, 2015 at 3:10 PM

Wow. I completely relate to these posts. My son has been using and abusing
pot, alcohol and other stuff for some time now. It really picked up after he
turned 21. I kept hoping it would stop; the lying, stealing and manipulating.
He wasn't stealing and lying to just fhis parents, but friends, siblings and
grandparents too. I always wanted to believe him. A month ago he took my in-
laws car and got into an accident, and denied up and down that it was he who
had taken the car. We gave him the choice of detox and rehab or the street.
Thankfully he went to both, and is moving into a sober living house after his
stint of 30 days. We are to visit this week, and attend the family program
offered by the treatment center. I am sick with the possibility that he will
relapse. I grew up in an alcoholic home, and have several siblings who are
also addicts. My older brother has taken every last cent from my mother. He's
only 47 and almost dead from disease. The thought of my son having this
outcome makes me sick. My husband and I are not drinkers, and I never wanted
my family exposed to this chaos. Now here I am again, and I know I can't live
like this. Not for myself or for my family. I have expressed this to my son
over the phone when he asks me why I sound down. The possibility of him not
being apart of our lives breaks my heart. I am sick that I believed all the
lies, covered up for him when I hoped things would change. I learned long ago,
no matter how much you wish, you can't control what other people do, you can
only control yourself. The sadness is overwhelming as I don't have much hope
for a positive outcome, as no one In my family has ever beat addiction. I pray
my son will be different, and he'll choose the right path, but I am doubtful
and that is why I am so sad. For myself, my family and for the friends who
love him. You can see the goodness within, see the son who once was, but it
occurs less and less often. Financially we have given him this opportunity,
and my heart hopes that he uses this opportunity and sees it as a gift.  
Kim

Reply

  * ![jo](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### jo

June 8th, 2015 at 8:24 PM

Dearest kim, i can here your pain and i can relate to. Im dealing with same
situation but with two sons one s adicted to horoin and the other is a
alcoholic. I wish i was as strong as you. Dont give up and dont doubt your
child recovery keep in faith that our god will guide your child to over come
this enemy that has a hold your child. Keep strong and keep moving
forward.your child is listening. You know why because your child is in a
treatment center trying to get help. Thats a start. Im still trying to
convince my sons to do the same for the last 3 years.good luck keep strong and
faith

Reply

  * ![Lucy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucy

May 20th, 2015 at 6:03 PM

Good luck Kim, stay positive no matter what.  
We are trying to. Our son will go to jail for over a year, beginning at the
end of Auust, because of what happened. His addiction to pot is so strong,
that even after all this he can't bring himself to stop. I truly believe that
his brain has been permanently changed by the substance. I always thought that
pot was pretty harmless. It is not. It is very dangerous. So his lack of
judgment and depression got him involved with the wrong girl. And the girl
that conned him, as she did the young man before ( who is also in jail) will
go free, and is likely with another young man now (she is 15 but looks and
acts 18 a hence al, the charges). I feel that I have lost my son. And that we
are up just 'putting in time' until his sentence. Who now show he will be when
he comes out…

Reply

  * ![Eric](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Eric

May 24th, 2015 at 8:04 PM

I first posted here January 2014.

Let’s face it: in a huge number of cases… it doesn’t get any better. Ever.

The only way to survive the nightmare my drug-addict monster of a son became,
was to get the hell outta Dodge.

Reply

  * ![DIANE](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### DIANE

July 23rd, 2015 at 12:40 PM

ERIC, I AM TRULY SORRY TO HEAR WHAT DRUGS, AND OR ALCOHOL HAVE DONE. I TOO
USED TO BELIEVE IT WAS HOPELESS. I CRIED OUT TO GOD, AND HE HEARD ME. HE TRULY
SENT AND ANGEL, MY HUSBAND HAS BEEN SOBER FOR 20 YEARS SINCE THAT DAY.

IF YOU DO OR DO NOT BELIEVE IN GOD, CRY OUT TO HIM, HE MAY JUST SEND YOU AN
ANGEL.

Reply

  * ![Nik](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Nik

October 23rd, 2015 at 6:37 AM

Thank you. I am going through this with 28 year old. When we were away,she
stole,used sisters car with DUI. Left her Facebook on,so we saw exactly how
bad she was. I help with rent so she can't live with me. I changed my locks. I
work four hours away,home every other week. If it wasn't for my 3younger ones
who work hard and go to college,I would move to another state. Just found a
wonderful man and decided it's time to get on with my life.this site is great.

Reply

  * ![Peg](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Peg

May 30th, 2015 at 10:33 PM

I am thankful that I found this site as I can relate to so many of your posts.
My adult son (25) has started back down a slippery slope again of lies and
drinking and not working and expecting me to pay for his poor choices. He is a
4th year engineering student and even though he admits to drinking (sometimes
heavily) during the school year, he does manage to get good grades. While he
is in school (he lives on his own and has funded his own education) I don't
mind taking him for groceries or a bite to eat. However it's now summer break
(4 months) and he is able - if he chooses, to work every day with a local
moving company. This week I got a call that he needed $100.00 for groceries. I
know, through FaceBook, and his siblings, etc. that he is partying and
drinking and he has admitted to me that he is choosing not to work as much as
he could. So I said no to the $100.00. I told him there is a food bank if he's
truly starving (I think he wanted the money to go drinking). And then
yesterday he advised me that he doesn't have enough for rent (and the cheques
were written on my account - on the understanding that his student
loan/scholarship money, earnings, etc. would come to me to 'budget' and pay
his bills, etc.) Long story short, he's now telling me that he doesn't have
the 'entire' amount needed for rent so I've told him I put a stop payment on
the cheques. I didn't sign the lease, he did. Yes they are my cheques however
I'm not responsible to pay the rent. If he gets evicted, so be it, it's his
problem. He tries the whole - I was raised without a father (his father wasn't
the greatest dad) and he says his siblings are all alcholics too (they all
hold down jobs, pay their way in the world and don't expect me to), etc. etc.
etc. He tries the guilt and manipulation routine. Taking a step back - he was
a cocaine addict in his teens and I'm always terrified that if I don't give in
to his demands or "help" him, he could go back to snorting. I've finally had
an aha moment though (even though its so very hard) and I am telling him - no
more. I won't give or lend him money, I won't make excuses for him, I won't
help him with anything of that nature. He is 25 years old. He makes his own
choices. I have no control over them nor can I change his past or his
childhood. It is so hard but I know I must stay strong or he will continue to
bleed me (I was paying drug debts for him in in teens as he used the "they'll
kill me if I don't" story. It's unbelievable what our children can do to us. I
just want to say to everyone. Tough love - as hard as it is and as much as we
don't like to hear it, it is the only way we can truly help our kids. When my
son was using Cocaine I told him to get out of my home and stay away from me
and his sisters until he got help. He went and got help and quit the cocaine.
He was clean and sober for a number of years and did his upgrading and then
entered engineering in University. However now his drinking has become a
problem and although many believe it is better than cocaine - I don't, It's an
addiction and it can and will ruin his life if he doesn't get it under
control. I just can't let it ruin mine. Sorry for the long, rambling post. I
just needed to put some thoughts down on paper as I know what I'm doing is the
right thing. It's just hard. And finally, does anyone have any really great
words they tell their children as to how the abuse and the cycle and the bs
has to stop - to make them maybe understand a bit. I guess the "mom" in me
wants to be in control and have him listen to me and above all else, respect
me, but of course that's not the case. Anyway, thank you all for being open -
it's comforting (although very sad) to know that I'm not alone. I wish you all
peaceful sleep tonight.

Reply

  * ![Kim](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kim

June 4th, 2015 at 5:26 AM

dealing with this now. My daughter was on heroine. She never asked for money,
but she finally asked for help. Sent her to rehab. She came out and lives with
me and she relapsed. She's back on track now. Then find out my youngest has
been abusing alcohol. She's extremely mean when she drinks. Very manipulative.
She never saw me act that way, but their dad is an alcoholic. We finally
divorce d a few years ago and now I am still dealing with addiction from my
girls. This is pure hell

Reply

  * ![Robin](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Robin

October 7th, 2015 at 6:17 PM

Kim Don't feel like the Lone Ranger. My mom was alcoholic when I was a child
but did recover.Thank God. Now my only child- 28 to daughter is one. And she
is angry and hateful to everyone. I agree. This is a living hell.

  * ![Sheila](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sheila

June 25th, 2015 at 9:03 AM

I just read your post mostly out of desperation of my own dealing with my son
who is almost 23.  
I'm too emotional right now to disclose our story, however wanted to THANK YOU
for sharing yours! It has been THE post that HAS helped me see that the
decision I made MOMENTS AGO a confirmation. I am heart broken as the mom,
however I know now that I'm not alone in this journey of adult children of
alcohol and drug issues.  
Thanks again.

Reply

  * ![Missy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Missy

October 14th, 2015 at 2:27 PM

I am so sorry Peg. I too have a very intelligent son who is actually in Ph.D.
School, but the demons keep coming. Starting with alcohol then escalating to
drug abuse. I have tried for 4 years to be the super hero, to save him. I am a
medical professional as well, and thought I had all of the right things to
say. It doesn't work. I have finally realized after all this time it is up to
him. I go through my daily battles and attempt to help without enabling. I
know it feels like you lost your heart! In some way we have. I have decided to
throw my self into being a champion of the cause to end this horrific way of
life! God Bless us all💜

Reply

  * ![Samantha](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Samantha

June 3rd, 2015 at 7:48 PM

My daughter was fired from her job of 8 years. One week later she was crying
on the phone with me because the med stop facility she went to wouldn't treat
her, charged her and sent her to the emergency room. I encouraged her to go.
The diagnosis was alcoholic hepatitis with 6 months to live if she continues
drinking. This is my first awareness of the extent of her drinking. I told her
I will help her through this once. I am far enough removed so I won't know if
there is a relapse so I am going to have to set my boundaries regardless of
need or outcome. She says she gets it, is embarrassed to have caused this
condition to herself and has gotten the suggested prescriptions. I am hoping
she is strong enough to get this right the first time. I know that I am not
strong enough for more than one attempt. For me, it is literary do or die.

Reply

  * ![Kathy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Kathy

June 21st, 2015 at 6:41 PM

My single daughter is 47 yrs old and an alcoholic and drug addict. She has a 7
yr old son who lost his father in an accident several years ago. They both
live with me. She recently lost her job because they found drug paraphernalia
in her desk. She had a seizure while driving, wrecked the car and she was
arrested with a DUI. This will be her third DUI. In our state 3 is a mandatory
1 year person sentence. She's been in rehab 3 times to no avail because most
insurance cover only 15 days. She has no coping skills and has recently
confideded to me she was molested by her father who I have been divorced from
for 20 years. This would explain her adolescent issues with constant panic
attacks. Her attorney suggested she check herself into rehab now so that the
next hearing will have minimal consequences. She has done nothing yet. Her
license has been suspended but she uses my car for errands and the other day
she came home drunk. I told her she could not use my car again. I'm on edge
all the time. I never know what condition she will be in from one hour to the
next. She said she drinks because she's scared of going to jail and leaving
her son. But she'll find any reason to drink or get high. I sometimes hate
her. My whole life I've been here for her because she often threatens suicide.
In the past three months she's been in a mentally three times. I love my
precious grandson. He's the only reason I don't throw her out.

Reply

  * ![PJ](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### PJ

July 7th, 2015 at 11:26 AM

Thank each and every one of you for sharing your stories. My 38 year old
daughter, is addicted to prescription pain pills, weed, and who knows what
else. We've just discovered that she's been adept at hiding this problem from
all of us for a long time. We always thought that the requests for money for
rent, electric bills, ( mom they'll shut off my power tomorrow, and the kids
will freeze) were just because she was bad with finances and couldn't make
ends meet. In hindsight, and by comparing stories with other family members
and her friends, we see that her problem has been ongoing for some time. Her
recent, sudden, weight loss, quitting her job, losing her apartment were all
red flags. However, I continued to believe her stories and her reasons for
what was happening. I did stop giving her money, but kept hoping that what I
was seeing wasn't really happening. Maybe a mother's hope is blind. After she
stole from her sister and also a friend, left her two beautiful children, ages
9 and 13, with their father, and just disappeared, we finally opened our eyes.
She promised to meet the children for a "date" and didn't show up. She
promised to meet her 18 year old daughter for lunch and didn't show up. She
continues to text her father and a few friends sporadically, with different
stories of her whereabouts, and what she's doing. None of the stories ever
match. Her location is unknown to us. I lie awake at night waiting for the
call telling me that my daughter is dead. How did this happen? A smart,
generous, kind hearted, beautiful, loving, woman, with many friends, and a
good job. How did she end up here? Until reading these comments, the answer I
kept giving to this question was "It's my fault". I was a terrible mom, didn't
love her enough, didn't give her what she needed. Maybe, with the help of your
stories, I can let that go.

Reply

  * ![Longbeach2015](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Longbeach2015

July 9th, 2015 at 2:02 PM

After 20 years of addictive behavior, i managed to get my son into a high
security hospital 5150 on grounds that he was serious suicide threat. I then
talked to the dr. You can write a letter to the doctor, they just wont give
you any info on your kid without their consent. I let him know that my son was
destructive, grabbed my glasses from my face and threw me against the wall.
That convinced him that my son was a threat to me. I said he couldn't come
home until they found a med that reduced the violence.

My son at first wouldn't take the meds but the dr said he wouldn't release him
unless he did. Finally, just to get out he consented. Took his first tiny dose
of atypical antipsychotic seroquel. Like night and day!!! Mr hyde became dr
jekyll overnight. If i was ever unconvinced that addiction was self medication
and NOT a choice for him, this clinched it for me. I think he just wanted
peace, relief from social anxiety, self-hating voices, depression, etc. And he
got it from booze and drugs.

He's been home a month, and he is voluntarily not drinking, not using drugs.
He's able to be friendly and talk to people, look em in the eye. He hasn't
been that way since- well, maybe never even as a kid he was a mess. He used to
say he just wanted tofeel normal. I think with the meds he isnot anxious or
horribly angry any more. He has a long way to go, but for the first time, he's
considering going to group therapy and voluntarily to AA. I think he dreaded
people so much that those things were too painful for him.

Maybe some addicts do choose to be addicts, but i think many are completely
out ofcontrol of their own brain. Someday we'll get better imaging data. I
personally think both my sons were damaged when the ob/gyn insisted on doing
fetal sonograms. Imagine that really thin skull being blasted with high
intensity sound waves before birth. Why else are so many of ou kids screwed
up? No, i don't think i was a bad parent, and my kids had great schools, great
extended family, etc. Son #2 definitely has a physiological brain problem that
caused this addiction. I just hope the meds continue working while he gets
some therapy to help him wrestle with his overactive reptilian brain. Looking
back on it i think he had signs of problem as an infant although he was
athletic and very bright in spite of it. Stop blaming yourselves. Our kids are
just as sick as if they had cancer or ms or asthma, it's just that society
won't accept that they truly need to be involuntarily committed long enough to
be helped. It took me 20 years to get it done because i didn't see it before
age 18. Addicts are children, and we should be able to commit them before they
totally screw up (the "hit bottom" bs). I am going to do all in my power to
make my elected officials consider changing the law to empower parents of
adult addicts. We can help them if we have the law on our side.

Reply

  * ![Leslie S.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Leslie S.

July 9th, 2015 at 3:29 PM

This is the best article for parents with drug addicted children. Wish I had
know this and followed this advice 15 years ago. It is the only way to
possibly save your child and the only way to save yourself from a life of pure
hell. When it comes to our child and drug addition, our heart is our biggest
enemy.

Reply

  * ![Jill E](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jill E

August 29th, 2015 at 5:08 PM

My 33 year old son died December 7, 2015. I had no idea he was an alcoholic.
His wife never told us or asked for help. Maybe she is an alcoholic too? I saw
my son regularly, he had a good job, just bought a new car, etc. I thought all
was good. Now I see some signs now looking back. I just wish I would have had
the chance to help, I wasn't given the chance to help, my help may not have
changed anything. I miss my son more than life itself.

Reply

  * ![Gail](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gail

September 6th, 2015 at 5:06 PM

My 35 y/o son is adopted. He has been addicted to alcohol and drugs since
about 18. He has been in/out of rehab for 6-8 times now and has had 3 (that
I'm aware of) suicide attempts. I quit enabling him about 3 years ago and
actually live in a different state. Unfortunately, my ex; his Dad still
enables him and we are not on good enough terms for me to talk with him about
his actions. He does this out of guilt as he is a professional and was not
around much when I was raising our 2 sons. Our older son is also adopted from
a different biological mother; he is thriving with a family of his own and has
pretty much disowned his brother. Just last week I asked my son to give me the
straight story on what's going on since he is an adult and I have no access to
his history in rehab, etc. He said he has been smoking a lot of weed and did
meth about a month ago. He has never held a job. Ever since high school, he
has quit every job, sport or other thing he joined. He also has been diagnosed
bi-polar and through all his stints in rehab has learned the "lingo" and
excuses for his addictions; i.e. biological parents being addicts also. When I
asked him how he affords his drugs/alcohol he told me that he loans his car
(which his dad bought and is paying ins, etc. on) to drug dealers in return
for drugs. I was sickened when he told me several instances of having a 22
pointed in his face, etc. I just can't take this any more. It's been almost 20
years and I lie awake at night worrying about whether he's alive, having a
meal, prostituting himself, laying in a street somewhere, etc. This has
totally started to affect MY mental health. I must let him go………………….but I
love him to the moon and back. Am I a terrible parent? I'm open to ANY
suggestions……………..

Reply

  * ![Carly W](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Carly W

September 16th, 2015 at 12:11 PM

My son is 26. Alcoholic. Learned of huffing a month ago. Has no home, recently
umemployed. Keeps getting jailed. Has major anger issues, has beat and
controls his GF. Their new baby and my 1st grandbaby is almost 8 weeks.
They've been staying in a hotel some. I don't give him money. I have bought
everything I can to help new grandson. As of last week after he was calling me
a "B" and was very angry after I gave them ride. (G-son was also In my
car)Worst I've ever seen him be. I vowed I wouldn't help him anymore. He has
said several times I won't be in G-sons life. And his GF sides with him since
I won't "help" him.  
WHAT are my rights to see GRANDSON? HOW CAN I KEEP MY SANITY? My husband
thinks he will SNAP & harm me if I keep on being around him.  
Good luck to all with addicted family members.

Reply

  * ![Lana](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lana

September 19th, 2015 at 10:08 PM

As a 45yr old addict, I found a lot to be commended on this page. I have given
up all hard drugs for over 8 yrs now, am finding alcohol the hardest thing to
knock on the head. Years of anxiety, panic attacks, no self esteem, no male
role model in my life, abuse at a very young age and kicked out of home at 15.
Yes, this history and I need to just get my shit together.  
I love my mum, she not had things easy and I am SO grateful she has never
bailed me out of any messes I have created. She has been there and given me
the hard words when I need them and never have I doubted she loves me. If you
want to help, don't give money, go shopping, get some food, whatever the so
called bill, go with them and pay if situation is that desperate. Then sit
down and figure out with them why they not managing.Hardest thing to do is
watch them hit rock bottom. Anything can happen,but for me, I praise and love
my mum, she bn tough, very hard for her. Absolute best thing for me.

Reply

  * ![Teresa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Teresa

October 14th, 2015 at 3:52 AM

One form of insanity is repeating the same destructive behavior over and over
again. We then are addicts, or hostages, to our own emotional responses. I was
on the emotional draining roller coaster wuthering my addict. One night I had
a nightmare that he died before I could get to the hospital. I realized I
could continue to allow my fear and emotions to cripple me, or I could take
control of my own life free of the chains. Since that day I am no longer

Reply

  * ![Teresa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Teresa

October 14th, 2015 at 4:04 AM

Sorry this is the finish of my comment. I am no longer also a hostage. I help
when it is the compassionate thing to do, I support when it is called for,
within reason, Yes my plans must be changed sometimes, but it's also about me,
not just the alcoholic anymore. My life is worth living. I may mourn someday
over the loss of a child, but I'm not going to spend my life now in fear and
mourning. I have already mourned and now I must live. We must emerge to this
point.

Reply

  * ![Nik](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Nik

October 21st, 2015 at 5:39 PM

Thank you. My 28 year old daughter is an alcoholic since 14 and I help pay for
a room in a nice house for her. She is getting worse and doesn't,t care about
herself or family. I liked your article because me and my 3other daughter do
not want to go down with her. I just realized how many lies, she came over and
left her Facebook page on and my daughters found out what she was
doing,lying,stealing,laughing and joking about it. So I am done. Locksmith
coming tomorrow. She got a DUI and then took my other daughters car out and
did not care. I have accepted she may die and I can do nothing about it. It
breaks my heart but now I found a great man I want to be with, I will not let
anyone take that chance away from me. Thank you and good luck, God bless

  * ![christine](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### christine

October 26th, 2015 at 11:46 AM

I buried my son on October 16, 2015. He was 32. He had been drinking for 13
years, he also was an epileptic. When he would drink heavily, there was a 90%
chance he would have a grand mal seizure the next day. He very well knew and
was very educated in the risks he was taking with his health. in the beginning
as his mom, we went to docs. shrinks, societies, educating ourselves, etc. if
he didnt drink, he very rarely had any seizure activity. But my son just never
grew up. I kicked him out at 19. I could not get him into treatment or to deal
with his abuse, and I could not watch him killing himself day by day.
Sometimes he would wake up in the E.R. and not know why he was there.
Thankfully, someone found him face down and unconcscieous in a street
somewhere after a seizure. He began to live w my ex , his father. He was an
alcoholic and had a stroke in 2000, which left him paralyzed on one side. he
walks now w a limp and a cane. He has enabled my son for over a decade. i have
screamed, cajoled, begged, and threatened my ex. STOP buying the booze . STOP
giving him a place to live. bind together with me to intervene and together
unite to put a stop to all of this. he just never would. he is a very backward
shy person, and extreme procrastinator. also, my exs parents died . they lived
2 doors away. so for the last two years my son was allowed to live in their
empty house, unsupervised!! up until the last 2 years i saw my son at least
once a month wld take him out for a burger, just love him, no judgement , no
questions. but things had gotten so bad if i took him out he would flip out on
me in public, screaming and flailing, i would have had to call the cops. told
him i cant be alone w him anymore till he gets off the sauce. we can talk and
email, but only get together on holidays or when someone else is present. told
the ex what the kid was doing and saying to me. he just acted like hu? and
again, would not stop enableing. at least i had talked them into checking in w
each other every day. the ex had seen him saturday night, but not on sunday so
at 130 am on monday he went over and found him face down dead next to his bed,
and very stiff rigormourtes already set in. then- the ex didnt call me for 12
hours - and i live 2 miles away. i was not allowed the chance to see my child.
i can only guess this man was afraid of me because of all my pleading with him
and ripping him a new one over and over, and had just done so about 3 weeks
before my son died. i insisted to go in his house. the ex didnt want me to and
i found out why. the ocean of beer cans and booze bottles. there was so much
even in my sons own room, he would not have been able to even walk from the
bed to the bath without having to wade thru the cans and bottles 2 feet high
mounds of crap. the ex admitted at the end he was buying him 48 beers on fri,
and on monday the kid waas back asking for more money. there was lots of weed
that i destroyed, and it was obvious he was selling for his dealer. this kid
lived a childs life- never drove a car- never paid a bill- never had to worry
about anything. he was given a free party pad and access to booze, and
alifestyle where he could just party and just do little odd jobs and things to
keep his dad happy. he did not even know the amount of beer he was drinking,
he admitted to me he would drink till he passed out. its so sad. I am so
enraged. Justin, was the only family member I have that i got along with. that
got me. we had the same sense of humor. he let alcohol take it all away. i am
devastated . i know he is in heaven. that is my silver lining. but i am left
alone without him, as so many, with regrets, anger , anger at the enabler,
angry with my son, even tho i love him so.l

Reply

  * ![Cindy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cindy

December 29th, 2015 at 4:10 PM

Christine, I'm so very sorry for your loss, tears are pouring down my face &
my heart's breaking for you! I can relate to most of what you've gone thru,
also. You're in my heart & prayers now beautiful!

I too, have a grown son (only child & only family member also) in his 30's, I
honestly don't expect him to make it & had to recently "completely" detach
from him, due to his behaviours which I could no longer tolerate. It's like
facing his death to me & the grief is almost unbearable!

I can't imagine what you've had to face, feel, experience, etc., it's truly
touched my heart reading your story. May God surround you with his powerful
loving grace!

Reply

  * ![TessaR](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### TessaR

November 1st, 2015 at 11:30 AM

My daughter has still a couple of years to become a grown adult, however it's
good to know the signs of childishness career. My friends is currently
struggling with her son, who doesn't seem to see anything odd about living on
parent's account and wasting all the money on alcohol. this got me worried and
I don't want this to happen.

Reply

  * ![Sally M](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally M

November 23rd, 2015 at 9:36 PM

Christine. Wow. Amazing testimony. I am sorry for your loss. My daughter is
like your son. I wont even list the crap, I have seen and been through. I ask
and pray to God that he heal her or take her…as the life she is leading now is
not a life. I hope that I am not the one to have to find her dead. I have been
told she wont see her 31st birthday if she continues to drink and abuse Rx
drugs. is 30 and 1/2 year old now.

Reply

  * ![Mary](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mary

November 26th, 2015 at 9:51 AM

my son OD two nights ago…he was in the bathroom…I had to go to the bathroom.
He didn't answer I walked in. He was foaming at the mouth his eyes were rolled
back…he was pasty…making noises in his throat. I yelled for my husband. I
called 911 we dragged him out my husband did CPR until the police came. They
took over until the EMTs came. My husband and the EMTs saved his life. He's
been trying to get into treatment….I had taken him to the ER the day before…we
just needed help. The hospital treated him and me like crap. Drug addicts
don't count I guess they are not human. They got him stable then said you can
go home your not going to die. WTH our system is so flawed. Needless to say
this happened two nights ago. The only place that will help is an outpatient
which I took him to yesterday…go back tomorrow where he will see the dr. He's
25 we won't let him leave the house…how long before you let them leave? Does
anyone know what we do now? He wants to stop. He has been calling daily for a
bed its full.

Reply

  * ![Jon](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jon

December 2nd, 2015 at 9:39 AM

We have a 28 year old female child, masters degree. Had 3 good jobs lost them
all. We also have a male 24 year old male who manages to go to work every day.
But also drinks every day. The girl developed her issues in the last 2 years,
the boy has been drinking since high school. Neither parent is an alchoholic.
And there is no history in our family, until now. So much for genetics.

Reply

  * ![Jessica](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jessica

December 5th, 2015 at 4:55 PM

My husband is an alcoholic. He was submitted to hospital three nights ago with
depression and has had his gun licence taken from him the following day. I
know that I am unable to change him. He is still in denial that he has a
problem. They were unable to keep him in hospital because he wasn't showing
signs of suicide and had no drug and alcohol staff at the hospital on the
Friday to talk to him. His liver is enlarged but luckily there is no scaring
yet. His enzyme levels which are meant to be about 40 are 833. He still says
he does not have an alcohol problem but rather a liver problem. He is only 39.
He has fallen out with many friends. He engages in a lot of reckless and
socially unacceptable behaviours like drink driving, was shooting while
intoxicated and would do it while he had his 15 yr old son with him. He had to
sell his boat to finance his ute registration. One of his friends hides a bar
fridge in her spare room to store her alcohol so she can make out that she
doesn't have any. He will have unpaid bills everywhere. He lies, spends no
time with children when they are home (they live with their mother) and will
not take responsibility for anything. The list of the symptoms of his
alcoholism does not end there. The biggest obstacle I can see preventing him
from getting help and acknowledging he has a problem is the enabling from his
parents. His mother still allows him to put his medication on her account at
the pharmacy. Before I came along she did all his housework, wash his clothes
and would buy gifts on his behalf for his children and neices and nephews.
Both of his parents will often pick the children up when he is allowed
visitation and do not require him to provide fuel money. I have had to fight
hard to get access to his paperwork like divorce papers and tax
papers,insurance so that we can do those things ourselves. We rent a house
from them (only $50 per week). My husband refuses to leave it because he knows
we have it good. Before I brought him back fromtheypital I suggested to them
that they give him the ultimatum of getting help for his drinking or they tell
him that we are to leave immediately. They refused saying that they have tried
before and it didn't work (they were always idle threats and never followed
through on and my husband knows this) and that they couldn't do it because it
would effect the children and that it is also their home. I suggeated they
might consider increasing the rent to an amount that it is actually worth so
that there is less money for alcohol they still refuse. I know they are not to
blame for his drinking but I find myself frustrated by their lack of insight
into how they enable.

Reply

  * ![Debbie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debbie

December 14th, 2015 at 5:14 PM

I need some advice on where to start. My son just turned 35. He is an
alcoholic and is getting worse. Even though I do not support him financially,
he has a daughter that just turned 8 that I make sure she has what she needs.
What I need advice about is, how and where can I go to get guardianship of
her. I have to get her out of that house. Her mother and my son have never
gotten married, but they do live together. Her mother is not completely all
there mentally. She can function as far as keeping house and taking care of my
granddaughter, but educationally, she is no help to the child. She, herself,
can not read on a first grade level. My granddaughter had to repeat
kindergarten. She is in first grade now and not doing well again. Her mother
has called me because she doesn't know what to do. She can't get her to do her
homework or her class work. She wants me to help her. They live about 20 miles
from me. I can not go there every afternoon to help. That is the one problem.
The other is my alcoholic son. He works nights. He gets off work at 10pm. He
used to go home drinking, screaming, yelling and verbally abusive to the
child's mother and waking up my granddaughter. Several times, I have gotten a
phone call (sometimes 3:00 in the morning) and had to go there and take my
granddaughter out of the house. I told my son, one more time and I'll come
with the police to get her. Now, he buys his beer, goes home, sits in his
truck and drinks till he passes out. The mother gets up early to go out side
to get him to come inside before the child gets up for school, so she doesn't
see him. He usually does, but 3 weeks ago he refused (with some strong
language to her). I got there about 11:00 that morning and made him get out
and I had some strong words for him, along with an ultimatum to him. I told
him he had till the first of the year to get himself together or I will do
everything in my power to get her out of that house. He has not changed
anything as of today. He screams and yells at the both of them. He tells them
he is sick of taking care of them. He tells them all the time to get the H***.
Out of his house. He tells all that to an 8 year old child.He punches holes in
the walls. I ask her what happened and she cries, because she is not supposed
to tell and she doesn't want me to be mad at her dad. He is over 6ft. Tall and
he stands in front of her and makes her look up at him and belittles her. He
tells her she is stupid like her mother. She is tall for her age and she
already gets picked on because she is so much taller than the kids in her
class. She is supposed to be in second grade. She is still in first and not
doing well. If she fails first grade, I don't know what will happen with her.
I have told her mother if she chooses to stay there, that is up to her,
but….my granddaughter should not have to.

Reply

  * ![Christine](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Christine

January 5th, 2016 at 12:50 PM

You must get both mother and child out of that house!! If mother won't go you
must get your granddaughter. He is psychologically abusing them. How can
anyone expect her to do well in school. She is being traumatized daily. This
is going to leave very deep scars for your granddaughter. In my personal
situation the addicted parents let the wife's mother take children to her
house. Grandmother has called CPS and has their approval for the children to
be in her care. However nothing has been taken to court to award her
guardianship. Legally the parents can come and get their children anytime they
want to. Grandmother lives in constant fear they will do this. I believe you
must call CPS. Talking to her teacher and school counselor would help too I
believe. Please try to get your granddaughter out of that house.

Reply

  * ![DerekM](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### DerekM

December 16th, 2015 at 1:33 AM

This article will help many people understand how to deal with such situations
whenever it happens to someone close to us. I am glad I stopped by.

Reply

  * ![Gina](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gina

December 29th, 2015 at 9:31 PM

Debbie, My heart goes out to you, I was reading up on how to deal with a
relative taking advantage of another relative. Your first concern, custody, is
a legal question and hopefully you have found some answers by now. The mother
is asking for help with her daughter though so finding help with school is
something you can also start. Your granddaughter could have a learning
disability and needs to be tested. If she is struggling with the material she
would be avoiding the work. Support groups such as CHADD (for ADD), websites
like Wrightslaw, can help figure how to have the child tested. It starts with
requesting the school to do it, in writing. However, I think schools sometimes
won't diagnose ADD or autism because they aren't characterized as learning
disabilities. Some school districts are better than others about all of this.

2- Drinking in the parked truck could be a DUI if your son is caught,
depending on your state's laws.  
Best wishes for you and your family, hope 2016 is better.

Reply

  * ![Diane](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Diane

January 1st, 2016 at 5:33 PM

My son just called to tell us he's been arrested for his 4th DWI, he's been an
addict for more than ten years. He has a six year old son and we see him as
much as possible. My son was arrested in another state and I'm so sad for him,
we have stopped bailing him out for 3 years now but emotionally it"s hard to
deal with it. I'm sure he's headed to prison for this. What a way to start the
new year. I have to separate myself from this. He is 30 years old! I'm really
sick about it!

Reply

  * ![Louise](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Louise

January 3rd, 2016 at 12:30 AM

The culture we live in leaves so many of us feeling flawed &/or inadequate.
Escape through A & OD is one way out, while becoming the  
'victim' of others' behavior & choices seems to offer another form of
compensation, once again avoiding self responsibility. This site has miles of
posts from 'victims' & playing a victim means playing powerless &
powerlessness, like addiction, is a choice. In truth, it is you who deems
yourself powerless. What to do to breaks the cycle? No magic answer…yet, there
is Ayahuasca. This is the best news I have heard regarding complete turnaround
& transformation for addiction. Google search Dr Gabor Mate, listen to his
YouTube talks. Look up & research on Ayahuasca & Addiction, get proactive &
see what you can find. I wish you well & suggest that you keep an open mind,
~just not so open that your brain falls out. In this world, anything is
possible.  
♡ Namaste.

Reply

  * ![Patty](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Patty

January 5th, 2016 at 7:09 AM

My beautiful, talented 21 year old daughter has been admitted to mental health
unit in a drug psychosis. She has lost her insight, so believes she was
admitted for being tired. She completely blames me for her hospitalisation. It
has come to light that for the last year, a 51 year old "man" has been
"grooming her". Telling her how beautiful and intelligent she is, promising to
get her a job in his "friend's" law firm, promising to give her his 1967
sports car etc.. All the while convincing her to use cocaine. He would have
small bits for himself and feed her up on 4x the amount he was having. He has
been telling her that I am the source of all of her problems and I'm punishing
her because I have issues. Due to her lack of insight from psychosis, she
believes everything he says. She was discharged from hospital and went to his
house that night. I had contacted him when she was admitted and asked about
her drug use so doctors could start a recovery plan, but he denied everything.
I told him how unwell she was and that he should just keep away from her. He
contacted her 4 hours after this phone call and arranged a "dinner" with her.  
She has now half moved out and only calls me to yell at me or demand the use
of my car (which I will not be allowing). Her friend, who is keeping an eye on
her and keeping me updated, has told me that this predator is trying to
convince her to cut me out of her life totally and is now also trying to
isolate her from her actual friends.  
I'm scared that she may never get her insight back and work towards recovery
as the predator is still giving her free drugs. I think he gets her to sell
them for him, so that and her mental health mean they aren't free at all. All
I can do now is sit and wait for it all to come crashing down and pick up the
pieces. I just hope that she doesn't destroy herself so much that she spends
the rest of her life in and out of mental health units.  
If anyone has tips…. If be grateful.  
Thanks.

Reply

  * ![Lucie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucie

January 7th, 2016 at 4:57 PM

I hope I can get some help or direction here. My 24 year old daughter returned
home from college almost 3 years ago because she became involved in drugs
through some so called friends. We had no idea that she was taking drugs. She
told us that her friends were somehow giving them to her without her knowledge
and that the drugs were baked into cookies and that while she was drunk they
also injected her. When we asked who did this to her she would not reveal any
names and then told us that the whole school basketball had raped her while
she was under the influence. From what we can gather she had been taking drugs
for a 4 month period before finding her way back home. As far as we know she
has been clean of drugs since her return but she is now a chain smoker and
drinks alcohol. She also went through a period where she was becoming bulimic
\- eating a lot of food and throwing it all up. She now has a healthier
relationship with food and we see no evidence of purging. She has no self
esteem and her maturity level is now that of a q0 year old. She lives like a
hoarder. Her room is always messy as heck - never makes her bed, leaves trash,
plates etc all over the place - no matter how much we ask her to clean her
room, it never gets done. She doesn't seem to know how to pick up after
herself so when she fixes something in the kitchen she leaves a mess. She
invades everyone's privacy in the home - goes through their things and takes
or uses what she wants. A few months ago she and my younger daughter got into
a physical altercation when she 'borrowed' my younger daughters cell without
her permission. For my younger daughter it wasn't just about her cell phone -
she had built up so much anger and frustration over a lot of issues with my
troubled daughter that it just all exploded with the phone incident. I have
noticed all of my children who are adults just be very weary and short with
her. They do not like to be around her and merely tolerate her when they don't
have a choice. She tried to commit suicide by taking a bottle full of her
dad's high blood pressure medications abo it a year ago and after a brief stay
in a psych hospital she has sworn never to try that again. These days she
seems very depressed and just blames me for every bad decision she's made and
for ruining her life. She does not accept any responsibility for what has
happened to her. She lacks the ability to socialize like a normal adult her
age and seems to avoid interaction with others especially the extended family.
I'm thankful that she is not on drugs - I'm thankful she has not committed any
crimes or has been arrested. I'd also like to mention that she wants to work
but can't keep a job. She has had 4 serving jobs over the past two years and
she's been let go from all of them because she has trouble being on time and
probably has difficulty multi tasking. She also had a desk job but didn't seem
to care too much for it because didn't want to sit at a desk or deal with
people over the phone all day so she didn't show up at work or call and got
fired from that job too. She refuses to go to counselling and says all the
counselors are hopeless and can't help her. She was my golden child. She was
brilliant and we had such high hopes for her. She had lots of friends but now
can't keep one to save her life. She has been prescribed medication but
doesn't take them as prescribed or doesn't take them at all. We love our
daughter and want to help her but we are not sure anymore as to what we can
do. I'd appreciate any feedback or if any of you have read any books that
might help us we would be grateful for any recommendation. Thank you.

Reply

  * ![Ari](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ari

January 8th, 2016 at 3:48 AM

Hi Lucie,  
I relate to some of your daughter's experiences. I had always been a top
student, but somewhere in my late teens, I just crashed. I had never had a
good relationship with my mother, who was also rejected by her mother so that
cycle sadly continued. My mother cares for me in her way. I suppose I was a
difficult case for her and didn't know how to relate to me in a way that was
positive to me. My sister was able to be more detached, and shared my mom's
athletic ability and aptitude for math. She was also more social than me. I
had always had a small group of very group friends. Too much social
interaction literally exhausts me. My mother sees herself in my sister and her
type of successes, I believe. I was and am more social science/humanities
based, which are not of interest. I also have a slower metabolism and was told
I was overweight for the family. I became bulimic in grade 11. I was told many
things, which were probably frustrations on the part of my mother. My 20s were
HELL. Finished uni. Struggled with crippling depression and then with a
constant state of anxiety that no matter what I was doing I was always falling
behind, always not achieving, not being any good. More panic. 0 self esteem. I
felt I could not rely on my mother for anything, least of all emotional
support. I felt that all the good things done for me could be used against me
or taken away from me at the drop of a hat - so I didn't trust them very much.
That being said, I was always given the same monetary help my sister received
(i.e. help with paying some part of the student loan). Though I never asked
for any of it, I am grateful. In order to escape competition with my sister,
my mother's expectations, my own expectations, and having to seriously engage
intimately with boys (at 11 years old I was molested by stranger on the way
home from school - never got counseling for it, simply because it didn't occur
to anyone that that would influence development down the road - such were the
times, such was the culture), I decided I would live as a boy starting first
year uni. It was the ultimate escape - a sort of crutch used to help myself
back up. I spent years like this, living a double life. While it helped me get
back to myself eventually and develop some sort confidence in some way, it did
further damage in other ways. Once I decided I was strong enough, I decided to
merge the positive aspects I had discovered about myself during this process
with my core self. It took quite a few years. Throughout this time I managed
to make lasting friendships at university, which I still hold dear. The only
substance I abused was tobacco, which I have quit when I felt it was time to
let go of another crutch. Not running away from a desk job was another hurdle.
Initially I put so much pressure on myself to be perfect, I actually ended up
peeing myself at work. I was having dreams about work and longed to quit.
Which I did eventually. But got back on the horse and somehow managed to stay
on it. That was a learning curb and I have learned since to grow thicker skin
towards others, as well as myself. The next goal, is to maintain a meaningful
career, which is in the works. I met a good man along the way, and we married
this year. I am in a loving, positive environment and I am much better at
handling my anxiety. I feel and am 100 times more proactive about life. Since
third year uni my godfather has helped me financially on and off, and has also
been very encouraging. I can't deny that this didn't feel like dependance to
me, and I felt ashamed of it and guilt ridden about it. I am looking forward
to the day when I can repay him and spoil him and take care of him too and
thus put a definite end to that crutch as well. I was always ashamed of being
too weak to refuse his help - since that was 'enabling' me. I never asked. But
I never refused either. However, I always made sure to remind him that he
doesn't have to help me, that I would love him anyway, and that he could stop
anytime without guilt. Now I am scheduled to start volunteering at an Autism
centre and am waiting acceptance to a post grad program in this field. Fingers
crossed! I am 32. I have made a sort of peace with myself that I will never be
for my mother what my sister is, but that she cares for me in her own way. I
was bitterly angry for a very long time. I can't pretend that hurt has
vanished - on both sides - but it's less important. My mother influenced my
development then, but it's up to me now. I do believe she did the best SHE
could. Cannot ask from people what they don't have to give. That lesson was
tough, though liberating in a way. My primary family is my husband and I, and
thank God for belonging together. And my godfather - sometimes family is not
blood related. :) I will also probably continue to have to deal with this
anxiety thing for a while, but I think I am getting better at it - as time
passes, I learn to trust myself more and to make decisions without worrying
about disappointing others or myself. I'm leaning to feel less inferior and to
use different criteria when comparing myself to others. In other words, I'm
finally taking the bull by the horns and it feels great. It's empowering. :)
So please take heart - good things can happen too. It just takes lots of time
and a weird sort of perseverance, the successful result of which isn't
immediately obvious. Hang in there! You're a good parent!

Reply

  * ![Ari](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ari

January 8th, 2016 at 4:05 AM

I also find it difficult to stay in touch with the extended family. But I try
to. I care about them, very much. I just have this irrational fear cropping up
allot - at which point I have to reason with myself, which gives me positive
results more often than not.

Reply

  * ![Ari](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ari

January 8th, 2016 at 4:12 AM

@ Lucie - Also I hate to ask: do you believe there is any truth to her rape
story? Because that would be enough to damage anybody.

Reply

  * ![Gail](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gail

January 8th, 2016 at 7:32 AM

Lucie - first of all, did you check into the alleged rape of your daughter by
the basketball team? That would be top on my list. Your story sounds so
familiar to me. I have been dealing with a son with almost 20 years of
alcohol/drug abuse. I would definitely get her in for a drug test as her
actions sound to me like she is still using as much as we want to believe
they're not. The users can be very sneaky and manipulative and as much as we
want to believe them, you can't. They will bold face lie right to your face.
Oh how I want to believe my son has quit; but after all the stealing and lies
I've lived through only time will be the true test if they've cleaned up or
not. Another thing I have learned is that you cannot let this situation tear
your family or marriage apart. I have gone months without talking to my son as
he accuses me of not praying hard enough for him and therefore, he's not
getting better. He calls me either high or drunk and says these things. I just
can't deal with it anymore and I've learned to just not talk to him, just to
keep my own sanity. I live in a different state so that helps. Our family has
alienated him except for my ex, his dad, who has totally enabled him over the
years out of guilt. I did have lunch with my son over the holidays, he looks
good and is just out of rehab (again, at least the 8th time). He swears to me
this is it; he's got a new job and plans to stay clean now. We'll
see………………………….only time will tell. Please get your daughter in for drug
testing and you and your husband into Al Anon. The rest of your family has to
do what they feel they have to do. Boundaries need to be set in your home if
your daughter lives there for all involved. It's tough love time if she's
still using.

Reply

  * ![Lucie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucie

January 8th, 2016 at 4:42 PM

Thank you Ari for your feedback and for sharing how you can relate to what's
happening with my daughter. I'm happy to hear that there was light at the end
of the tunnel for you and that you have found some happiness. I hope and pray
that my daughter will be able to do the same in time. I would give my life for
her to be who she was again. As far as the rape story based on how she
responds to my questioning it's very difficult to gage if there is any truth
in it. I'm also basing this judgement on my conversations with her prior and
during this 4 month period. A couple of the basketball players lived right
below her apartment and she would hang with them and she always told me they
treated her like a little sister. One of the boys mom's was always at the
apartment and she was very close to the mom. She would attend games with them
and just seemed so trusting of them. When she talks to people about her
experiences living in that town, going to school, her friends etc. She always
says how much she misses her life there and her friends. When we told her we
wanted to approach the school about her rape story she would tell us not to.
Until I can feel confident that what she is telling me is true I don't want to
make these accusations and ruin other young people's lives. If she could
pinpoint a name or two that's one thing but to say it was the ENTIRE
basketball team that's another. We had all the necessary testing done for her
as soon as she arrived home. When I picked her up from the airport I was in
complete shock at the mental state she was in. It was like she was a whole
other person. I had to drive away from home and sit with her at the beach just
to come to grips with this change. She was telling me that there were
subliminal messages in the music that was playing on the radio and that she
had to save the world and so on and soon. She was ha.Lucia ting and hearing
voices. We took her to a psychiatrist and underwent counselling and she
refuses for us to sit in on any of her sessions and we still don't know what
her diagnosis is. If I were to diagnose her I would say she was depressed,
bipolar and delusional. She is still smart as a whip and we have been
encouraging her to return to school to finish her degree. I think this wou,d
help her ho.d her head high again. I feel that the main reason she doesn't
like to be around extended family is because she feels like she didn't live up
to their expectations. She was the kid all the other parents wanted their
kid's to be like. I'm going to try to get her back into could selling and back
on her medications. I hope and pray she will find a good person to share her
life with but until then we have a lot to work on. Another thing i'd like to
mention is that she doesn't seem to have any issues with being in an intimate
relationship. She started a relationship a couple of months after returning
home. I told her she could do so much better. I don't know for sure but I
think he may have been a pot smoker. That relationship fizzled because her
behaviour was too erratic and perhaps too needy. My main issue with her right
now is her maturity level. She behaves like a 10 year old. I have an 8 year
old grand daughter and at times she's more mature than my daughter. My
daughter is glued to her cell phone all day long just checking social media
and watching videos. She plugs her ears practically the whole day and doesn't
hear us when we call out or try to talk with her. We get so exasperated with
that but I guess things could be worse. She often just bursts out laughing out
of nowhere whether she's watching or listening to something or not. Her
behaviour seems quite mad to me sometimes like she's slowly becoming insane.
She often complains she is so lonely. She sits a t home all day leaving only
to go outside to smoke or go to the 7-11. She is a workout fanatic. She works
out at the gym almost everyday for several hours. We attend the same gym and
often go with her.

Hi Gail - thank you for your response too. I'm sorry to hear about the
difficult time you are having with your son - I pray things will get better.
As for my daughter still using I don't believe she is. She's held 5 jobs over
the past 2.5 years and she had to undergo drug testing for all of them and she
passed each one. The last test she had was about 6 months ago. I believe her
only vices are smoking and drinking. She has no income other than a little
pocket money she gets from her dad. She would be able to afford drugs. Her
brain chemistry has just been damaged by her past drug use and she is
primarily depressed. I'm happy that your son has a new job and is determined
to stay clean. Have faith in him keep encouraging him. I wish my daughter
would keep trying to get her life straight but right now she just seems to be
content sitting around home with her phone. All the best to you and your boy.

Reply

  * ![Rita](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rita

January 11th, 2016 at 9:24 AM

This website has been such a help for me

Reply

  * ![Rita](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rita

January 11th, 2016 at 10:18 AM

I have a 28 year old daughter who has an addiction of prescription drugs and
heroin and probably more that I'm not aware of. After reading some of the
stories from this website I see that my story sounds frightenly familiar to
others. I have been struggling with her addictions for at least 12 years now.
She also was diagnosed in grade school as having ADD. Her father died at the
age of 32 from a drug overdose. My biggest fear has always been that she
herself would carry that gene from her father. Playing around with drugs in
high school and now has led to bigger and more dangerous drugs. She has a 10
year old daughter that is a beautiful child and has been through too much. My
granddaughter's dad now has temporary custody and my daughter blames me for
this. I'm not saying her dad is picture perfect as he has done drugs also and
has no drivers license to get my granddaughter around and he works side jobs
to get by…it's a total nightmare. I want so much to take care of my
granddaughter so she can have the best care she deserves. She loves her dad
very much though and although it really doesn't seem like much, he is doing a
better job than my daughter was doing as a parent. I don't believe the dad is
on any drugs but then again I'm not around him that much. The house they live
in is not a clean place. I cannot even breathe when I walk in. I have told my
granddaughter to always know I would love for her to live with me and is
always welcomed. I pick her up most weekends and sometimes during the week. I
still do worry about my granddaughter and wondering if I should suggest to her
dad that she live with us as he simply cannot afford to raise her. But then
afraid of suggesting as he may take it the wrong way and then decide to keep
her from me. I know he loves her but OMG…he is still very immature himself. My
daughter is ripping our lives apart while we worry and try to make sense of it
all with her crazy behaviors. I have tried helping her the best way I know
how, only to be lied to and called names and now resorts to stealing. She
can't keep a job nor does she even care to work. At 29 she has never held any
kind of a real job. Things have really took a turn for the worse and I was
forced to not let her in. I told her she could not stay at our house as I did
not trust her to be alone at me house as she would invite her "friends" over
while we are at work and help herself to anything we have and then dissappear
for months at a time. Just recently she came to me asking to stay at my house
while she detoxes. Although I was very relieved to hear her decision on that I
could not let her stay at my house. I have to work and did not trust her to be
alone and any length of time at my hours. I offered to take her to a detox
place and she surprisingly agreed to do so. So on a Sunday night I took
her…she checked out the next morning. But she did call me and let me know she
just couldn't stay there and still was staying clean. I didn't see her for a
week. I had texted her and told her how worried I was and loved her. She
assured me she was fine. Then she showed up at my work. I work at a college.
She told me she was leaving for Texas that evening…that she had no place to
live and she has good friends in Texas that were going to help her. I actually
know the people wanting to help and I knew I couldn't stop her…although I did
try to change her mind. We were in good terms and asked her to text me when
she stopped to fill up gas. She left at 7 pm and I never heard from her until
1:15 am saying she was ok but had taken a wrong turn but was now back on
track. I never heard from her again and the friend she was going to hadn't
either. At 4 pm I called the police…at 7 the police called me back and they
found her in county jail 600 miles away. They had pulled her over for going 7
miles over the speed limit. Her drivers license had expired back in June. They
asked if they could search her car and she said yes. They found drug
paraphernalia in the back of her suv. She claims one of her "friends" most
have left it in there that it wasn't hers and had no idea it was there. Now
she sits in jail waiting to go in front of a judge…out of state…I have talked
to her on the phone 2 times so far. She seems ok but I know she's scared…and I
feel totally helpless!!!!! I don't know what to do right now!! Her friend in
Texas is going to help all he can and be there for her…but that is a 3-4 hour
drive for him…but closer than I am at 9 hours. I know she feels alone most of
the time. Her sisters won't speak to her as they hate seeing what is
happening.

Reply

  * ![The GoodTherapy.org Team](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/GoodTherapylogo11.jpg)

### The GoodTherapy.org Team

January 11th, 2016 at 10:37 AM

Dear Rita,

If you would like to talk about this or any other concern with a qualified
mental health professional, please feel free to return to our homepage,
https://www.goodtherapy.org/, and enter your zip code into the search field to
find therapists in your area.

Once you enter your information, you'll be directed to a list of therapists
and counselors who meet your criteria. From this list you can click to view
our members' full profiles and contact the therapists themselves for more
information. You are also welcome to call us for assistance finding a
therapist. We are in the office Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Pacific Time; our phone number is 888-563-2112 ext. 1.

We wish you the best.

Kind regards,

The GoodTherapy.org Team

Reply

  * ![Gail](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Gail

January 11th, 2016 at 12:15 PM

Cindy - I feel your pain. Last August I detached from my adult son as I just
couldn't bear to talk with him and listen to his "life", which really is no
life. He has a lot of very undesirable "acquaintances" which I point blank
asked him questions about. His stories made me sick to my stomach and I just
couldn't believe I was hearing any of this. Anyway, after the umpteenth time
of hearing how he's going to get clean, etc. I did agree to see him over the
holidays when I was in town. He had just gotten out of rehab (again) the day
we arrived. He looked good, had a new job starting the beginning of the next
week. Well, he stayed on the job for a day or two, had "mental issues"
supposedly because of his meds, etc. As the parents of these adult users, all
we can do is tell them how much we love them and emotionally support them. I
just continue to pray for all of us; it's just about all we can do. They have
their demons. God Bless all of us………………….

Reply

  * ![Rita](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rita

January 11th, 2016 at 12:59 PM

Hi Lucie, my daughter left the state a year ago and I could not get a hold of
her for 6-7 months. I was very worried and didn't know what to do as she was
28 at the time. I finally called the police, I was so afraid that something
terrible had happened. The police did find her and she was ok. She later
called me in the middle of the night and sounded out of it. But she had told
me a very long story about her getting into a car with a strange man she
didn't know. He had promised her work. He took her to a motel and sounds much
like a motel for prostitutes. She was drugged with heroin and raped. She then
told me after weeks of being locked in the room she finally escaped and
managed somehow to get on the Amtrack and got back to home. But she did not go
to the police or hospital. I am so physically and mentally sick of worry. My
heart is breaking into and I find myself walking around as part of me is gone
myself…like a zombie.

Reply

  * ![Ari](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Ari

January 13th, 2016 at 5:12 PM

Hi Lucie! I'm glad to hear that she IS seeing a psychiatrist. I am, of course,
not one, but I feel that she probably experienced a type of psychotic break.
It's possible that she pushed herself allot, putting allot of pressure on
herself (this is not necessarily the parents' fault at all - my friend who is
pharmacist has been recently diagnosed with depression and high anxiety, and
her parents are extremely loving and supportive;) She may have pushed herself
too far beyond her limits. Have the hallucinations happened since? Does she
seem to completely 'invent' reality? My cousin experienced a psychotic break
in his early 20's and was diagnosed with schizophrenia. He also hallucinated
and believed things happened that didn't in reality. NOT saying this is
necessarily your daughter's case! Although many ppl with this diagnosis manage
to lead fulfilling lives, while taking their medication and attending therapy.
Sometimes these medical privacy laws do more damage than good. Maye try asking
her psychiatrist if they prescribed any medications and what they are (though
this may be a long shot), and if she is a danger to herself or others. Could
ask the psychiatrist how you could help - how should you and the family treat
her/do for her. You could deduce a clearer picture about of daughter's current
situation from these answers (provided they are given to you). Tell the
psychiatrist you are desperate to help your daughter be well and you don't
know what to do. You need to understand what is happening with her so that you
may be able to giver the support she clearly needs right now. And if your
daughter's psychiatrist doesn't want to say anything, then please go book an
appoint with a psychiatrist yourself and tell her/him what the situation is -
give her/him all the details - and ask for strategies. This very tough on you
too. iT'S OK TO FEEL OVERWHELMED or to feel angry or to just want to get away
from it all. But do NOT blame yourself. Don't blame your daughter either for
being this way (not saying celebrate bad behaviour - definitely address that),
but right now, God knows what and how she got pushed over the edge. Right now,
I think your daughter is mostly Escaping with capital E. Hang in there! And
please make an appointment for yourself! It can't hurt, might help allot.

Reply

  * ![Lucie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lucie

January 15th, 2016 at 5:04 PM

Hi Ari thanks so much for all your advice. It's great advice and we will
definately take stock. It feels good to know there are others out there who
know what we'Re going through and can provide encouraging feedback to help us
breakthrough to our daughter.

Reply

  * ![Steffy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Steffy

January 19th, 2016 at 5:44 AM

How do you help an adult son who has been through rehab many times and now has
just given up? He doesn't want to go through the struggle and pain to get
clean and just wants his pain to end. Don't know what else to do. My heart is
breaking.

Reply

  * ![Doris](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Doris

January 20th, 2016 at 6:46 AM

This is a super concise article. I saved it under Read This Every Day. I
always wanted my son to have an occupation and income. Well, he does. His
occupation is Victim, and his employer is Me.

Reply

  * ![PWL](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### PWL

January 29th, 2016 at 4:42 AM

It's wonderful that you are getting thoughts from this article  
as well as from our dialogue made at this time.

Reply

  * ![Cindy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cindy

February 25th, 2016 at 6:10 AM

Good morning,  
My drug addict daughter was arrested for shoplifting a year ago. Then she
attempted suicide. I had her committed but they only kept her for a week. I
filed an ex parte to get custody of her then 5 year old daughter and her ex
filed an ex parte to get custody of her then 2 year old son. We went to court
and were granted full custody. She has been kicked out of an outpatient rehab
program 3 times. She tried the "online" rehab program. I was supporting her by
providing her with an apartment, paying her electric bill, providing her with
a cell phone, providing her with a car and insurance. She rented out the spare
room of the apartment (she had insisted on 2 bedrooms for "when I get the kids
back") and did not tell me that she was collecting "rent money". She was
working at a strip club all the while swearing she was clean.  
My daughter now has a decent job in the same industry I am in (I own my own
business) and threatens to ruin my business, take my customers, accuses me of
slandering her to customers and contractors. She accuses me of being the
reason she is an addict. It is all my fault and all her ex's fault according
to her. She chose to lose her children, her family, her job (she used to work
for me) by using drugs. She claims addiction is a "disease" when I know that
using is her choice.  
She is constantly belligerent, hateful, name calling, but then says I am not
there for her and that I do not care about her or love her and that I am a
horrible mom since I have cut her off both financially and emotionally.  
I know better but it still hurts. I know that her behavior is that of an
active addict and she cannot truly be a recovered addict even if she is
holding down a job now, has her own place, bought a used car, etc.  
Is there no way to help her other than cutting her off?

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

March 8th, 2016 at 1:03 PM

I've commented on this site before. My story is the same as all of yours. I
have and have had the hurt, fear, anger, worry and hope and all the other
emotions that all of us have been through. My adult daughter has been through
detox's, treatments, attempted suicides, ICU for overdose, etc. etc. etc than
most people have shoes and under ware….combined! After years of her lifestyle,
I know what "enabling" is and have not enabled her for about 4 years now when
I finally figured that out. My question is, at what point do you totally…100%
cut them out of your life verses not? Not enabling them yet, being in the
background giving them an occasional "good job" when they need it and letting
them know that you will always be there for a hug when they need it most? Even
though they are addicts and drunks, they still need to know that someone loves
them. Every time I want to cut her out of my life completely, I keep going
back to the Bible where in many passages it says to forgive always, I will not
forsake you, or I will give you hope and a future. I think the answer is that
you need to cut them out of your life 100% when watching them slowly rotting
away becomes too painful for a mother to watch any longer Being a nurse and
watching people die before, I don't know if it is in my soul to let go of her
100% while she is still on this earth, I wouldn't do that to anyone that I
love; child or not, if they were wasting away from cancer or any other
disease. Any counselors out there that can respond or someone that has had
specific experiences?

Reply

  * ![Debby L.](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Debby L.

March 13th, 2016 at 5:03 AM

So sorry about your daughter and thanks for posting. My 38 yr old alcoholic
son who lives 3 hrs away was hospitalized 3/11/16, the 1 yr anniversary of his
dad's death, for alcohol related hepatitis. He called to let me know. We have
not been on good terms because of his belligerent attitude, words, and
behaviors, ie, unwilling to see 4 yr old daughter under court ordered
supervised visitation; gave up his parental rights, makes hurtful remarks to
me, resentful of my relationship with his ex which is only way I can see my
granddaughter. When When we try to talk by phone there are long silences. Any
suggestions for things I can say that are loving and supportive in this
situation. Thank you.

Reply

  * ![Jeannie K](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jeannie K

March 21st, 2016 at 11:48 AM

My 33 yr old daughter has been using heroine meth and pot. She has a daughter
that will be 11 in October

Reply

  * ![Cindy S](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cindy S

March 22nd, 2016 at 3:51 PM

Debby: The words that always pull me through difficult times is:  
If they are still breathing, there is hope.  
God is not finished with him/her yet.  
For I know the plan I have for you, declares the Lord, plans to give you hope
and a future Jeremiah 29:11  
When/if my daughter is beligerant or mean, i just hang up the phone or leave
the physical situation. After a few times of that, she knows I don't put up
with her crap. This however, does not mean you cannot have compassion for
thier situation either. Tell him you love him and that you will pray for him.
Let him talk, you listen. He still needs to know that he is worthy and
special, even if it is his mother but you have to be in the background waiting
for his soul to heal. He may die or maybe not, but that is up to him and God.

Reply

  * ![Lily](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lily

May 2nd, 2016 at 10:06 PM

Thank you for sharing Cindy S I needed words of encouragement.

Reply

  * ![JD](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### JD

May 12th, 2016 at 12:51 PM

Lyle. Don't do what we did. When the younger child 1st has an issue, don't
protect them from consequences. Our boy got in trouble at school and they were
going to search his locker. We took him up to empty it (vodka) so he wouldn't
be thrown out of school. We continued to protect him until he finished high
school and that proved to be a mistake. Allow the consequences to happen, I
know this runs counter to instinct.Our Daughter's issue didn't occur until she
was in her mid twenties. She was a brilliant child, Went to School,
successfully completed the masters degree program, and started a promising
career. She lost 6 jobs in a row, a husband. Painfully we had to report her
out driving drunk, and she was arrested for a DUI. Even these consequences
have not stopped her from drinking and today the Sheriff picked her up, sober
but hallucinating from alcohol withdrawal. She is presently back in the
hospital, for the 8th time and calling us to come save her, even though we
stopped saving her awhile back. Ultimately the only thing you can control and
save is yourself. If you let the emotions ravage you, you are helping no one.
There is always hope. Our son while still an alcoholic, is managing to keep a
job, buy a car and rent his own place. But he still struggles and falls down
on occasion. I encourage him, but still do not intervene, especially
financially. In my daughter's case her addiction is pure and very physical.
There is a promising drug called Naltrexone that inhibits the opioid receptors
in the brain. The problem is that the medical establishment will not prescribe
it due to a rather stupid set of guidelines for it's use, and the alcoholic
has to take the pill and want to get better. I wish someone would write an
article on how the medical establishment has failed the addict. All the
negative legal consequences, fines and even jail are a poor substitute for a
caring health care system. Finally I'd like to take a poke at the theory that
alcoholism is hereditary. It's not. Based on my personal observations it's
just not true. No alcoholics in either family, until now . I will pray for you
all in being successful 1st in taking care of yourselves, and a hopeful
outcome in each of your situations. There is always hope, never disbelieve
that. God bless.

Reply

  * ![Blanca](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Blanca

May 17th, 2016 at 11:07 AM

Mother of a 33yr. old addicted daughter, has been using for almost 8yrs. I'm
in Alanon & Naranon which is more geared for families of drug addicts, most
members are parents. I find both programs to be very helpful! I go to meetings
on a weekly basis, have a sponsor & work the steps. My addict lives over a
couple hrs. away so it helps!! I had to place very strong boundaries (changed
phone numbers) to avoid her predetorial behavior & her instant gratification.
I tended to get confused with her lies & ended enabling in some way or form.
She can contact me if she wanted to anyway. I don't think I can detach with
love when being around her, doesn't work for me!!!

Reply

  * ![Jeannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jeannie

June 4th, 2016 at 10:30 PM

It's so hard to learn not to enable them. It's hurts either way deep inside
you feel that you have already lost them and can only hope they can make I out
alive

Reply

  * ![Mary](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Mary

May 20th, 2016 at 2:07 PM

So much of what has been said is the same and yet. I am the mother of 4
children. I had two girls one biologically mine the other not. They had the
usually adolescent stuff and the younger girl struggled a little more but they
are both fine now. the younger one live with me and works 3 jobs. She helps in
the house and is a joy to be around. My youngest son was a oops baby as my
husband calls him and he adopted another boy 7 months older than him as an
infant. As children they were delightful. Happy, kind cheerful kids involved
in lots and energetic. The old adopted child has FASD and ADHD and struggled
at school but did ok. Then the teens came and everything I had never thought
would happen has happened. They both started with weed- it is ubiquitous here
in BC. I don't care what anyone says its a gateway drug because it is an
acceptance of criminal activity as a norm. So husband moved with youngest son
to a new community new school fresh start at age 16 thinking that it would
help. First 3 months excellent then down hill faster then I could have
imagined. Fast forward to now, 19 and 18, both boys have criminal record. One
has done jail time "doesn't mind jail" I think it is the structure and rules.
anyway neither does anything around the house if they can help it both still
doing marijuana no clue how they are paying for it. Second time in a week
older one has come home drunk, he is alternatively aggressive and weeping when
drunk and very loud and obscene. I told him today that if he comes home drunk
again he will have to look for a new place to live- "Sounds good he says" . I
am tearing my hair out. I know that they are going to die young in a way I
almost grieving in advance. they have no respect, for themselves or anyone
else. I keep telling myself at least I know were they are and they are safe
and fed. Neither finished high school because of the issues. I have never done
drugs, I talked from an early age about the dangers of drugs and the
consequences of such. My household has no alcohol although I will have a glass
of wine a couple of times a year. My husband no longer lives with me as he
cannot take the tension and the behaviour. he will not let either of them live
with him. They are both on bail for which I am the surety. I really do not
know what to do. Neither wants treatment they do not have a problem just ask
them. The older was on crystal meth and on the streets for about 6 months a
year ago. Jail got him off it. I swing from I am done to getting in my car and
driving hours to go fetch one or the other. Canada despite what you may hear
does not have free rehab anything worthwhile costs a fortune. I dread the
future. my daughter or myself are always in the house in the evening as they
cannot be trusted alone. I love them dearly but I like neither of them. I
appreciate the views of other parents my husband and I have gone dizzy trying
to figure out what we did wrong. I live in small rural community which I
thought was a safe place to bring up kids, I had no idea how easily drugs are
to get. In fact it is easier to get weed here than fresh fruit. My fear is if
I throw him out he will send up on the street back on meth and soon dead. I
also fear that his brother will follow along to 'look after him". Suggestions
anything would help at this stage. I spend a lot of time either angry or
crying or both.

Reply

  * ![Dannie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dannie

June 4th, 2016 at 12:38 PM

I'd like to reply to each and every one of you as I am finding myself in a
situation that I can unfortunately relate to at least one thing that each of
you has been going through. I couldn't believe it when I saw Mary's comment
about already preparing for the loss of her child and already grieving in
advance because that is what I have been saying. It's to the point that my son
is angry at anything I have to say or even help that I'm offering. He says I'm
criticizing him and I won't let up. I am trying to save him from himself and
he acts like he wants it and the next day he's angry and saying that I need to
stop talking about it. He's moved home several times over the past ten years
(he is 29 now) and nothing we did could get him to work or become sober and he
refuses treamtment. I'm offering to pay for counseling and he says I'm
criticizing his mental state. I don't even know what words to use anymore when
talking to him. We asked him to move out three months ago after another 6
month stay here with no job or advancement at becoming sober and he's doing
worse living on the street with undesirable people. I don't know how I am
going to be able to live with my decisions (all of them are attempts at trying
to help him) if something happens to him. I wish I could offer advice but I
don't know what I'm even doing.

Reply

  * ![Anne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Anne

June 15th, 2016 at 3:12 PM

I found this thread because I googled" when is it enough". " when to let go of
an adult child who is an addict" I need help..

Reply

  * ![Stephanie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Stephanie

June 20th, 2016 at 8:28 PM

Even after a childhood that was full of shamed based, codependentcy and
emotional molestation, I am here. I am here with a heart that is shattered, a
spirit that is broken and I am alone.  
My adult son is an alcoholic. He has yet to make the decision to face himself
and change his behaviors.  
I never thought nor predicted anything close to this. I am just beginning in
the process of changing, as I told him today… "I love you dearly; I will not
live you to death."  
Prayers and love.

Reply

  * ![Sharon](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sharon

July 7th, 2016 at 2:32 PM

Have not read through all of the posts… read the article and a few posts from
2008\. SOOO glad to see SOMEONE agreeing with what I struggle with most….. my
21 year old daughter being called by professionals and those in AA  
and believing herself that she is an addict. I TOTALLY agree that it is a
CHOICE!.. If she CHOSE to use drugs to the point of having her body have to go
through a withdrawal… which she really didn't…. or does not know her personal
limits when drinking….. this does not mean she is "An Addict"… I worry that
since she has been 'clean' and has had one occasion where she "relapsed" and
drank too much…. that she figures that…. 'well, I'm an addict….it is what I am
supposed to do'!! Struggling everyday….. I know I cannot control her…. it is
all up to her…… but feel so confused when I do not agree with the literature I
have been given.

Reply

  * ![Emily](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Emily

September 14th, 2016 at 1:08 AM

My beloved son, aged 40, died two months ago of alcoholic liver failure and
hepatitis c complications. He also had chronic schizophrenia and had been on
disability support since age 24. I relate to all the sad stories here. I also
struggle with alcohol addiction and blame myself for being a bad role model to
my son. I have three other high achieving, family-oriented adult children who
learned to keep their distance from both me and my afflicted son as the damage
continued over the years. I did abstain for three years after going to AA in
the late 1990s but later resumed my daily habit of a bottle of wine. I have
since stopped for another period of 6 months and was so shocked by my son's
sudden death that I have stopped drinking again. it may not be a disease but
it IS quite hard to stop an addiction. I knew that from my previous abstention
and definitely enabled my son's drinking out of misplaced soft-heartedness. I
had tried the tough-love approach because my son was always inclined to be
aggressive while drinking and I took out several apprehended violence orders
against him over the years. After the last one in 2010 he ended up homeless
here on the streets of Melbourne, Australia. He was eventually picked up by
the police for bizarre behaviour (e.g runnng in and out of traffic) and was
confined in a psychiatric ward for 4 weeks for mandatory treatment. He had
around a dozen hospitalisations in the last few years of his life and was not
treated for hepC even though the hospital documentation which I have lists
this infection. I found private rental accommodation for him and became his
carer for the last two years of his life. He also had had a 20 year extreme
gambling habit which he stopped in the last two years, He had also stopped any
drug use. But in spite of two alcohol de-toxs in hospital in the last 9 months
of his life, he was unwilling to give up alcohol. Alcohol and/or drugs make
people FEEL good. Maybe we are low in dopamine or seretonin. I definitely
required anti-depressants when I gave up alcohol in 1999 - 2002 and have not
been able to come off them. I believe this is the genetic part of addiction
and once someone finds alcohol or a drug makes them feel great, it is very
hard to get them to stop using. Why would they? Research shows that a good
marriage, education, a good job etc can predict a better outcome in quitting
because there are other feel-good experiences in the addict's life. But for a
homeless, or jailed single person who has destroyed all good family
relationships, doesn't work, maybe has even become a hooker, where is the
motivation to stop the one thing that makes them feel the way normal people
feel by just watching their kids play soccer? Of course drugs and alcohol
destroy the production of the normal levels of feel-good chemicals anyway so
it can be pretty bleak abstaining. Contrary to what non-addicts believe,
abstinence doesn't make life all rosy again. It can feel worse than using so
why stop? This is just to provide some feedback about why addicts find it so
hard to stop. As for the parents, you must put boundaries in place to save
yourselves. You will be probably be dealing with this for 20-40 years. How
much are you going to give up of yourselves? Your home (I did), close
relationships with other family (I did), all your other assets (I did), your
reputation as a high-achieving person (I did) and for what? My poor son still
lost his life far too soon and that just makes me feel even more of a failure.
Addiction no doubt is a choice (unlike cancer) but it is really beyond the
person's will-power in many cases. Talk to your young children about the
dangers, don't model daily drinking, ensure your kids have something in their
life that makes them feel good, music, sport, healthy friendships, maybe don't
push them too hard either. I don't have answers, only a lot of painful
experience. If my son was alive today, I would be now trying to find him
another rental flat because he got paranoid about any neighbours. I would have
probably toyed with having him live with me again because we were both on
pensions and living separately is far more expensive. His constant cigarette
smoking inside (he would not follow rules about outside only) would have got
to me, I would have said something and he would have threatened me again.
Thank goodness he never had children. I know grandparents of addicts who have
had to take on raising their grandchildren. As someone said in this thread,
that is what you must do if you don't want them fostered by strangers. Get
support FOR YOURSELVES, keep supporting (not financially) your adult addict as
in keeping in touch if you can but you have to decide where your limits are.
You have to keep on living as well as you can while your child keeps on with
their own sad path. We get so close to the sick ones emotionally because we
still think of them like a sick six-year old who needs Mummy & Daddy. But
however difficult their path, they are adults now and we may have to accept
that they will die of their addiction, roughly 15-20 years after it started
according to my research. In the meantime, proper medical addiction research
may come up with better answers than we have at present. As AA said to me
nearly 20 years ago, this " disease" kills. They were right.

Reply

  * ![Rene W](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Rene W

September 14th, 2016 at 1:44 PM

Thank you for this; it was hard to read but maybe I need to hear it. My son is
in jail at the moment on his third DUI but living in my hometown thousands of
miles away. At least his children have a wonderful mother who doesn't receive
any child support but does well despite my son. I love him and go to Alanon so
I know what I shouldn't do or say but it's still the hardest thing I've ever
done. 15-20 more years? AGGGH

Reply

  * ![Emily](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Emily

September 14th, 2016 at 7:21 PM

Thank you Rene W.  
Now that my journey is over, what would I do differently? Not much, you just
lurch from crisis to crisis, finally get some support eg carer's groups,
AlAnon etc. I could never completely turn my back on my son. Maybe because of
the mental illness which I knew couldn't be cured. Even when he was forced out
of my home by police, I kept up contact with monthly visits as I did with my
other children. But I moved and kept my address hidden from him for 3 & 1/2
years. But he eventually went homeless, was un-medicated, in legal trouble and
very sick when he came back to my town and I was called from the local
hospital. I persisted for another 8 months while he went in and out of various
psychiatric wards until I eventually brought him to my place and finally found
him his own rental accommodation nearby where I could visit daily. Because he
is now dead, I am so glad we had that last 19 months of daily contact. He was
still drinking 4 litres of wine a day but mood stabilising medication meant he
was no longer angry on it so it was bearable. It did eventually kill him
though but he was really beyond help by then. The 20 years of anti-psychotic
medication also can be very hard on the brain (shrinks it) and liver including
the mood stabilisers. I loved him and he loved me. So I did what I could
tolerate: no violence in the end, caring for him by being his "reality check"
daily, taking him to doctor's appointments etc. We even went on a 4 day
holiday 3 months before he died. He died in palliative care after being
admitted to hospital with jaundice. it was a textbook death: we said all the
right things, he said he was sorry, he was told how much he was loved, that he
hadn't asked to get schizophrenia, he even thanked me for giving him a good
life. So my advice: use your heart and your head. Establish your own limits,
what you can live with & what you cannot tolerate. Because all the strangers
you talk to for help on the journey won't suffer when your child dies, only
you will. Don't sacrifice yourself, but also don't force yourself to
completely cut off if it is not in your nature. Read the "Smart Recovery"
sites, I just did and it seems to be great content.

Reply

  * ![Sally Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Sally Marie

October 8th, 2016 at 1:13 PM

Emily, Emily. What great words. I needed to read your message today. Thank
you.

Reply

  * ![Delores](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Delores

October 17th, 2016 at 5:30 PM

I have a 55 yr old son who suffers from a bi-polar disorder and demands I
allow him to live in my house. I am 80 years of age, he make threatening
comments about me losing my money and friends. I gave him my car, he ruined
it. I 've paid his insurance bill and other bills so he can survive. Finally,
I said no more! He has taken residence in my driveway in a rented auto with
his (2) dogs. He trying to ruin my life that I have left. What are my options,
I am a nervous reck!

Reply

  * ![Reen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Reen

November 3rd, 2016 at 3:47 AM

I have read all the letters on here and for the first time, I realize that I
am not alone. I was married to an alcoholic for 13 years and finally divorced
him, leaving me to raise our two sons alone. They were 9 and 11 at the time of
the divorce, but are now 40 and 43 yrs old. My oldest has been on drugs since
he was 17 yrs old and has been in and out of jail several times. He is 43 now
and lives on the street. He is a meth addict. My youngest son is raising his 3
1/2 yr old daughter on his own because he got involved with a woman who
abandoned her husband and 3 young children when she met a man online and moved
from Virginia to Arizona to be with him. She met my son while involved with
this man and 2 months after they met, she got pregnant. When she had the baby,
she decided she wanted nothing to did with the child, so abandoned her and
left my son and their daughter and never looked back. My son is an alcoholic
and pot smoker. He got a Dr. to say he needed Marijuana because of back pain.
UNREAL!!!! After my grand daughter was born and her mother abandoned her, I
let my son and grand daughter move in with me. They lived with me for 8 months
and it was a complete disaster to have him move in with me in my one bedroom
apartment, but I couldn't abandon my grand daughter, so I put up with a LOT,
because I was so concerned for my grand daughter. My son used me in every way
possible……as a full time nanny. I did ALL the housework, laundry, dishes,
vacuuming, etc., while he did NOTHING at all to help. He had a free place to
live, a babysitter, free groceries, and of course, money whenever he needed
it………..which was ALL the time. He worked at a bar 5 nights a week and after
the bar closed, he would get drunk with friends and finally show up at my
place at 3 am or later, leaving me to watch his daughter. I am 64 yrs old and
was diagnosed with Stage 4 Inflammatory breast cancer, so had to quit my job
and go thru the hell of chemo and radiation and a Mastectomy. I have been
doing pretty well, but I don't have the energy I used to have and as much as I
adore my grand daughter, it is extremely difficult for me to take care of her
because, like most 3 yr olds, she is very active and needs constant attention
and care. I did EVERYTHING. My son never helped with anything, including
taking care of his daughter. He hardly spent any time with her, because of his
late nights at the bar and slept until about an hour before he had to leave
for work the next day. I finally had to make him leave because I was exhausted
and tired of being taken advantage of by him. He never lifted a finger around
my apartment. I did everything, including watching his daughter. He never
contributed a dime because he was always broke and of course, made a million
excuses…………like he didn't make enough money and what he did make, he spent on
his addictions. We had a horrendous fight when I told him I would let him stay
for 2 more months, while he found a job that he could work during the day……NOT
a bar. Instead of taking the 2 months I offered to get his act together, he
woke his daughter up in the middle of the night, thru some things in garbage
bags and left in a huff with his daughter at 1:30 am. I KNOW that he expected
me to beg him to stay and not take off with my grand daughter in the middle of
the night, because he has made that threat several times in the 8 months he
lived with me and I ALWAYS stopped him and said he could stay with me because
I was worried about my grand daughter. But this time I let him leave. I cried
all night. The next morning, he called and apologized and begged me to let
them come back to live with me, but I HAD to say "no." He was shocked and
screamed horrible things, like, "you'll never see your grand daughter again"
and "I feel sorry for my daughter because the two women who should love her
the most have abandoned her," and a lot of other ugly things, but I just
couldn't let him live with me. He now lives in a house with a family he met
thru someone he worked with at the bar. He and his daughter share a small
bedroom. He got a job with a pest control company during the day, but he
doesn't get home until 8:30 pm every night, so he sees his daughter for a few
minutes and then she has to go to bed because he has to drop her off at a
daycare center at 6 am and his girlfriend picks her up at 5:30 pm and keeps
her until my son picks her up. His girlfriend is extremely codependent and
helps him out by watching his daughter and also with rent when he's short and
groceries, etc., Today she called me and told me that he has missed two days
of work this week and she is SURE it is because he was drinking the night
before and couldn't get out of bed. I am sooooo worried about my grand
daughter and feel awful that I can't have them stay with me again because my
health just isn't good right now and I KNOW that if he moved back in, he would
take advantage of me again. I just don't know what to do and am soooooo angry
at my son for not putting his daughter first and for not acting like a 40 yr
old adult father. It's so unfair to my grand daughter, but I just don't know
what to do. He will probably lose this job because he has taken two days off,
so once again, he will be without a job and without money. I finally learned
how to do the tough love thing with his older brother by telling him he
couldn't be around me until he has checked into a drug rehab and gets clean. I
don't give him money and hardly ever see him, although he calls quite often to
try to manipulate me by threatening suicide and calling me a horrible mother
for not being there for him. I would do the same tough love thing with my
youngest son, but because I am so scared for my grand daughter, I feel so
guilty for not letting him come back to live with me again. I am emotionally,
physically, financially and mentally exhausted and I just don't know what to
do. I would really appreciate any advice any of you could give me. I have to
say that as grueling as cancer treatments were for me, it has been much more
painful for me to watch my two sons throw their lives away, especially my son
who has a daughter and is too selfish to put her first. Please help. I am
desperate. Thank you for letting me vent.

Reply

  * ![Tanasha](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Tanasha

February 23rd, 2017 at 5:08 AM

I am sorry you are going through this but know you are not allow . I have 4
grandkids my son is an addict and I am knocking on wood everyday that he stays
clean. He is doing good right now on his own. I had to stop helping. Now if he
need a me to get something I will go buy it myself for my grandkids. But no
money is givin. My daughter is sober but married an addict and I just had to
kick him out the other house we are buying and she decided that she was going
with him. I am praying for that issue too. But I can't do addiction and
helping anymore and yes I hope that she wakes up and comes back home. But I am
done…. I have been dealing with addiction since I was a child and my dad was
an alcoholic . My brother durg user and alcoholic,. Son and now son in law. I
have to think of me now. I will be here but I am not going to feel guilty
about there decision no more. It has made me cold hearted

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

December 22nd, 2016 at 2:11 AM

My Alcoholic brother (53) is living with our mother (59). She pays for
everything and he is refusing to see me (I'm his sister) which means I can not
go there, Christmases have to be split. If my Mom wants to see me, she has to
drive an hour on the highway as I can not go there. My Dad was alcoholic and
she has done the reading around that but she is doing nothing to help my
brother. She says… well he doesn't drink when he lives with me. This is not
true, there have been many instances where he did and the police or paramedics
had to be called. She is going further into debt every month to support him
and his behaviours (he is also bulimic). He pays for nothing but he has a
pension and investments. She is afraid to confront him or hold him accountable
because he will leave and may die. Our alcoholic father which she divorced
died due to alcoholism.  
My question is this…. Can you recommend a book I can give her to help her see
that supporting him is not helping him and that she needs to try another
avenue if he is going to ever recover and take responsibility for his life.
Also… is there a good book for the sibling of an alcoholic? He wants nothing
to do with me and I need to understand why and how to deal with that. Thank
you. Lisa.

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

February 19th, 2017 at 7:14 PM

Hi Lisa,  
It felt so surreal reading your comments. My brother is also 50 years old and
an alcoholic and bulimic. He has blood my family dry both financially and
emotionally. I finally had to move far away from the situation, but now I feel
so much guilt. I always wonder if there is something I could have done had I
stayed close, but then I always wonder if it would have ruined my life, too.
He is now in a halfway house, thank God. My poor mother is in her 80s and has
to deal with him on a daily basis.

Reply

  * ![Lisa](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lisa

December 22nd, 2016 at 2:12 AM

Regarding my above comment. Our mother is 79 (not 59) (typo).

Reply

  * ![David R](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### David R

January 8th, 2017 at 3:58 PM

There is plenty of focus the parents self-preservation. However, there is,
rarely, any focus on helping the addicted teen or young adult. There is a a
way to accomplish both in most cases. Many parents panic when faced with an
addicted teen or young adult and attempt to fight the problem while they
should be attacking the cause. They are often ill-advised to set the wrong
types of boundaries at the wrong time.

Reply

  * ![Dee](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dee

February 20th, 2017 at 11:27 AM

Who knows? Maybe a solution will come …

Reply

  * ![Marilyn D](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Marilyn D

February 23rd, 2017 at 11:08 AM

I really need support. Having a chronic sciatic pain back problem. It's
difficult to get out and do things and I keep telling myself not to let her
help me by going to the store when u feel like crap because every single time
she "loses" the change or swears the store overcharged her. I won't give her
my debit card because over 3 yrs time she has wiped out $10000 of savings and
I have nothing to show for it. Nothing but debt so deep I'll never get out of
it. I have such a hazard time accepting that she is a liar and a thief with no
guilt whatsoever. I put up with it for her kids but they're getting older and
they live Parr time with their dad. It's time to make that full time but it's
so hard being alone. But at the same time - I'm alone anyway. She stays in her
room except to use my kitchen and shower and washer. I need help - I want to
be happy again. I don't know what that word means anymore.

Reply

  * ![helene](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### helene

August 23rd, 2017 at 4:11 AM

I have been reading post after post, all these parents in the same predicament
as me, a child that has grown up and become addicted to drugs and wants
nothing to do with anything except money to buy more drugs. I no longer live
with mine but every time i hear of him or see a pic i start to feel sad all
over. He will pretend he wants to see me just to get money. My big decision is
to include or exclude him from my will. If i should die now he would take
whatever money he gets and spend it on drugs…..maybe i will to to Naranon to
see if they can suggest something.

Reply

  * ![Brian](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Brian

March 7th, 2017 at 5:46 PM

I'm glad to see that someone other than me doesn't buy this disease and
genetics nonsense. There are 2 kinds of families. Those who have an addict in
the family, and those who won't admit it. Show me a family and I'll show you a
family with an addict in it. And having attended my share of nar-anon
meetings, I have issues with step 1 of all 12 step programs. All start with
something resembling "I am powerless". If we are all so powerless why are we
sitting in meetings. Let's just let life happen to us. As parents of these
children who use, we can only control how much life we want to let our addicts
suck out of us. Only THEY can control whether or not to clean up. And one more
good point the author makes….. this idea that the only people who can help
addicts in rehab centers are recovering addicts is so wrong. My experience
with 2 addict children is that when they are clean and when they are using,
the only people they associate with are addicts and recovered addicts who
won't "judge" them. They don't want to be held to the same standards as
everyone else. Rather, they want you to be ecstatic at the simple fact that
they aren't using for a period of time. At some point they need to be treated
and compete with the rest of their peers. And that includes everyone, not just
those they attend meetings with.

Reply

  * ![Elina](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Elina

March 20th, 2017 at 6:11 AM

I remember the night I decided to ask for help so vividly. I had gotten high,
and started thinking about my future, my family, my friends, and how I was no
longer the same person I was before this all started. Then I

started thinking about the fact that I was only prolonging my withdrawals,
every single day, by continuously using, trying to ward the withdrawals off.
You need to understand what made you want to get sober.

Reply

  * ![Holly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Holly

March 21st, 2017 at 2:55 PM

Hi - Here I go again…. my daughter is 26 and after her second encounter with
meth, had been clean for six years. She has two children by different fathers
and has never been married. Up until last summer things were going pretty well
for her. She blew it. She began using again. I had the DCS in our state take
the children from her and they gave me temporary emergency custody. The boy is
5 and the girl is 8. I'm single and 58 years old. Like the dumbass I am I co-
signed for her car loan back when she was doing all right. Heh. Now I'm
raising her kids AND liable for her car. She lost her job the week of
Christmas. I'm so angry at her!! I wanted the kids…. yes, I'm older and get
tired, but they are loved and safe here. There is some semblance of "normal"
family life. No drug or alcohol use. No more raids by the ATF or Federal
Marshalls over her most recent boyfriend. She is mean to me…. says she never
had a decent family. I don't ever never want her to get her kids back. ever.
This is the second time in the oldest's life she's been taken away from her
mother by the authorities. Same situation last time….. meth use and horrible
terrible low life scum bag boyfriends. Why why why??? She knew what would
happen. How in the HELL does a mother do this to her kids??? I mean - I was no
angel back in the day and had my own substance abuse bouts - but when I found
out I was pregnant for the first time I straightened up pretty quickly and
remained that way. I do not understand. Is it just this generation?

Reply

  * ![Harriet](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Harriet

March 22nd, 2017 at 8:01 AM

Hi Holly,  
So Sorry. No, you are not an idiot. Just a mother who loves her daughter. The
love we have for our children I feel is sometimes a hindrance, not a gift. I
mean if it was any other human on this earth would we put up with this
abuse??? No, we would wash our hands of them. Yet, because they are ours we
have the constant worry and angst that I am so tired of. I have forgotten what
joy was or a normal life. At least your daughter was clean and doing well when
you co signed. Just wanted you to know you are not alone. I truly don't think
my son would care if I died at all. I am just a human wallet.

Reply

  * ![web designers Cambridge](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### web designers Cambridge

April 8th, 2017 at 4:36 AM

"Wow, great blog post. Keep writing."

Reply

  * ![eyГјp evden eve nakliyat](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### eyГјp evden eve nakliyat

April 8th, 2017 at 4:53 AM

"Thank you for your article. Great."

Reply

  * ![ohmb](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### ohmb

May 10th, 2017 at 8:19 AM

"Fantastic article post. Awesome."

Reply

  * ![Australia C](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Australia C

August 12th, 2017 at 3:41 AM

Very shortly this web page will be famous amid all blogging viewers,  
due to it's pleasant articles

Reply

  * ![Betsy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Betsy

August 23rd, 2017 at 8:52 AM

My mentally (TBI as a child) disabled 25 year old has admitted to Meth habit.
Having difficulty finding treatment for people with cognitive and behavioral
issues. He's angry and won't consent on medical forms to allow us to do
something about it. Anyone come though similar situation? Thank you.

Reply

  * ![Lilly](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Lilly

September 22nd, 2017 at 10:32 PM

I am a 50 year old woman with two sons. My problem is my mother expects me to
spend my vacation time with my alcoholic stepsister and her son, and she wants
me to be on call to take custody of my stepsister's son whenever she might
wind up dead from overdose. He is extremely damaged from years of her
drinking, abuse, and insanity. He has serious problems himself now and I do
not wish to introduce this to my life or family.  
There is never any consideration for what might be good for me or my family.
My mother does not ever take steps to protect me or my children, and instead
sees me as a resource to fix the mess she got herself into. This has been true
she she married my stepfather 37 years ago and the nightmares with his
children began.  
So now I desperately want to be free of this situation. I stopped going to
their state to visit them. The last time I saw them I was physically extremely
ill for five days, related to the stress. I am literally concerned I will get
a heart attack if I go there again.  
Perhaps I will get written out of their will … I don't care … I want this
burden off me. I had no hand in creating those problems and did not even grow
up with my stepsister.  
More recently my brother has been talking and behaving like an addict …
apparently buying Rx meds abroad. So I have to protect my children from him as
well.  
Any advice welcome.  
Please people, do not not burden your higher functioning children with your
addict children or their children. Contain that cancer otherwise it takes down
everyone in the vicinity.

Reply

  * ![Donna](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Donna

October 11th, 2017 at 2:23 PM

I find it impossible to accept that we can't do better than we are doing. We
shouldn't have to watch a loved one die slowly or ignore them. We should be
able to figure out how addiction operates and hijacks the brain,

Reply

  * ![helene](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### helene

October 12th, 2017 at 4:03 AM

I agree, if only there was a way.

Reply

  * ![William](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### William

December 14th, 2017 at 6:05 PM

Usually it's as simple as talking to someone. Especially people who rarely get
to talk to anyone at all. There is plenty to understand even by bits and
pieces, such as dental work that produces frequencies used for mind control…..
Feel free to contact me

Reply

  * ![Betsy](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Betsy

November 21st, 2017 at 11:52 AM

I have a 25 yr old stepson living with his Dad & myself. He is low IQ and
sustained a brain injury when he was 7 years old. He never received cognitive
therapy or any further testing since his original injury and can not deal with
his situation so he is resistant to any help. He was arrested for shoplifting
3 years & the judge sent him to rehab which went completely over his head
because of his developmental issues plus daily pot / other substances. They
asked us to pick him up "early". Getting him just basic help for the TBI is
nearly impossible, let alone now he's a meth addict. He has so many
behaviorial issues yet a master of sliding under the radar / manipulation. We
stopped giving him money, no cars, and no bicycle. He makes trades or does
house work for others to get his drugs. I'm under no illusion that he can be
treated at this point but I have faith that there will be some circumstance
that will prevent him from using and possibly more docile for cognitive
therapy. We struggle with the morality of kicking a developmentally disabled
young man to the streets though we have threatened; thus he remains with us.
God bless all of you; and this very sick world we are dealing with.

Reply

  * ![Judi](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Judi

December 16th, 2017 at 4:06 PM

This is a great site. You would never believe what I Googled to find it. I was
so irritated when trying to find support for parents of addicts I only got
sites for help for addicts. I typed some not so nice words out of frustration
and found this site. I can relate to many of the posts and will be putting it
in favorites.

Reply

  * ![Dot](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dot

December 17th, 2017 at 6:15 AM

Hope this helps.

Reply

  * ![Auto](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Auto

January 11th, 2018 at 2:49 AM

It's helpful.

Reply

  * ![Dot](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Dot

January 19th, 2018 at 7:16 AM

Am interested in solving a problem

Reply

  * ![Leonard](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Leonard

January 26th, 2018 at 11:10 PM

I have been reading out a few of your posts and i must say nice stuff.  
I will surely bookmark your blog.

Reply

  * ![Marie](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Marie

February 2nd, 2018 at 7:16 AM

I have found this article and the blog very helpful. I am very frustrated and
resentful, and it is ruining my marriage. My 40yo stepson and his girlfriend
are the alcoholics and have 3 children. This son did not talk to my spouse for
7 years and wanted nothing to do with him, let alone me. Since he entered back
into our lives 2 years ago, it has been hell. My husband does still enable but
has gotten better at not doing so. He can't give him money because he doesn't
have it. My stepson finally went to rehab for a little under a week in
September (more like detox) and then lived with us for a few months where I
know he was also using drugs (marijuana and pills). After about 8 weeks, he
ended up back at home with the girlfriend and the alcohol. He was not entirely
sober during the last 4 weeks and on those days, he did not come to our house
unless my husband went and hunted him down and brought him home to sober up.
The challenge is that his 14 yo couldn't take it any more and my husband
brought him to live with us within a week of my stepson moving home. We were
empty nesters for a year, and have not had that in the last 6 months. This is
a rather large family and after being treated like outsiders for so long,
cannot get past being irritated that we are now the ones with his son. I know
a lot of grandparents take in their grandchildren, but this has been very
difficult for us. We are very active and go away a lot and have to change our
entire lifestyle. My husband is retired. I feel sorry for the grandson and am
so conflicted at wishing I could adapt but can't help resenting that my
husband offered this situation up for us. I really don't want to raise another
teenager and was enjoying our empty nest. His grandmother works and his
siblings say they have their own families. I am not sure what I can do to
change how I feel.

Reply

  * ![kat](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### kat

August 31st, 2018 at 1:17 AM

Drugs have always been around, but nothing like this, and we are pretty much
the only country that has kids dropping like flies. Our population represents
4% of the world, and we own 27% of drug related deaths. We literally have the
highest drug death rate in the entire world. Of course, we are also the only
country that has people reaping insane profits from drug addiction, imagine
that. Perhaps life long debt to wall street for a job that barely pays the
rent, with no pension or benefits, no hope of owning a home, and having
children with a 6,000 deductible, doesn't give them a whole lot of incentive
to come down to reality? Just a thought.

Reply

  * ![Cheryl](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Cheryl

October 13th, 2018 at 8:52 PM

The report describes me exactly. I am 68 years old and my 50 year old son is
an addict. He wasn't until the last 5 or 6 years. He married a girl the was
and addict. She actually was prescribed a lot of medication and she took some
recreational drugs. My sons business was very hard on his body and back. He
was a brick mason. She decided to start medicating him with her pills because
he would come home from work in such pain. I lost my business of 20 years
partially because of the economy and partially from my giving him money all
the time. I have given him practically all the money I have made in the job I
have now and the money I had put back for when I couldn't work any more. My
son had a home, two trucks, a jeep and 3 4 wheelers when he met her. And a
very successful business. He has nothing now. Living in a motel that I was
paying for. Until my daughter took my money and put it is the bank where she
had to get it for me. Plus she told my son and told him not to call me and ask
for money again. My sons wife didn't like living the way she was with nothing.
So she walked out and found another guy that had money. She has been gone for
about a month. The guy has rent a nice house for them, bought her a car ect.
The sad thing is she is hiring my son to paint her house and do other
maintenance on her house she has with the new guy. He is doing it. She is
paying him with cash and pills. I put them both in the suboxone clinic. Didn't
last long. Cost a bunch but they soon decided that wasn't working for them. I
bought him a car that she got mad and took and ax and busted all the windows
and windshield and all the tires. His teeth were horrible and he has abscesses
all the time. I was worried about his health. I paid for his teeth to be
pulled. and dentures. The temporary teeth hurt and he never went back and
doesn't wear them. Her step dad gave them a car. I have paid for parts for it
and tires. He has been arrested a few times. And my daughter and I have paid
for attorneys and fines. We have both paid for his motel because we can't
trust him in our house because he would steal things. He has had jobs but
never kept them. I don't know how he is getting money since my daughter told
him to stop asking me for money. All I can do is cry and worry about him. How
can you just sit and wait for him to decide he needs help. We have told him
since she left that he should just go to rehab he says he is clean and doesn't
need rehab. So if he is clean why does he get pills from her. He said his back
hurts. I also know he has been taking benedryl and sleeping aids over the
counter. His hands jerk. She snorts all his pills he gets. When he lost his
house we helped him move out. We found boxes with prescription bottles and
straws in them. He use to go to a pain clinic but got kicked out. He said
because he missed an appointment, I think it was more than that.  
How can you just do nothing and not know if your child is sleeping in his car.
Or if he has food to eat. He told me once he goes through the trash at the car
wash and gets change. Since he isn't himself and does things that aren't the
way he ever was. Does he think I don't care or love him since I can't give him
money anymore. I am scared he will die.

Reply

  * ![Jeanne](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Jeanne

October 31st, 2018 at 9:29 AM

From Harvard Health, How Addiction Hijacks the Brain

Reply

  * ![Karen](https://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/blog/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/mistery.png)

### Karen

March 16th, 2019 at 6:29 PM

Oh WOW!!!! Where do I start….I would have to go back to when I got pregnant at
16 to really tell the whole story back in 1972 but that would take too long to
tell so I will just say briefly that I ended up with a man that beat me and
took drugs and was basically a crazy person……I am lucky to be alive as he
would point guns at me, throw knives at me, chase me in the woods with a
shotgun and I am hard of hearing in one ear because of him backhanding me for
no apparent reason……in the interim I got pregnant with his child and named her
Mary Ellen……he had done a few things to her like kick her across the room,
lock her in the closet while he was beating on me….for about a year and half I
went through the horrors, finally got away from him….help from my mom to get
away….got into an apartment, got a job, went to school, remarried, divorced,
remarried again, neither one mean to me but just cheated on me…..one I was
married to for about a month after dating for 2 years, the other I was married
to for 12 years so he basically was the father figure and we went to church he
was a pastor, we were very involved in church until he decided to stray and I
left him…..before that we were happy, had two more girls so had 4 girls
altogether, one was his daughter from another marriage who I raised as my
own…..they were all taught right from wrong, went to a Christian school, and
all turned out totally different……Mary Ellen was always fighting with her
step-sister as sisters usually do but there was the looks that she would have
on her face that haunted me and sometimes scared me because she looked just
like her biological father who was now in prison for attempted murder on
someone else which I was glad that he was behind bars, but, I was afraid that
she was going to be just like him and that fear proved to be somewhat true
because after we left and went to stay with my mom and then find another
place, and I got a job that required me to be sometimes there until late at
night and she was the babysitter at 15, that was not working because she
started to have parties at my apartment with drugs and alcohol to which I had
to put a stop to quickly…..the other two younger girls were witness to this
and I had to get her away from them so tried sending her to a girls home to no
avail….she stole somebodys stuff so got kicked out, she went to live with her
other grandparents on my crazy husbands side who seemed ok but crazy runs in
the family sometimes….that did not work out because my x-father-in-law groped
her at some point and she had to leave there as well…….that was when she was
17….she basically went from one place to another staying with friends,
boyfriends, girlfriends, any place she could live and use people for drugs and
alcohol…..she would call me on occasion to say that she was hungry and could I
come get her….I would buy her some groceries and a couple of times I tried
bringing her to my house but she would steal from me or steal the car or truck
and be gone for the night and go get her boyfriend to spend the night…..I
would kick her out and have to take her somewhere….I would give her
money…..not much but enough to buy cigarettes or I would buy her some…..my
bad…..then she got beat up bad with her face bashed in and had to have surgery
on her face after her boyfriend and her were high on meth ad he started
hitting her…..she went into a shelter and started going to church and had a
support system and got clean for awhile…..I went to visit her there every
other weekend take her to lunch, buy her cigarettes….etc……spending money I did
not have and driving each time for two hours to get there……exhausting…..money
I did not have so I was basically using a credit card which started racking up
to 5000 in no time…….my mother died and left me some money so when she got out
I rented her an apartment, bought her a car, bought her some furniture……she
went right back to the same thing after I left…..crazy drugies…..she also
ended up with three kids with three different guys all the way up into her
30's, 40's and is now 47 years old and has been in and out of behavioral
clinics and alcohol abuse centers, has had heart surgery, claimed that he had
cancer, PTSD, Bipolar, and I think that she has Borderline personality
disorder, which there is no help for but has not been diagnosed for yet, has
been so drunk that she drove her car into the lake, cops have come to her
house when she and her boyfriends got into a knockdown drag out fight, thrown
stuff and broken stuff, pointed guns at people, gotten in fights in a parking
lot with people that she worked with…..had to go to court for disturbances and
public drunkenness……..still has to blow in a breathilizer to drive, still
paying fines with government money that she gets for disability , has been
married to a halfway decent guy who puts up with all of this……he calls me on a
regular basis…..she has told me on occasion that she wishes that I had had an
abortion, that she wishes that I was dead, and that she hates my guts, then
after about a month or so she is so sorry for saying those things…..supposedly
getting counseling, but still doing the same thing after being out of the
hospital for only about a week, downs vodka with pills and makes herself have
seizures and goes to the hospital on a regular basis……sliced her wrists on
three separate occasions and took heart pills with vodka and died several
times on the table only to come back…….I am telling these things because you
would think that if she had really wanted to die that she already would have
and at this point I am numb to all of her calls and attempts to get my
attention or the attention of someone…….I have cried, and fretted, and cried
again and again over the years and have high blood pressure, an enlarged
heart, she has ruined any parties by getting drunk in secret and yelling and
causing a scene to the point that she is no longer welcome anywhere in the
family….one of my daughters became a therapist I think maybe in order to help
others and to deal with this herself because it affects the whole family when
one is infected or possessed with genes that make them this way….I think that
she chooses to be this way because she has no teeth, does not love herself and
never has, she has never developed beyond the age of 13 or 14 because of the
drugs and brain damage……so tell me what I am to do other than disconnect
myself from this……

Reply

### Leave a Comment

By commenting you acknowledge acceptance of GoodTherapy.org's Terms and
Conditions of Use.

Name: _Email address:_ Comment:*

Current ye@r *

Leave this field empty

Notify me when new comments are added. Subscribe me to the GoodTherapy.org
public newsletter.

  * Indicates required field.

## Search Our Blog

Title Content Author

## Browse by Category

  * Therapy News
  * Featured
  * Issues Treated
  * Dear GoodTherapy
  * Uncategorized
  * General
  * GoodTherapy.org Announcements
  * Share Your Story
  * For Therapists by Therapist
  * Interviews
  * FAQ/What to Expect in Therapy
  * Types of Therapy
  * QuoteCards
  * Book and Movie Reviews
  * Meet the Topic Experts
  * Topic Expert Roundup
  * Modes of Therapy
  * Marketing for Therapists
  * Best of
  * CE Presenters
  * Business of Therapy

See more

## Notice to users

GoodTherapy.org is not intended to be a substitute for professional advice,
diagnosis, medical treatment, or therapy. Always seek the advice of your
physician or qualified mental health provider with any questions you may have
regarding any mental health symptom or medical condition. Never disregard
professional psychological or medical advice nor delay in seeking professional
advice or treatment because of something you have read on GoodTherapy.org.

#### See Also

927, 16511, 15845

## About GoodTherapy

  * About Us
  * Mission and Vision
  * Advertise
  * Press Room
  * GoodCause
  * Therapist Membership
  * Tx Center Membership
  * Student Membership
  * Partnership Information
  * Contact Us

## Resources

  * Find a Therapist
  * Explore Therapy
  * Elements of Good Therapy
  * Modes of Therapy
  * Dear GoodTherapy
  * Find a Treatment Center
  * What Is Therapy?
  * Types of Therapy
  * Issues Treated in Therapy
  * Warning Signs in Therapy

## Subscribe to Newsletter

__

## Follow GoodTherapy

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Copyright (C) 2007 - 2019 GoodTherapy, LLC. All rights reserved.

Home Terms of Service Privacy Policy Sitemap Subscribe to The GoodTherapy Blog

__GoodTherapy uses cookies to personalize content and ads to provide better
services for our users and to analyze our traffic. By continuing to use this
site you consent to our cookies.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

