

Accessibility links

  * Skip to main content
  * Keyboard shortcuts for audio player

  * ![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)

  *     *       * NPR Shop
  *     * Open Navigation Menu 

Close Navigation Menu

  * Home

  * News Expand/collapse submenu for News

    * National
    * World
    * Politics
    * Business
    * Health
    * Science
    * Technology
    * Race & Culture
    * Arts & Life Expand/collapse submenu for Arts & Life

    * Books

    * Movies
    * Television
    * Pop Culture
    * Food
    * Art & Design
    * Performing Arts
    * Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music

    * Tiny Desk 

    * All Songs Considered 
    * Music News 
    * Music Features 
    * New Music 
    * Best Music Of 2019 
    * Shows & Podcasts Expand/collapse submenu for Shows & Podcasts

Daily

    
    
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/morning-edition.jpg) Morning Edition 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesat_sq-cbde87a2fa31b01047441e6f34d2769b0287bcd4-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Saturday 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesun_sq-4a03b35e7e5adfa446aec374523a578d54dc9bf5-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Sunday 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/all-things-considered.png) All Things Considered 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/fresh-air.png) Fresh Air 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/up-first.jpg) Up First
    

Featured

    
    
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hibt_podcasttile_sq-98320b282169a8cea04a406530e6e7b957665b3f.jpg?s=100) How I Built This with Guy Raz 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/05/23/screen-shot-2019-05-23-at-8.46.21-am_sq-7dcea391e7a87ca3569fe3d2047dda0144e5d86f.png?s=100) Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me! 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/02/npr_planetmoney_podcasttile_sq-7b7fab0b52fd72826936c3dbe51cff94889797a0.jpg?s=100) Planet Money 
    * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hiddenbrain_podcasttile_sq-270ab642de6948802f485c6ad1f087239ef6e324.jpg?s=100) Hidden Brain 
    * More Shows & Podcasts
    

  * Search

  *     * NPR Shop
  * ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-dark.svg) ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-light.svg)

  * Tiny Desk 
  * All Songs Considered 
  * Music News 
  * Music Features 
  * New Music 
  * Best Music Of 2019 

  * About NPR

  * Overview
  * Support
  * Careers
  * Connect
  * Press
  * Ethics

**More Evidence Links Marijuana Use And Psychosis : Shots - Health News** **As
more places in the U.S. and Europe legalize marijuana, weed consumption is
growing ever more popular. But researchers are studying a troubling health
risk associated with the drug.**

![Shots - Health News](https://media.npr.org/branding/sections/health-

shots/branding_icon-9d5c5798fbff8351e5c796ffe65e5e8246c166fb.png)

## **Shots**

**Health News From NPR**

  * Your Health
  * Treatments & Tests
  * Health Inc.
  * Policy-ish
  * Public Health

  * Twitter

![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg) **Daily Marijuana
Use And Highly Potent Weed Linked To Psychosis**

### Public Health

# Daily Marijuana Use And Highly Potent Weed Linked To Psychosis

  * **Facebook**
  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

March 19, 20197:32 PM ET

Rhitu Chatterjee

Twitter

![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/03/19/weed-bud-

bc500c4866252c287b190cd5fe679238b2a91982-s1100-c15.jpg)

Enlarge this image

Research shows a link between marijuana use and psychosis. **Kirill
Vasikev/EyeEm/Getty Images** **_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

Kirill Vasikev/EyeEm/Getty Images

Research shows a link between marijuana use and psychosis.

Kirill Vasikev/EyeEm/Getty Images

Weed use is taking off as more states move to legalize it. And with all the
buzz over medical marijuana, it's starting to gain an aura of healthfulness.
But there are some serious health risks associated with frequent use. One of
the more troubling ones is the risk of having a psychotic episode.

Several past studies have found that more frequent use of pot is associated
with a higher risk of psychosis — that is, when someone loses touch with
reality. Now a new study published Tuesday in the _The Lancet Psychiatry_
shows that consuming pot on a daily basis and especially using high-potency
cannabis increases the odds of having a psychotic episode later.

"This is more evidence that the link between cannabis and psychosis matters,"
says Krista M. Lisdahl, a clinical neuropsychologist at the University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, who wasn't involved in the study.

The study authors consider high-potency cannabis to be products with more than
10 percent tetrahydrocannabinol or THC, the compound responsible for the
drug's psychoactive effects. The fact that consuming high-THC cannabis
products has a greater risk is concerning, Lisdahl says, because these
products are more common in the market now.

The study also shows that three European cities — London, Paris and Amsterdam
— where high-potency weed is most commonly available actually have higher
rates of new cases of psychosis than the other cities in the study.

The researchers identified 901 people aged 18 to 64 who were diagnosed with
their first episode of psychosis between May 2010 and April 2015, at a mental
health facility anywhere in 11 cities, including London, Paris, Amsterdam,
Barcelona, other cities across Europe and one site in Brazil.

The researchers then asked these individuals and a control group of 1,200-plus
other healthy people about their habits, including their use of weed. "We
asked people if they used cannabis, when did they start using it and what kind
of cannabis," explains study author Marta Di Forti, a psychiatrist and
clinician scientist at King's College London.

![Voters Relax Marijuana Laws In 3 More States: Michigan, Utah,

Missouri](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/11/07/ap_18299644006255_sq-2e4e2769343cb02608a5ee4f499c22e98cab098c-s100-c15.jpg)

### National

### Voters Relax Marijuana Laws In 3 More States: Michigan, Utah, Missouri

![More Older Americans Are Turning To

Marijuana](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/09/10/smoking_women_sq-1067a0484876dc335d0c3e94c184d2e83356a507-s100-c15.jpg)

### Shots - Health News

### More Older Americans Are Turning To Marijuana

People reported the names of weed strains they used, such as skunk in the U.K.
or the Dutch Nederwiet, which allowed the researchers to identify the THC
content in each product through data gathered by the European Monitoring
Center for Drugs and Drug Addiction and national data from the different
countries.

The study found that those who used pot daily were three times more likely to
have a psychotic episode compared with someone who never used the drug.

Those who started using cannabis at 15 or younger had a slightly more elevated
risk than those who started using in later years.

Use of high-potency weed almost doubled the odds of having psychosis compared
with someone who had never smoked weed, explains Di Forti.

And for those who used high-potency pot on a daily basis, the risk of
psychosis was even greater — four times greater than those who had never used.

The easy availability of high-THC weed is a recent phenomenon, she notes.
"Almost 20 years ago, there wasn't much high-potency cannabis available [in
the market]."

One recent study showed that high-potency cannabis is increasingly dominating
markets. It found that the average potency of weed in Europe and the U.S. in
2017 was 17.1 percent, up from 8.9 percent in 2008.

And some products can be even more potent. For example, in the Netherlands,
the THC content of one product that's gained popularity, locally produced
Dutch resin Nederhasj, can be as high as 67 percent.

"What this paper has done that's really nice is they look at rates of
psychosis and cannabis use in lots of different places where underlying rates
of psychosis are different," says Suzanne Gage, a psychologist and
epidemiologist at the University of Liverpool, who wrote a commentary linked
to the study in _The Lancet Psychiatry_.

This allowed the researchers to compare incidence of psychosis with the
availability and use of high-THC cannabis in the different cities, she says.

The study found that the three European cities — London, Paris and Amsterdam —
had the highest rates of new diagnoses of psychosis — 45.7 per 100,000 person-
years in London, 46.1 in Paris and 37.9 in Amsterdam.

These are also cities where high-potency weed is most easily available and
commonly used.

Other European cities in Spain, Italy and France on the other hand have less
than 10 percent THC content in most popular cannabis products on the market.
These cities also have lower rates of new psychosis diagnosis, according to
the study.

"One of the things that's really novel is that they could show that variation
of use and potency of cannabis was related to rates of first-episode
psychosis," Lisdahl says.

One critique of the theory that weed contributes to psychosis risk has been
that while more people are using weed worldwide, there hasn't been a
corresponding rise in rates of psychosis, Gage explains. But the new study
shows that cities with more easily available high-THC weed do have a higher
rate of new diagnoses of psychosis.

"That's a really interesting finding, and that's not something anyone has done
before," she adds.

However, the study doesn't prove causality, cautions Dr. Diana Martinez, a
psychiatrist and addiction researcher at Columbia University. "You can't say
that cannabis causes psychosis," she says. "It's simply not supported by the
data," she says.

Lisdahl agrees. In order to show causality, one would have to follow people
over time — before they started using weed to years later when they have their
psychotic episodes, she says. "You need twins in the studies, you need genetic
information," among all other kinds of data, she says.

Psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar are complicated,
"multifaceted disorders," Gage notes.

"In all psychotic disorders, there is this multiple hit hypothesis," Martinez
says. Many factors influence whether and how these disorders manifest.

Genetics is known to play a major role, as are a host of environmental
factors. "Children who have risk of schizophrenia but grow up in stable homes
... they may not go on to develop schizophrenia," she adds.

The Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development study, which is funded by the U.S.
National Institutes of Health, is attempting to tease out the various
influences, Lisdahl says. "The NIH has now invested in that question."

In the meantime, the new findings should be of interest to anyone using
cannabis, says study author Di Forti. "There are people across the world who
use cannabis for a variety of reasons," she says. "Some of them
recreationally, some of them for medicinal purposes." They should be aware
that using high-potency cannabis comes with a risk, she says.

"They need to know what to look for and ask for help, if they come across
characteristics of a psychotic disorder," she adds.

  * psychosis
  * cannabis
  * marijuana

  * **Facebook**

  * **Twitter**
  * **Flipboard**
  * **Email**

#### Tuesday, June 11th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

  * **_*_ *Download**
  * **_*_** _Embed_ ***

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/731545443/731548267" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

##### Up First

#### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

![Shots - Health News](https://media.npr.org/branding/sections/health-

shots/branding_icon-9d5c5798fbff8351e5c796ffe65e5e8246c166fb.png)

## **Shots**

**Health News From NPR**

###### Read & Listen

  * Home
  * News
  * Arts & Life
  * Music
  * Podcasts
  * Programs

###### Connect

  * Newsletters
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * Contact
  * Help

###### About NPR

  * Overview
  * Finances
  * People
  * Press
  * Public Editor
  * Corrections

###### Get Involved

  * Support Public Radio
  * Sponsor NPR
  * NPR Careers
  * NPR Shop
  * NPR Events
  * Visit NPR

  * Terms of Use

  * Privacy
  * Your Privacy Choices
  * Text Only
  * 

NPR thanks our sponsors

Become an NPR sponsor

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

