

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4176521/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
  * How To
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# Bookshelf

##

Search databaseBooksAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO ProfilesGTRHomoloGeneIdentical
Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Browse Titles
  * Advanced
  * Help

NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National
Institutes of Health.

StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2019 Jan-.

![Cover of StatPearls](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/bookshelf/thumbs/th-statpearls-

lrg.png)

## StatPearls [Internet].

Show details

Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2019 Jan-.

Search term

# Marijuana Toxicity

Anisha R. Turner; Suneil Agrawal.

Author Information

#### Authors

Anisha R. Turner1; Suneil Agrawal2.

#### Affiliations

1 Louisiana State University Shreveport

2 Desert Regional Med Center, Western Uni

Last Update: October 27, 2018.

## Introduction

The term "marijuana" typically refers to the tobacco-like preparations of the
leaves and flowers of the plant Cannabis sativa. The active ingredient is
believed to be tetrahydrocannabinol, which is also responsible for
intoxication. Different preparations of marijuana vary in strength, with THC
concentration in cannabis varying with climate, soil, and cultivation
techniques. Also, the amount absorbed by the body varies with route of
administration. The effects of cannabis depend on various things: the dose,
mode of administration, user's prior experience with the drug, user's
expectations/attitudes towards the drugs, and social environment when using
the drug.

## Etiology

Marijuana intoxication is dose-related and has multiple names depending on the
preparation: grass, ganja, hashish, etc. The amount absorbed by the body
varies by the route of administration. Marijuana is commonly smoked due to the
rapid onset of symptoms, but marijuana can also be eaten, (i.e., "grass"
brownies), or drank, (i.e., marijuana tea). Smoked marijuana has an increased
potency, quoted as high as 2.6 times by some sources. Marijuana is used for
both recreational and therapeutic purposes. Although some people promote the
"harmless" nature of marijuana, acute and chronic intoxication can occur.

## Epidemiology

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), marijuana is the world's
most widely cultivated, trafficked, and abused illicit substance.
Approximately 2.5% of the world's population (147 million people) uses it. Its
use is more prevalent among men than women--a gender gap that widened in the
years 2007 to 2014. Use is widespread in the adolescent and young adult
population. According to the Monitoring the Future survey, an annual survey of
drug use in America's middle and high school students, rates of use within one
year ranged from approximately 9% in 8 graders to 35% in 12 graders. In the
United States, cannabis is still a Schedule 1, meaning it is not scheduled for
federal medical use and has a high potential for abuse.

## History and Physical

The initial state of acute intoxication formulates the symptoms that
recreational users enjoy: euphoria, perception alterations such as time and
spatial distortion, intensification of ordinary sensory experiences, and motor
impairment. Not all effects of cannabis intoxication are welcomed by users, as
some experience unpleasant psychological reactions such as panic, fear, or
depression. Acute intoxication also affects the heart and vascular system,
resulting in cannabis-induced tachycardia and postural hypotension. CNS and
respiratory depression have been noted with high doses in animal models.
Studies show that inhaled doses of 2 to 3 mg of THC and ingested doses of 5 to
20 mg THC can cause impairment of attention, memory, executive functioning,
and short-term memory. Doses > 7.5 mg/m2 inhaled in adults and oral doses from
5 to 300 mg in pediatrics can produce more severe symptoms such as
hypotension, panic, anxiety, myoclonic jerking/hyperkinesis, delirium,
respiratory depression, and ataxia. Conjunctivitis is a consistent physical
exam finding regardless of the route of administration. In children,
neurological abnormalities such as lethargy and hyperkinesis can be signs of
life-threatening toxicity. Although acute toxicity is uncommon in non-
pediatric patients, those who come to medical attention are more likely to
have hyperemesis, behavioral problems or a medical emergency such as
bronchospasm due to inhalation. There is disagreement about how long these
impairments persist after taking cannabis, ranging from hours to days. Chronic
use may lead to long-term effects on cognitive performance, "Amotivational
syndrome" (loss of energy and a will to work), and respiratory disorders.
There have also been various reports of patients presenting with cyclic
vomiting syndrome/cannabinoid hyperemesis. Cannabis intoxication can lead to
acute psychosis in many individuals and can produce short-term exacerbations
of pre-existing psychotic diseases such as schizophrenia. Psychiatric symptoms
observed in some studies include depersonalization, fear of dying, irrational
panic, and paranoid ideas.

## Evaluation

The standard urine drug screen can be used to detect THC metabolites,
primarily THC carboxylase. The lower limits range from 20 to 100 ng/mL.
Second-hand exposure causing positive results is tough to achieve in
adolescents and adults, although this has not been studied in children.
Reported false positives for THC include dronabinol, efavirenz, PPIs, hemp
seed oil, NSAIDs, and baby wash products in infants. Positive results for THC
have been reported up to 10 days after weekly use and up to 25 days for after
daily use, making the timeline of exposure different and severity of
intoxication difficult to correlate. Breathalyzer tests have been proposed,
but since small amounts of cannabis continue to be released from fat into the
blood long after short-term impairment wears off, this method has not been
promoted.

## Treatment / Management

Most adolescents and adults do not warrant testing for diagnosis or treatment
of cannabis intoxication. If chest pain is present, it is reasonable to obtain
a 12-lead electrocardiogram and possibly cardiac markers to assess for
myocardial ischemia or infarction, as there is thought to be an elevated risk
up to 4.8 times for MI within 1 hour of marijuana use. Patients with toxic
ingestion should also be screened for co-ingestion, especially if electrolyte
abnormalities or OTc or QRS prolongation is noted on EKG. Some patients,
particularly children, may require further testing if exposure is unknown,
including rapid blood glucose, electrolytes, blood gas analysis, and
neuroimaging (e.g., computed tomography of the head). Neuroimaging should be
avoided in known cannabis exposures unless focal neurologic findings are also
present or concerns for other etiologies such as head trauma exist.

The treatment for marijuana intoxication is symptomatic management. The extent
of management has numerous factors, including an age of individual and amount
of cannabis ingested. There have been several cases of accidental cannabis
poisoning in a geriatric patient resulting in intensive care admissions due to
central nervous system depression. Unintentional ingestion by children has
also resulted in similar admissions. In cannabis-induced psychotic disorders,
safe cannabis detoxication typically requires 24 hours, but sometimes longer
if persistent psychosis or unstable vital signs occur.

## Pearls and Other Issues

For obvious ethical reasons, there is no experimental evidence to determine
the lethal dose in humans; but the dose that kills animals range from 40 mg/kg
to 130 mg/kg intravenously. Well-controlled studies have not implicated in
utero marijuana exposure in any major fetal growth or physical abnormalities,
but it may have may have long-term emotional and behavioral consequences.
Marijuana has an affinity for lipids and accumulates in human milk, so its use
is contraindicated during breastfeeding.

## Questions

To access free multiple choice questions on this topic, click here.

## References

1.

Isbell H, Gorodetzsky CW, Jasinski D, Claussen U, von Spulak F, Korte F.
Effects of (--)delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Psychopharmacologia.
1967;11(2):184-8. [PubMed: 4871478]

2.

Tart CT. Marijuana intoxication common experiences. Nature. 1970 May
23;226(5247):701-4. [PubMed: 5443246]

3.

Thomas H. Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. Br J Psychiatry. 1993
Aug;163:141-9. [PubMed: 8075903]

4.

Weil AT. Adverse reactions to marihuana. Classification and suggested
treatment. N. Engl. J. Med. 1970 Apr 30;282(18):997-1000. [PubMed: 5436557]

5.

Grauwiler SB, Drewe J, Scholer A. Sensitivity and specificity of urinary
cannabinoid detection with two immunoassays after controlled oral
administration of cannabinoids to humans. Ther Drug Monit. 2008
Aug;30(4):530-5. [PubMed: 18641545]

6.

Smith-Kielland A, Skuterud B, MÃ¸rland J. Urinary excretion of
11-nor-9-carboxy-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabinoids in frequent and
infrequent drug users. J Anal Toxicol. 1999 Sep;23(5):323-32. [PubMed:
10488918]

7.

Allen JH, de Moore GM, Heddle R, Twartz JC. Cannabinoid hyperemesis: cyclical
hyperemesis in association with chronic cannabis abuse. Gut. 2004
Nov;53(11):1566-70. [PMC free article: PMC1774264] [PubMed: 15479672]

8.

Behnke M, Smith VC., Committee on Substance Abuse. Committee on Fetus and
Newborn. Prenatal substance abuse: short- and long-term effects on the exposed
fetus. Pediatrics. 2013 Mar;131(3):e1009-24. [PubMed: 23439891]

9.

Zupan MeÅ¾nar A, Brvar M, Kralj G, KovaÄiÄ D. Accidental cannabis poisoning in
the elderly. Wien. Klin. Wochenschr. 2016 Dec;128(Suppl 7):548-552. [PubMed:
27900531]

10.

Khan MA, Akella S. Cannabis-induced bipolar disorder with psychotic features:
a case report. Psychiatry (Edgmont). 2009 Dec;6(12):44-8. [PMC free article:
PMC2811144] [PubMed: 20104292]

11.

Hudak M, Severn D, Nordstrom K. Edible Cannabis-Induced Psychosis:
Intoxication and Beyond. Am J Psychiatry. 2015 Sep 01;172(9):911-2. [PubMed:
26324307]

12.

Bui QM, Simpson S, Nordstrom K. Psychiatric and medical management of
marijuana intoxication in the emergency department. West J Emerg Med. 2015
May;16(3):414-7. [PMC free article: PMC4427213] [PubMed: 25987916]

13.

Reis JP, Auer R, Bancks MP, Goff DC, Lewis CE, Pletcher MJ, Rana JS, Shikany
JM, Sidney S. Cumulative Lifetime Marijuana Use and Incident Cardiovascular
Disease in Middle Age: The Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults
(CARDIA) Study. Am J Public Health. 2017 Apr;107(4):601-606. [PMC free
article: PMC5343712] [PubMed: 28207342]

14.

Fischbach P. The role of illicit drug use in sudden death in the young.
Cardiol Young. 2017 Jan;27(S1):S75-S79. [PubMed: 28084963]

15.

Draz EI, Oreby MM, Elsheikh EA, Khedr LA, Atlam SA. Marijuana use in acute
coronary syndromes. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2017 Sep;43(5):576-582. [PubMed:
27820669]

16.

Buckley T, Hoo SY, Fethney J, Shaw E, Hanson PS, Tofler GH. Triggering of
acute coronary occlusion by episodes of anger. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc
Care. 2015 Dec;4(6):493-8. [PubMed: 25713468]

Copyright Â© 2019, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

This book is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits use, duplication, adaptation, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original
author(s) and the source, a link is provided to the Creative Commons license,
and any changes made are indicated.

Bookshelf ID: NBK430823PMID: 28613573

Share

### Views

  * PubReader
  * Print View
  * Cite this Page

Turner AR, Agrawal S. Marijuana Toxicity. [Updated 2018 Oct 27]. In:
StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2019 Jan-.

### In this Page

  * Introduction
  * Etiology
  * Epidemiology
  * History and Physical
  * Evaluation
  * Treatment / Management
  * Pearls and Other Issues
  * Questions
  * References

### Related information

  * PMC

PubMed Central citations

  * PubMed

Links to PubMed

### Similar articles in PubMed

  * Review Marijuana poisoning.[Top Companion Anim Med. 2013]

Review Marijuana poisoning.

_Fitzgerald KT, Bronstein AC, Newquist KL._ _Top Companion Anim Med. 2013 Feb;
28(1):8-12._

  * Comparison of the subjective effects of Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana in humans. [Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2002]

Comparison of the subjective effects of Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and
marijuana in humans.

_Wachtel SR, ElSohly MA, Ross SA, Ambre J, de Wit H._ _Psychopharmacology
(Berl). 2002 Jun; 161(4):331-9. Epub 2002 Apr 19._

  * Marijuana intoxication in a cat. [Acta Vet Scand. 2018]

Marijuana intoxication in a cat.

_Janeczek A, Zawadzki M, Szpot P, Niedzwiedz A._ _Acta Vet Scand. 2018 Jul 11;
60(1):44. Epub 2018 Jul 11._

  * Cultivation of Cannabis sativa L. in northern Morocco. [Bull Narc. 2005]

Cultivation of Cannabis sativa L. in northern Morocco.

_Stambouli H, El Bouri A, Bellimam MA, Bouayoun T, El Karni N._ _Bull Narc.
2005; 57(1-2):79-118._

  * Review Blurred boundaries: the therapeutics and politics of medical marijuana.[Mayo Clin Proc. 2012]

Review Blurred boundaries: the therapeutics and politics of medical marijuana.

_Bostwick JM._ _Mayo Clin Proc. 2012 Feb; 87(2):172-86._

See reviews...See all...

### Recent Activity

ClearTurn OffTurn On

  * Marijuana Toxicity - StatPearls

Marijuana Toxicity - StatPearls

Your browsing activity is empty.

Activity recording is turned off.

Turn recording back on

See more...

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=books&ncbi_pdid=book-

part&ncbi_acc=NBK430823&ncbi_domain=statpearls&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/NBK430823/&ncbi_pagename=Marijuana

Toxicity - StatPearls - NCBI

Bookshelf&ncbi_bookparttype=chapter&ncbi_app=bookshelf)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

