

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

  *     *       *         * 

Log In or Sign Up

  * Log In
  * Sign Up

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * More 

  * Recode 

  * Explainers 
  * The Highlight 
  * Future Perfect 
  * The Goods 
  * Politics & Policy 
  * Culture 
  * Science & Health 
  * World 
  * Identities 
  * Energy & Environment 
  * Technology 
  * Business & Finance 
  * First Person 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts ✕

# Marijuana is illegal under federal law even in states that legalize it

By German Lopez@germanrlopez Updated Nov 14, 2018, 4:14pm EST

Share Tweet Share

**Share** Marijuana is illegal under federal law even in states that legalize
it

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

Part of Marijuana legalization, explained

Even as several states and Washington, DC, allow marijuana, the federal
government still strictly prohibits pot.

Under the **scheduling system** , the federal government **classifies**
marijuana as a schedule 1 drug, meaning it’s perceived to have no medical
value and a high potential for abuse.

The classification puts marijuana in the same category as heroin and a more
restrictive category than schedule 2 drugs like cocaine and meth.

![marijuana](https://cdn.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/Mnz8F2xr-

oiDfPR9JPU_DqRAa_k=/0x0:3619x5401/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:3619x5401\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/679344/166909906.0.jpg) Desiree
Martin/AFP/Getty Images

But that doesn’t mean the federal government views marijuana and heroin as
equally dangerous drugs or that it considers marijuana to be more dangerous
than meth or cocaine. Schedule 1 and 2 drugs are both described as having “a
high potential for abuse” — a vague description that doesn’t rank drugs in the
two categories as equal or different.

The big distinction between schedule 1 and 2 substances, instead, is whether
the federal government thinks a drug has medical value. The DEA says schedule
2 substances have some medical value and schedule 1 substances do not, so the
latter receive more regulatory scrutiny even though they may not be more
dangerous.

It may be helpful to think of the scheduling system as made up of two distinct
groups: nonmedical and medical. The nonmedical group is the schedule 1 drugs,
which are considered to have no medical value and high potential for abuse.
The medical group is the schedule 2 to 5 drugs, which have some medical value
and are numerically ranked based on abuse potential (from high to low).

The schedule is not something the president could change alone, but the
administration, through the attorney general or secretary of health and human
services, can begin a review process for the current schedule.

There have been many calls to reschedule marijuana, but they’ve run into a
serious hurdle: To date, there have been no large-scale clinical trials on
marijuana. Those kinds of studies are traditionally required to prove a drug
has medical value to the federal government. But these studies are also much
more difficult to conduct when a substance is strictly regulated by the
federal government as a schedule 1 drug. So pot is essentially trapped in a
catch-22: It likely needs a large-scale clinical trial to be rescheduled, but
those trials are going to be much harder to conduct until it’s reclassified.

Congress can also pass legislation to reschedule marijuana, which legalization
advocates have been lobbying legislators to do for decades.

Although the scheduling system helps shape **criminal penalties** for illicit
drug possession and sales, it’s not always the final word. Penalties for
marijuana are generally far more relaxed than other schedule 1 drugs — perhaps
an acknowledgment that the drug isn’t as much of a risk as, for example,
heroin.

Despite federal prohibition, the Obama administration took a relaxed approach
to marijuana, generally letting states do as they wish as long as they met
certain criteria (such as not letting legal pot fall into kids’ hands or cross
state lines). But the Trump administration has **taken a tougher line** ,
allowing federal prosecutors to crack down on marijuana even in states where
it’s legal — which could let federal law enforcement shut down state-legal pot
businesses.

Pot’s criminal classification at the federal level has other **serious
ramifications** for marijuana policy even in places where state law says the
drug is legal. Many state-legal marijuana businesses, for instance, must
function as **cash-only enterprises** , since many banks are nervous about
dealing with businesses that are essentially breaking federal law. Businesses
also can’t file for several deductions and, as a result, their effective
income tax rates can soar to as high as **90 percent or more**.

The result is that even as **several states** and **public opinion** move in
favor of marijuana legalization, the federal government often finds itself
standing in the way of a reform that many voters want after seeing the
longstanding struggles and failures of the war on drugs.

## Marijuana legalization, explained

  * Marijuana has been legalized in 10 states and Washington, DC 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879063/marijuana_plant.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana legalization is a response to the failures of the war on drugs 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879069/shutterstock_226135945.0.0.jpg)

  * A majority of Americans now support legal marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879081/1539738.jpg.0.jpg)

  * 15 states have decriminalized — but not legalized — marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879129/73244614.jpg.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is legal for medical purposes in 33 states 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879177/medical_marijuana.0.jpg)

  * Marijuana is a relatively safe drug — with some risks 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879205/175231438.0.0.jpg)

  * The research suggests marijuana legalization could lead to more use 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879223/459780027.0.0.jpg)

  * The case for marijuana legalization 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879233/451907616.jpg.0.jpg)

  * The case against marijuana legalization 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879265/73245308.0.jpg)

  * Uruguay was the first country to fully legalize marijuana 

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/61879247/GettyImages_949178554.0.jpg)

### Most Read

  1. The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress Democrats escalate their fight with the Trump administration.
  2. Trump is reportedly in denial about his campaign’s bleak internal polling This is fine.
  3. Mary Meeker’s most important trends on the internet Here are all the slides, plus analysis.

vox-mark

### Future Perfect

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 15. The sidebar size is medium.

Chorus

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy
  * GDPR Commitment
  * Communications Preferences

  * Contact

  * Send Us a Tip
  * Masthead
  * About Us
  * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

