

![NDPA logo](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/themes/ndpa-01/images/banner1.png)

**Promoting Good Practice In Prevention**

  * Home
  * Site Map
  * About Us
  * LATEST NEWS !
  * Drug politics
  * International News
  * Research
  * Papers
  * Cannabis Info
  * Help and Advice
  * Global Drug Legalisation Efforts
  * Parents
  * Teenex Success !!
  * Are You a User?
  * Geoffisms
  * Links
  * Contact

## Cannabis/Marijuana

University of Pennsylvania researchers performed Internet searches for
slightly more than a month in 2016 to identify CBD products that displayed
contents on their labels and were for sale online. They bought 84 products
from 31 companies, blinded their labels, and had their contents tested.

A full 70 percent of the labels turned out to be incorrect. The products
either contained more CBD than their labels specified, or less. Thirty percent
of the labels were “accurate” within a range of 10 percent.

Of particular concern was that testing detected THC in 18 of the 84 samples,
and the amounts of THC in some products were sufficient to cause intoxication
or impairment, especially in children.

The publication of this article in JAMA took place just days after the FDA
sent warning letters to four major CBD producers asking them to eliminate all
medical claims they make for their products. All have been marketing their
products with unproven medical claims. They have 15 business days from last
week to remove the claims or FDA can seize their merchandise and put them out
of business.

Source: Email from National Families In Action http://www.nationalfamilies.org
November 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Latest News,Marijuana and
Medicine,Political Sector :

Psychologist Robert Margolis, PhD, has spent the past 40 years treating
substance abuse disorders in adolescents. He founded and ran Solutions, an
after-school alcohol and drug treatment program for young people in Atlanta,
Georgia. When he retired recently, he merged Solutions with Caron Treatment
Center, a nonprofit organization with treatment facilities in several states.

Dr. Margolis wrote an op-ed for the _Atlanta Journal Constitution_ in 2002
calling for careful, reasoned debate about the legalization of marijuana.
Today, he writes that that debate still hasn’t happened. He lays out what
science says about the impact of marijuana use on young people and asks if we
are prepared to allow next generations to be so drug damaged.

Read his essay here.

Source: Email from National Families In Action http://www.nationalfamilies.org
November 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Latest News :

Researchers from the University of Connecticut Health Center studied data from
1,165 young adults who took part in the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of
Alcoholism. People in the alchol study were assessed at age 12 and then every
two years over a span of the next 13 to 22 years.

Those who became dependent on both marijuana and alcohol were found to have
lower levels of educational achievement, were less likely to be employed full
time, less likely to be married, and had lower social and economic potential.

“This study found that chronic marijuana use in adolescence was negatively
associated with achieving important developmental milestones in young
adulthood. Awareness of marijuana’s potential deleterious effects will be
important moving forward given the current move in the U.S. toward marijuana
legalization for recreational / medicinal use,” says study author Elizabeth
Harari, MD.

She presented her study at the annual meeting of the American Public Health
Association being held in Atlanta, Georgia this week.

Read abstract here.

Email from National Families In Action http://www.nationalfamilies.org
November 2017

Filed under: Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Education,Latest News :

**Abstract:**

Purpose: This study aims to assess potential health care costs and adverse
health effects related to cannabis use in an acute care community hospital in
Colorado, comparing study findings to those medical diagnoses noted in the
literature. Little information is available about specific hospital health
care costs, thus this study will add to the knowledge gap and describe charges
and collections from visits of these patients in one hospital's Emergency
Department (ED).

Objective: Review diagnoses of cannabis users visiting a local ED and outline
the potential financial and health effects of these patients on the health
care system.

Design: An Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved retrospective
observational study of patients seen in the ED from 2009 to 2014 with cannabis
diagnoses and positive urine drug analyses (UDA) matched with hospital billing
records. Randomized patient records were reviewed to determine completeness of
documentation and coding related to cannabis use.

Setting: An acute care hospital in one city in Colorado. The city has nearly
100 medical marijuana dispensaries, but has not legalized recreational
cannabis use. The city decided to not allow recreational stores in city limits
as they were allowed to make that determination as a result of Amendment 64,
which allowed municipalities to determine if they wanted recreational
marijuana in their town. As of this publication, more than 70% of Colorado's
municipalities have opted out of recreation marijuana sales.

Participants: Subjects seen through the ED who had both a diagnosis code
listing cannabis and a positive UDA for cannabis. Exclusions were subjects
with UDA for cannabis but also tested positive for other substances, subjects
who had cannabis diagnosis but no UDA result or those who had no UDA but did
have a cannabis diagnosis.

Conclusion: Subjects seen in the ED had similar diagnoses as those reviewed in
the literature, confirming the serious side effects of marijuana use. During
the study period, the study hospital incurred a true loss of twenty million
dollars in uncollected charges after allowing for contractual obligations.
While adverse health effects have been described in the literature, there is
little data on the financial impact of marijuana use on the health care
system. This study demonstrated an increasing number of patients who are seen
in the ED also have used cannabis. These patients are not always able to pay
their bills, resulting in a financial loss to the hospital. The authors
encourage the collection of hospital financial data for analysis in the states
where medicinal (MMJ) and/or recreational marijuana is legal

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314140400_The_Hidden_Costs_of_Marijuana_Use_in_Colorado_One_Emergency_Department's_Experience

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,Latest News :

Kenneth Finn, MD,

The problem of increased marijuana use has origin in its purported use for
pain, but the medical literature is completely void of evidence for the
treatment.

Pain is the most common diagnosis associated with marijuana being recommended
for medical use. With more states moving towards accepting marijuana use for
medical purposes, there is a call from the  
medical and scientific community for more research and evidence that it
actually works for common pain conditions.

Out of the top 20 medical diagnoses presenting to the primary care physician
nationally, there are only three that are associated with a painful condition:  
spinal disorders (i.e., lower back pain), arthropathies and related disorders
(i.e., knee arthritis), and abdominal pain.

There were no other pain diagnoses in the top 20 diagnoses that present to the
primary care physician for treatment, including cancer pain or neuropathic
pain. What does the medical literature tell us about the  
use of marijuana for pain? In 2011, The British Journal of Pharmacology
released a paper looking at the use for cannabinoids for the treatment of
chronic non-cancer pain.

They narrowed a broad literature review to only 18 trials with a total of 925
participants. Most of the trials studied neuropathic pain (72%), including HIV
neuropathy and multiple sclerosis related neuropathy (three trials), with
single studies looking at arthritis and chronic spinal pain.

There were four studies that looked at smoked cannabis and neuropathic pain
only. Six studies evaluated synthetic cannabinoids (Dronabinol, Nabilione) for
pain (offlabel use).  
From these trials, the average number of patients was 49 with average duration
of 22 days, some of which were one week long. Despite their conclusion that
cannabinoids may help for chronic non-cancer pain, they noted study
limitations of small sample size, modest effects, and the need for larger
trials of longer duration to determine safety and efficacy.

In 2015, the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) released an
article on cannabinoids for medical use.4 Chronic pain was assessed in 28
studies, involving 63 reports and 2,454 participants. Thirteen studies
evaluated nabiximols (not available in the United States), four smoked THC,
six synthetic THC, three oromucosal spray, one oral THC, and one vaporized
cannabis. The majority of studies looked at some form of neuropathic pain or
cancer pain. Two studies were at low risk of bias, nine at unclear risk, and
17 at high risk. Studies generally suggested improvements in pain measures
associated with cannabinoids but did not reach statistical significance in
most individual studies.

Despite these difficulties, the authors concluded there was moderate-quality
evidence to suggest that cannabinoids may be beneficial for the treatment of
chronic neuropathic or cancer pain (smoked THC and nabiximols). Note these are
less common pain conditions presentimg to the physician for treatment
nationally. The authors noted an increased risk of short-term adverse effects
with cannabinoid use, including some serious adverse effects. Common adverse
effects included asthenia, balance problems, confusion, dizziness,
disorientation, diarrhea, euphoria, drowsiness, dry mouth, fatigue,
hallucination, nausea, somnolence, and vomiting.

In 2017, the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine released
a paper on the health effects of cannabis and cannabinoids. It may be
important to note that none of the authors had a background in Anesthesia or
Pain Medicine. The authors felt the referenced JAMA article was the most
comprehensive and that the medical condition most often associated with
chronic pain in that article was neuropathy, and a majority of studies
evaluated treatment with nabiximols, which are not available in the United
States. The committee found that only a handful of studies evaluated the use
of cannabis and that many of the cannabis products sold in state regulated
markets bear little resemblance to the products available for research at the
federal level in the United States. They also note that very little is known
regarding efficacy, dose, routes of administration, or side effects of
commonly used and commercially available products in the U.S. Despite this,
they concluded that “cannabis is an effective treatment for chronic pain in
adults.” The above noted papers demonstrate the limited data available to the
public and medical community, and represent the only information available
regarding treatment of pain with marijuana. Despite that, the public has
embraced that marijuana can treat all pain conditions, and state governments
have followed suit, without scientific evidence, and have allowed an industry
to prosper on the thin ice of what is currently and scientifically available.

It is important to understand that pain covers a broad spectrum of disorders
and pain of different origins does not necessarily respond the same to
different medications. Additionally, dispensary cannabis is considered a
generic substance without defined or accepted dosing guidelines, and will vary
in purity as well as potency. It may also contain hundreds of other compounds,
some of which may have physiologic activity. Cannabinoids are purified
components of the plant which have been isolated in a laboratory and have more
scientific foundation, but are currently not available for study or use in
pain conditions in the U.S.

Since de facto legalization in Colorado in 2009, there has been a significant
increase in public health and safety concerns, which include utilization of
the health care system, an increase in adolescent substance use treatment for
cannabis, and an increase in marijuana-related driving fatalities. The
addiction rates are reportedly 9% in the adult and roughly 18% in the
adolescent, which was based on the potency of marijuana from nearly 20 years
ago. The potency has significantly increased in the past five years alone, so
we are now in uncharted waters and unable to predict the long term effects or
addiction rates of currently available, highly potent products, with variable
delivery systems.

As the number of medical marijuana patients increased in Colorado, there
appeared to be a parallel increase in the number of adolescents needing
substance use treatment, most often for cannabis. Colorado is now contending
with a huge opioid and heroin epidemic, and despite the widespread
availability of Narcan, does not appear to have leveled off or curbed the
number of opioid or heroin deaths in the state which continue to rise.

Although the concept of using marijuana to decrease opioid use is attractive,
there is little data to suggest that may be the case. According to the Centers
for Disease Control, the number of drug overdose deaths in Colorado has
continued to increase, ahead of the national average. The above problems are
now falling into the laps of other groups including law enforcement and mental
health providers who are pushing back and straining their respective
resources.

In summary, the problem of increased marijuana use has origin in its purported
use for pain, but the medical literature is completely void of evidence for
the treatment of common pain conditions with cannabinoids or cannabis. Current
medical literature suggests benefit in less common pain conditions, with
products not commercially available in the U.S., or with synthetic THC, not
with dispensary cannabis. The variability of available products changes
regularly and their use in medicine, particularly pain, is unproven. The end
game is in the court of law enforcement, mental health providers, the medical
community, and our educational systems, at unknown societal costs, which are
only now becoming apparent.

Source:
http://www.omagdigital.com/publication/?i=450168#{%22issue_id%22:450168,%22page%22:8}
September/October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Latest News,Marijuana and Medicine :

The House of Delegates of the Medical Association of Georgia (MAG) passed a
strongly worded resolution opposing the expansion of “medical” marijuana at
its annual meeting October 20-21. Passed unanimously, the resolution sends a
clear signal to legislators to reject a Georgia House of Representatives
resolution introduced in the 2017 session that carries over to next year. That
resolution, if passed, would enable legislators to place a constitutional
amendment on the state’s November 2018 ballot to cultivate, process, and sell
marijuana for medical use throughout the state.

The issue has evolved in each legislative session since 2014. Current law
allows people with 14 different conditions to apply to the Georgia Department
of Public Health for a card that provides legal immunity for possessing 20
fluid ounces of “medicinal cannabis” that can contain 5 percent THC.

The MAG House of Delegates’ resolution notes that “calling marijuana ‘medical
cannabis’ or ‘low THC oil’ does not alter its psychoactive, neurotoxic, and
addictive effects. Marijuana at THC levels of 3 percent, 4 percent, or 5
percent has resulted in hundreds of thousands of Americans experiencing
cannabis use dependence since the 1980s.”

It points out that “THC has been contraindicated for use in treatment of
conditions of children in studies by Children’s Hospital Colorado, Boston
Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School and Duke University.” It adds that
marijuana-related fatal road crashes have increased in Colorado and Washington
since those two states fully legalized the drug.

The resolution begins by stating, “Legislators or voters should not decide
what medical conditions should be treated by a non-standardized, un-tested
drug, namely artisanal THC Oil and related marijuana products, and then base
treatment on non-scientific anecdotal information.”

For these and other reasons, the resolution:

“RESOLVED, that the Medical Association of Georgia oppose the expansion of the
legalization of non-standard and non-FDA approved use of cannabis for medical
use in Georgia and educate physicians and other clinicians on the risks of
artisanal cannabis products lacking FDA approval.”

And “RESOLVED, that the Georgia Delegation submit a resolution to the American
Medical Association to work with the National Institutes of Health to ease
some of the barriers to medical research regarding chemical components of
marijuana such as cannabidiol that show great promise.”

The House of Delegates is MAG’s primary legislative and policy-making body,
according to its website. It consists of county and specialty medical
societies. Dr. Craig Kerins of the Richmond County Medical society introduced
the resolution, which was written by Susan Blank, MD, president of the Georgia
Society of Addiction Medicine and Gregg Raduka, PhD, executive director of
Let’s Be Clear Georgia.

Read full text here.

Source: Email from National Families in Action http://nationalfamilies.org
November 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Latest
News,Marijuana and Medicine,Political Sector :

U.S. marijuana growers’ and processors’ greatest fear has just been realized.
One of the largest international producers and marketers of beer, wine, and
spirits, Constellation Brands, has bought a 9.9 percent stake in a Canadian
marijuana grower, Canopy Growth Corporation. The two companies plan to develop
a line of marijuana-infused drinks to sell in Canada, expected to legalize the
drug for recreational use in 2018

US marijuana growers and processors have long feared that mega corporations
like those that make up the alcohol and tobacco industries would swoop in and
put them out of business if pot is legalized nationwide. They just didn’t
think it would happen in Canada first.

Business analysts say this is a smart move on the part of Constellation
Brands, given now-Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s campaign promise to legalize
the drug if elected.

Whether parents, public health officials, scientists, and doctors agree is
another matter. Marijuana beverages being marketed by an alcoholic beverages
company with Constellation Brand’s clout is hardly likely to reduce auto
traffic injuries and deaths.

Read story here and here.

Source: Email from National Families in Action http://nationalfamilies.org
November 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Latest News :

MOUNT SHASTA, Siskiyou County (KPIX 5) — It’s happening in the shadow of Mount
Shasta — hundreds of marijuana gardens pockmarking the landscape in
neighborhoods that have little in the way of housing.

For law enforcement officials in Siskiyou County, it’s a state of emergency.

“This is a monumental effort but, then again, we’ve got a monumental problem,”
says Sheriff Jon E. Lopey.

What’s unfolding in this county is a race between growers and the law to see
who can get to the countless grow gardens first.

“We’re in harvest season. We’re really putting a lot of resources into it and
a lot of personnel, trying to take out as much as we can before it gets
harvested and goes off back east or wherever it’s going,” said Siskiyou County
Sheriff’s Deputy Mike Gilley.

You can see the enormous extent of the grow gardens from space. Fire up Google
Earth and you can count grow after grow dotting the high desert landscape like
an outbreak of measles.

“I have a one-mile-square photograph and you can pick out 80 gardens in that
one square mile,” said Sgt. Gilley.

All of this is happening in a county that is decidedly not part of the
“Emerald Triangle.” In fact, elected officials and voters have passed laws
aimed at keeping marijuana out of Siskiyou County.

“Our county does not allow outdoor cultivation of cannabis,” asserts Sheriff
Lopey.

Siskiyou County has some of the cheapest — as well as most scenic — land you
can find in California. You can purchase nearly three acres for about $16,000.
That brings in people who see an opportunity. The sheriff thinks those people
represent a nationwide problem.

“I think … that this is an organized-crime effort. (They) basically take over
large geographic areas to grow illegal marijuana. That’s basically what it
amounts to,” Lopey said.

Source: https://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2017/10/27/marijuana-illegal-grow-
mount-shasta-siskiyou-county/(contains video report) October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Environment,Latest News,Social
Affairs :

MEDICINAL cannabis is no better than conventional drugs for treating children
with severe epilepsy, according to a top Victorian doctor.

After months of treatment, none of the 29 Victorian children accessing $1
million worth of medicinal cannabis product, imported from Canada, has been
seizure free.

**FIRST COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CROP TO HELP VICTORIAN CHILDREN**

**UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE GETS $500K FROM TURNBULL GOVERNMENT FOR RESEARCH
INTO MEDICINAL CANNABIS PLANTS**

Paediatric neurologist Professor Ingrid Scheffer told the _Sunday Herald Sun_
medicinal cannabis had been effective in some of the cases by reducing fits
among some of the group.

However, the results had been similar to outcomes achieved on other
pharmaceutical drugs and it was not the miracle solution families were hoping
for

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/herald-

sun-300x169.jpg)

Families hear the news kids who need cannabis to help with chronic illness
will gain access. Picture: Jason Edwards

“Initially we all had a sense of hope but that didn’t last but that is the
nature of these diseases,” Prof Scheffer said.

For more http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/medicinal-cannabis-not-
miracle-epilepsy-drug-says-professor-treating-victorian-children/news-
story/9107a6249aec2e59a7c0a49f6c8b0b71 October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Latest News,Marijuana and Medicine :

With no age restrictions on its use, some people – even children – are likely
consuming CBD on a very frequent basis.

While a growing chorus of voices recommend CBD oil for all manner of ailments
with glowing reviews and assurances of its safety, consumers would be wise to
think very carefully before jumping on the bandwagon.

This article seeks to pull back the curtain on the CBD story and reveal the
very real potential dangers of use by otherwise healthy people so that you can
make a truly informed decision for your family.

Please note that I am not disputing the benefits of cannabis in this article.
I know it helps a lot of very sick people manage their illness in a
comfortable way without the need for pharmaceuticals. What I am presenting is
the other side of the story that is usually not discussed – even glossed over
in favor of aggressive marketing to otherwise healthy people.

**What is CBD Oil?**

CBD oil is an alternative remedy for inflammation, pain, seizures and many
other conditions. It is gaining widespread popularity over pharmaceutical
drugs to treat the same ailments.

Manufacturers make CBD oil by diluting the active ingredient cannabidiol with
a carrier fat such as coconut oil. Depending on what carrier oil is used
(i.e., saturated fats or vegetable oils), the remedy then appeals to a wider
variety of people. In other words, CBD fans can find an oil that fits their
particular food philosophy on fats.

**Cannabidiol**

You might be surprised to learn that cannabidiol is one of over a hundred
compounds known as cannabinoids. The buds, flowers, leaves and stalks (not
seeds) of the hemp plant contain them. Other common names for this plant are
marijuana or cannabis.

Tetrahydrocannabinol, better known as THC, is another well known cannabinoid
in hemp plant matter. It is best known for its mind altering effects, which
pot smokers experience firsthand. (1)

Fans of CBD oil claim that cannabidiol is safe because it has zero inherent
psychoactive properties like THC. However, this is disputable, if not
downright false, in light of research on both animals and humans. More on this
later.

**Hash (Cannabis) Oil vs CBD Oil vs Hemp Seed Oil**

It is important to understand the key differences between the three primary
oils derived from the hemp or marijuana plant. These characteristics determine
whether the oil is used as food or medicine and, in turn, whether it is even
legal or not.

CBD oil falls in the gray area, which is why it is so confusing and
potentially dangerous for anyone except those who are gravely ill with few
other treatment options. Hopefully, the discussion below will help clear
things up for you!

**Cannabidiol (CBD) Oil**

As described above, manufacturers create medicinal CBD oil by blending
cannabidiol with a carrier oil. This active ingredient is either isolated or
alcohol extracted from whole cannabis plant matter.

CBD was legalized in all 50 states by the 2014 Farm Bill, which served as the
springboard for its explosive growth. However, this approval came with an
important caveat. The legislation required extraction of CBD for academic
research or under a state pilot program. Since then, a number of states
broadened this narrow definition, which legalized other CBD manufacturing
processes. (2)

**Hemp Seed Oil**

CBD oil is vastly different from hemp seed oil, which is a food and not
medicine. It is made by cold pressing the seeds on the cannabis plant. The
resulting oil is high in inflammatory omega-6 fats. Hemp seeds contain no THC
and hence the oil should technically not contain any either.

Some countries require testing for THC in hemp seed oil to verify purity.
Typical requirements are that there are no more than 5-10 or even zero parts
per million (ppm) detected in the final product.

**Hemp Oil (Hash or Cannabis Oil)**

In comparison, hash or cannabis oil does contain high inducing THC. It is also
misleadingly known as honey oil.

It comes from aerial parts of the marijuana plant except the seeds. This
medicinal or recreational oil can be made from any of the three sub-species of
the cannabis plant – Cannabis sativa, Cannabis indica, and more rarely
Cannabis ruderalis.

Hash oil is illegal for recreational use in most states but is approved for
medicinal use by a growing list of others. It is usually consumed by eating or
smoking. It is also sold in cartridges for use in vaping pens.

In summary, while hemp seed oil is widely recognized as safe and available on
healthfood store shelves all across the country, hemp oil is still regulated
as as a medicinal only drug in some states and completely outlawed in others.
CBD oil falls in the gray area somewhere between the two.

The question that remains to be answered is its safety. Does the narrow
legalization of CBD in the 2014 Farm Bill guarantee its safety? Or is it
actually more risky than consumers have been led to believe?

**CBD Oil Risks**

The side effects of consuming cannabidiol are very real though commonly
glossed over by those selling it.

Drug Contraindications

CBD oil may potentially interact in a negative way with anti-epilepsy drugs.
As of now, only in vitro (test tube) observations exist with no living
organism testing proving safety. Drugs that may interact include: (3)  
•carbamazepine (Tegretol)  
•phenytoin (Dilantin)  
•phenobarbital (Luminal, Solfoton, Tedral)  
•primidone (anti-seizure)

**Side Effects**

According to a review of existing research by the journal Cannabis and
Cannabinoid Research, the most common side effects of consuming CBD or CBD oil
include:  
•fatigue  
•nausea or vomiting  
•diarrhea  
•dizziness  
•anxiety or depression  
•changes in appetite/weight  
•Psychosis

While there is a well known link between psychotic disorders and pot, CBD is
generally regarded as anti-psychotic. (4)

How can this be if a CBD side effect is psychosis? (5)

Perhaps this common belief is simply not true!

**Psychoactive Effects of Cannabinoids**

Perhaps cannabinoid oil purveyors tend to ignore the well established
reactions because the side effect profile of CBD is better than pharmaceutical
drugs used to treat similar conditions.

In addition, proponents of CBD oil use insist on its safety because
cannabidiol is not mind altering like its cousin cannabinoid THC.

Research from the 1970s seems to confirm that CBD is well tolerated up to 600
mg without psychotic episodes. (6)

However, more recent research disputes this assumption.

**Conversion of CBD to THC**

Researcher Kazuhito Watanabe, PhD and his team at Daiichi College of
Pharmaceuticals, Japan discovered a disturbing problem with cannabidiol. (7)

They found that CBD converts into THC, the same psychosis inducing substance
found in weed. In addition, CBD converted into two other THC-like cannabinoids
known as HHCs (hexahydroxycannabinols). All three produced high inducing
symptoms in mice.

This research indicates that THC is not the only mind altering cannabinoid in
hemp. It also suggests the possibility that a person can be exposed to brain
altering, high inducing substances by simply consuming CBD.

Getting High on CBD?

Acidity is necessary for the conversion of CBD to THC and the two psychoactive
HHCs. Researchers performed this conversion using artificial digestive juices.
The change accelerated in the presence of some kind of sugar (or alcohol).

In people consuming CBD oil, this would parallel as acidity in the stomach.
Since people commonly consume CBD oil in sugary lattes, candy, goodies,
smoothies or alcoholic beverages, this situation mimics the reality of many
people who use it.

**Effects of THC Derived from CBD**

To test the effects of these components, the researchers then injected mice
with small quantities of the THC and HHCs converted from CBD. The researchers
tested for the four most common symptoms of THC exposure including:  
•Catalepsy – loss of sensation or consciousness  
•Hypothermia – drop in body temperature  
•Prolonged sleep  
•Reduced pain perception

Mice injected with small amounts of THC and HHCs converted in artificial
gastric juices from CBD tested positively for all 4 pot exposure symptoms.

**Human Studies**

Follow-up research in 2016 published in the journal Cannabis and Cannabinoid
Research gives additional pause.

More than 40% of epileptic children orally administered CBD exhibited adverse
events, with THC like symptoms the most common. In their conclusion,
researchers challenged the accepted premise that CBD is not high-inducing.

Gastric fluid without enzymes converts CBD into the psychoactive components
Δ9-THC and Δ8-THC, which suggests that the oral route of administration may
increase the potential for psychomimetic adverse effects from CBD. (8)

**Is CBD Oil Safe for Children?  
**  
The takeaway of existing research as of this writing seems to indicate extreme
caution when it comes to ingestion of CBD oil especially by children.

Research definitively shows that THC exposure affects their developing brains
in a negative way – perhaps permanently. The important point here is that
consuming CBD or CBD infused oil can initiate this THC exposure – not just
smoking or vaping pot. The Journal of Current Pharmaceutical Design warns:

The literature not only suggests neurocognitive disadvantages to using
marijuana in the domains of attention and memory that persist beyond
abstinence, but suggest possible macrostructural brain alterations (e.g.,
morphometry changes in gray matter tissue), changes in white matter tract
integrity (e.g., poorer coherence in white matter fibers), and abnormalities
of neural functioning (e.g., increased brain activation, changes in
neurovascular functioning). (9)

**CBD During Pregnancy  
**  
The Journal Future Neurology warns that cannabis exposure crosses the
placenta. “Human epidemiological and animal studies have found that prenatal
cannabis exposure influences brain development and can have long-lasting
impacts on cognitive functions.” (10)

Since CBD partially converts to THC under acidic conditions, women who consume
CBD oil for morning sickness or other discomforts of pregnancy should
understand that use may mimic using pot directly. Just because CBD oil is
natural and works effectively to alleviate symptoms does not mean it is safe
for your baby.

Always discuss any supplemental foods with a practitioner before use!

**CBD from Hops and Other Non-Cannabis Plants**

Some CBD products and oil come from plants other than cannabis. Hops is one
that is popular currently. (11)

People that use non-cannabis CBD mistakenly believe that they are safe from
THC. False marketing of these products encourages this line of thinking.

Be warned that no matter where CBD comes from, the potential for conversion of
CBD to THC in the digestive tract exists. CBD is ultimately a cannabinoid no
matter what plant it comes from. Thus, unless the CBD is applied transdermally
or intravenously to avoid the acidic conditions within the digestive tract,
the risk for THC exposure and brain-altering effects still exists.

To give you a example of how this works, consider how beta carotene converts
to Vitamin A in the digestive tract. It doesn’t matter if the beta carotene
comes from carrots, peppers or squash. This nutrient will still potentially
convert to Vitamin A. The same principle applies to CBD that is consumed
orally. The digestive process can result in conversion to THC no matter what
plant is the source of the CBD.

**Is CBD Safe for Anyone?  
**  
Consumers desperately need more research about the high-inducing effects of
CBD-to-THC that could manifest as a result of the digestive process.

The half life of oral CBD in the body is about 2 days. Thus, depending on how
much a person consumes and how often, the potential risk of psychosis could
increase over time depending on individual metabolism.

It seems that, as of this writing, the prudent course of action for the
cautious consumer is to adopt a wait and see attitude toward CBD and CBD oil
products pending further research on the very real potential for mind
altering, pot-like effects.

Some companies are already working to develop synthetic transdermal CBD. Such
a drug would bypass the gastrointestinal tract and avoid bioconversion to
psychoactive THC and/or HHCs. Of course, this treatment likely has its own set
of yet unknown dangers!

While the risks of THC exposure from CBD oil and other products are likely of
little concern for gravely ill people who desperately need it, for otherwise
healthy people and children, beware! It seems wise until further research is
concluded to treat CBD oil, candy, and other products just like any other high
inducing drug. Just. Say. No.

Sarah Pope MGA

Since 2002, Sarah has been a Health and Nutrition Educator dedicated to
helping families effectively incorporate the principles of ancestral diets
within the modern household.

Sarah was awarded Activist of the Year at the International Wise Traditions
Conference in 2010.

Sarah received a Bachelor of Arts (summa cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa) in
Economics from Furman University and a Master’s degree in Government
(Financial Management) from the University of Pennsylvania.

Mother to three healthy children, blogger, and best-selling author, her work
has been covered by USA Today, The New York Times, National Review, ABC, NBC,
and many others.

Going to the Doctor a Little Too Often?

Get a free chapter of my book Traditional Remedies for Modern Families + my
newsletter and learn how to put Nature’s best remedies to work for you today!

We send no more than one email per week. You will never be spammed or your
email sold, ever.

How to Find Real Manuka Honey (80% is fake)

How to Use Oregano Oil as Herbal Antibiotic (+ what kind is best)

Comments (115)

Anna

Well, by now Healthline has corrected the article you reference as evidence
for CBD causing psychosis, after I (and maybe others, who knows) pointed out
to them that they had mistakenly put the side effects of THC for those of CBD.
Now it lists only diarrhoea, changes in appetite and fatigue. Time for you to
follow suit? You both reference the same scientific article, and now that this
is the only remaining reference to back up your claim, I think it is time you
actually looked at it and realised that it does not support your claim either.
Could you then still go on and claim to have truth on your side, knowing that
your claim is based on nothing at all? And keep on calling people who disagree
with you biased? It’s pretty clear to me who is the biased one here, and
probably to most others as well.  
Sarah, you may have good intentions but you are not making the world a better
place by publishing misinformation. Maybe a few people will be kept from
trying CBD due to reading it, but most people will realise right away how
ridiculous it is. It will just contribute to their mistrust of official
information and authority figures on the subject of drugs. Because fact is
that a lot of fairly harmless drugs have been needlessly demonised along with
the genuinely dangerous ones since Nixon started his war on drugs. You might
believe otherwise, but people who try them know better. And the more
misinformation they see around them, the more they will be inclined to
disbelieve also the genuine warnings about those drugs which can actually be
really harmful. Especially now in this age of ‘fake news’ where people are
more and more unsure of what information they can trust. People actually end
up harming themselves much more due to ignorance than they would if they had
full knowledge of the whole subject in advance! Proper education is the way to
reduce the harm from drugs the most, not waging a war against them with
misinformation – isn’t it obvious by now that this war has totally failed,
because it is unwinnable?

April 20th, 2019 2:14 pm Reply

Sarah Pope MGA

I actually cited a scientific study about CBD converting to THC in the gut!
You are welcome to believe anything you like, but the fact is that some people
do experience psychosis from CBD. Read through the comments and read the
referenced research study.

April 22nd, 2019 7:39 am Reply

rooislangwtf

The effort the Japanese study went to, to convert cbd to thc makes me wonder
what the likelihood is of it actually happening in the human body (ph of 1.2
that’s lower than normal gastric acid and then a heck of a lot of
purification). The epilepsy study didn’t go past observation to indicate thc
effects (urine tests would’ve helped).

So the real conclusion to draw is until more tests are done:  
Dont take cbd with alcohol or a lot of sugars or get a way to take cbd non
orally (a patch or a suppository maybe).

April 10th, 2019 7:34 pm Reply

PATRICIA DONOVAN

I believe you picked and chose your so-called info from a multitude of sources
without validating ANY of it. You are doing an extreme dis-service to those
who use CBD effectively. People have to do their own research and find what
works for them. Not all brands are created equal. I could write a book, with
VALID sources, disputing virtually every point you made.

February 13th, 2019 1:06 pm Reply

Sarah Pope MGA

I find it amusing that people who disagree with an article frequently get in a
huff and claim that “all” the sources/references are invalid and that they
could “write a book” disputing every point. LOL Go read a site then that
confirms all your biases. You don’t want the truth .. you want an article
validating your belief system.

February 13th, 2019 1:37 pm Reply

Tim Wolford

I believe failed to include that the types of CBD oils in question are the
Full Spectrum which has THC properties. The two other types will NOT produce
THC and they are Broad Spectrum and Isolate Spectrum. The majority of CBD oils
on the market today are Full Spectrum with THC compounds, however when the THC
is extracted from the CBD Oils you have a Broad Spectrum product which may
cost more, but will NOT have THC period! Do your homework and don’t always
believe everything you read, especially when the Spectrums were never
discussed

February 12th, 2019 11:23 am Reply

Sarah Pope MGA

Please read the article. You have apparently missed the point completely as
have several other commenters. There is NO BRAND of CBD oil that is safe. ANY
cannabidiol even if from another plant (like hops) will potentially trigger a
conversion to THC in the gut. When NYC just banned CBD from edibles sold at
restaurants, healthfood stores etc, there was NO distinction between “full
spectrum” and isolate spectrum.

February 13th, 2019 8:56 am Reply

Dela Baldwin

Not all CBDs are created equal. Not all CBD has THC. A lot have trace amounts
however not all. My company is 100% 0.00000 % THC free.

February 5th, 2019 9:52 am Reply

Sarah Pope MGA

I don’t think you understood the article! I am not suggesting that any CBD oil
has THC in it … it DOESN’T MATTER how your CBD oil is produced … some CAN AND
DOES CONVERT to small amounts of THC in the acidity of the digestive tract
when consumed. Some people have a HUGE negative reaction to this.

Beta carotene partially converts to Vitamin A in the digestive tract too as do
many other substances.

February 5th, 2019 10:26 am Reply

Load More

Leave a Reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Sign me up for the newsletter!

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Effects of Drugs,Latest News :

Randi Melissa Schuster, PhD; Jodi Gilman, PhD; David Schoenfeld, PhD; John
Evenden, PhD; Maya Hareli, BA; Christine Ulysse, MS; Emily Nip, BA; Ailish
Hanly, BA; Haiyue Zhang, MS; and A. Eden Evins, MD, MPH

J Clin Psychiatry 2018;79(6):17m11977

10.4088/JCP.17m11977

Objective: Associations between adolescent cannabis use and poor
neurocognitive functioning have been reported from cross-sectional studies
that cannot determine causality. Prospective designs can assess whether
extended cannabis abstinence has a beneficial effect on cognition.

Methods: Eighty-eight adolescents and young adults (aged 16–25 years) who used
cannabis regularly were recruited from the community and a local high school
between July 2015 and December 2016. Participants were randomly assigned to 4
weeks of cannabis abstinence, verified by decreasing
11-nor-9-carboxy-∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol urine concentration (MJ-Abst; n =
62), or a monitoring control condition with no abstinence requirement (MJ-Mon;
n = 26). Attention and memory were assessed at baseline and weekly for 4 weeks
with the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery.

Results: Among MJ-Abst participants, 55 (88.7%) met a priori criteria for
biochemically confirmed 30-day continuous abstinence. There was an effect of
abstinence on verbal memory (P = .002) that was consistent across 4 weeks of
abstinence, with no time-by-abstinence interaction, and was driven by improved
verbal learning in the first week of abstinence. MJ-Abst participants had
better memory overall and at weeks 1, 2, 3 than MJ-Mon participants, and only
MJ-Abst participants improved in memory from baseline to week 1. There was no
effect of abstinence on attention: both groups improved similarly, consistent
with a practice effect.

Conclusions: This study suggests that cannabis abstinence is associated with
improvements in verbal learning that appear to occur largely in the first week
following last use. Future studies are needed to determine whether the
improvement in cognition with abstinence is associated with improvement in
academic and other functional outcomes.

Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03276221

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Health :

When people like the headline writer of this _HealthDay_ news article talk
about “medical marijuana,” they usually mean everything. The plant’s dried
flowers which people smoke. Concentrates that can contain up to 90 percent
THC, whose extraordinarily high levels are almost certainly what is sending
toddlers and children who accidentally consume them and adults who consume
them on purpose to emergency rooms with many needing to be hospitalized.
“Edibles” – cookies, candies, and soft drinks infused with marijuana that are
now in the food chain. And hundreds more, all sold as “medicines.”

The _HealthDay_ author does a good job of covering a new study in _Pediatrics_
, the journal of the American Association of Pediatrics. But notice the
study’s title: “Medical Cannabinoids – not Medical Marijuana – in Children and
Adolescents: A Systematic Review.”

What’s the difference?

The marijuana plant contains about 500 different chemicals. Most have not been
studied. Some 100 of those are called cannabinoids, so-called because they are
unique to the cannabis plant. Most of these have not been studied either, but
that is changing. Some cannabinoids show scientific promise and may become
medicines. Two already are.

By medicines, we mean they have gone through rigorous preclinical (test tubes
and animals) and clinical (humans) research. They have proven to FDA that they
are both safe and effective, can be manufactured with a consistent dose, and
most importantly _are pure_. They contain no contaminants unlike most of the
products in legal states. A further FDA safeguard is that sometimes approved
medicines cause dangerous side effects in the larger population after
approval. FDA has a notification system that requires doctors to report any
that occur so the medicine can be pulled from the market, if necessary.

The most studied cannabinoids are delta-9 THC and cannabidiol (CBD). The
former makes people high. The latter doesn’t. The two medicines that FDA has
approved are nabilone (trade name Cesamet®) and dronabinol (trade names
Marinol® and Syndros®). Cesamet® and Marinol® are pills. Syndros® is an oral
liquid. They are used to reduce chemotherapy-related nausea and AIDS wasting
in patients who do not respond to standard medications.

Two more cannabinoids, nabiximols (trade name Sativex®, approved in other
countries but not yet in the US yet) and CBD (trade name Epidiolex® which has
completed clinical trials and is applying for FDA approval) are in the
pipeline.

About half our medicines originated in plants. But when drug makers create a
new medicine from them, they use pure chemicals to make a molecule-for-
molecule carbon copy of the plant’s component. Nabilone and dronabinol are
made that way. Patients know when they take these medicines that they will not
contain any contaminants and FDA has approved them.

Not so the “medical” marijuana products being produced and sold in states that
have legalized the drug for medical use. In fact, the American Epilepsy
Society calls such CBD products “artisanal CBD” to differentiate them all from
Epidiolex®, which may be available as early as next year to treat children and
adolescents suffering intractable seizures.

Not one of the marijuana products states allow to be sold as medicines has
been approved by FDA.

This new study searched several databases for scientific articles about
pharmaceutical-grade cannabinoids that are being studied to treat a variety of
illnesses in children and adolescents. They found 2,743 citations that might
meet their search criteria and reviewed the full texts of 103. From these,
they found 21 articles about 22 studies with a total sample of 795
participants:

  * Five were randomized controlled trials, the gold standard of knowledge development.
  * Five were retrospective chart reviews.
  * Five were case reports.
  * Four were open-label trials.
  * Two were parent surveys.
  * One was a case series. 

The medicines used in these studies were nabilone, dronabinol, Epidiolex®, a
formulation of delta-8 THC, and other pharmaceutical-grade preparations, not
Charlotte’s Web, Haleigh’s Hope, Cannatol, or any of the hundreds of other
artisanal CBD products states allow to be shipped – and Amazon sells – to all
50 states in violation of federal law.

The researchers found that in children and adolescents:

  * “Evidence for benefit was strongest for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (four RCTs), with increasing evidence of benefit for epilepsy [1 RTC using Epidiolex® rather than artisanal products]. At this time, there is insufficient evidence to support use for spasticity, neuropathic pain, posttraumatic stress disorder, and Tourette syndrome.
  * “The methodological quality of studies varied, with the majority of studies lacking control groups, limited by small sample size, and not designed to test for the statistical significance of outcome measures. Studies were heterogeneous [varied] in the cannabinoid composition and dosage and lacked long-term follow-up to identify potential adverse effects.
  * “Additional research is needed to evaluate the potential role of medical cannabinoids in children and adolescents, especially given increasing accessibility from state legalization and potential psychiatric and neurocognitive adverse effects identified from studies of recreational cannabis use.” 

Read HealthDay account of this study here.  
Read American Association of Pediatrics study abstract here.  
Read what Colorado Children’s Hospital tells families who want artisanal CBD
for their children here.

Source: Email from National Families In Action http://www.nationalfamilies.org
October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Latest News,Marijuana and Medicine :

## Strongest evidence supports use to reduce seizures, side effects of

chemotherapy

A systematic review of published studies on the use of medical cannabis in
children and adolescents finds a notable lack of studies and a minimal number
of the randomized, controlled trials needed to confirm the effectiveness of a
treatment. In their paper published in the journal _Pediatrics_ ,
Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) investigators Shane Shucheng Wong, MD,
and Timothy Wilens, MD -- both of the MGH Department of Psychiatry -- report
that their review suggests only two pediatric uses of medical cannabis -- to
relieve chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and to reduce seizures -- are
supported by existing studies.

"Medical cannabis is now legal in 29 states and the District of Columbia, and
in those areas with active programs, children and adolescents can legally
access medical cannabis with certification from their doctor and consent from
a parent or guardian," says lead author Wong. "This means that doctors and
families need to understand what we know and what we don't yet know about
medical cannabis in order to make the best decision for the health of the
individual child."

Two synthetic cannabinoids -- compounds that act on specific receptors in the
brain -- have been approved for medical use in the U.S., both of which mimic a
form of THC (tetrahydrocannabinol), the compound responsible for the "high" of
recreational cannabis use. Dronabinol (Marinol) is approved to treat
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in both children and adults, while
the pediatric use of nabilone (Cesamet) carries a caution. A third
cannabinoid, cannabidiol, is currently in phase 3 trials for treatment of
seizures.

The researchers followed established procedures in searching for studies of
medical cannabis use listed in major research indexes and selected out those
that primarily enrolled participants aged 18 and under and included original
data about a clinical use. Only 21 papers reporting on a total of 22 studies
met their criteria. The papers were published from 1979 to 2017, 14 within the
last five years. Only 5 were randomized controlled trials, the others being
case reports, open-label trials, parent surveys or case series. The most
common conditions studied were chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (6
studies) and seizures (11 studies).

The trials for chemotherapy side effects -- 4 of which were randomized
controlled trials -- found that medical cannabis was significantly better than
anti-nausea drugs standard at the time of study for reducing nausea and
vomiting. Similarly the epilepsy studies, including a single randomized trial,
found that medical cannabis reduced the frequency of seizures in participants,
some with treatment-resistant seizures. Limitations of these studies include
lack of a control group for many, small sample size, differences in the
medications used and lack of long-term follow-up.

Two studies investigating the use of cannabis for spasticity and three case
report on use for neuropathic pain, post-traumatic stress disorder or Tourette
syndrome all lacked controls or blinding, conferring a high risk of biased
findings. "At this time," Wong says, "we do not have good evidence that
cannabis can be useful in children and adolescents for any conditions other
than seizures or chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting."

He and Wilens also note that decisions regarding medical cannabis use need to
weigh the likely benefits against the known risks, which -- based on the
results of studies in recreational cannabis users -- are probably even greater
for children and adolescents. Their still-developing brains may make them even
more vulnerable than adults to cannabis's negative effects on learning,
memory, attention and problem solving. Additional research is needed to better
understand the risks and long-term effects of cannabis-based drugs in this
population.

When asked how he would advise the parents of a child with a condition that
could be alleviated with medical cannabis, Wong states, "I would recommend
they have a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits with a physician who
has specialized knowledge and experience in the area. For chemotherapy side
effects, that could be a pediatric oncologist or palliative care specialist;
for seizures, that could be a pediatric neurologist, especially at an academic
medical center involved in the ongoing clinical trials of medical cannabis for
seizure disorders."

Source: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/10/171023094606.htm October
2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Latest News,Marijuana and Medicine :

Trevor Hughes

CALISTOGA, Calif. — Marijuana farmers and dispensary owners across Northern
California are nervously watching as wildfires burn through some of the
state’s prime cannabis growing areas and destroy valuable crops, which could
drive up prices for consumers across the country.

“This is right smack in the middle of people’s harvests,” said Eli Melrod, the
CEO of Solful Dispensary in Sebastopol, in northern California. “It couldn’t
have been worse timing, frankly.”

A single marijuana plant can be worth up to $5,000, but pot growers can’t get
crop insurance like traditional farmers or the vintners whose grapevines tend
to get most of the attention here.

Wildfires are burning across parts of Napa, Sonoma and Mendocino counties,
which are known for both wine and marijuana, particularly among high-end
consumers willing to pay a premium for the name.

Complicating matters: Marijuana farms are built in remote areas with poor road
access and don’t necessarily appear on firefighters’ maps of buildings to be
protected. The growers often live largely off the radar, without health
insurance or access to traditional job support systems such as unemployment
insurance. Black market growers may be reluctant to tell friends and family
members of the losses they’ve suffered.

“It’s just sad that we live in this underground world where we can’t discuss
the true extent of the damage,” said Jessica Lilga of Alta Supply, a statewide
wholesale cannabis distribution based in Oakland. “All remaining growers who
did not literally lose their crops will be affected.”

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/636433386289791100-11-300x200.jpg)

A helicopter drops water on a wildfire in Sonoma County outside of
Geyserville, Calif., on Oct. 11, 2017.

Paul Kitagaki Jr., The Sacramento Bee, via AP

It’s unclear exactly how many people work in the cannabis industry in northern
California and how many cultivation operations exist. Lilga said she’s aware
of “thousands” of grow operations but was reluctant to speculate, given the
industry’s secretive nature.

But any interruption could have widespread implications for American marijuana
consumers, legal or otherwise.

Millions of Californians consume medical marijuana, but even more pot is
illegally shipped across state lines for black markets around the U.S.
California’s legal cannabis market is worth an estimated $2.76 billion,
according to marijuana analytics firm New Frontier Data, while the state’s
black market is worth $13.5 billion, according to GreenWave Advisors.

GreenWave estimates that nearly $11 billion worth of the state’s black-market
cannabis is grown in Northern California, with a “significant” amount of that
shipped to neighboring states. In comparison, the California wine industry is
worth an estimated $114 billion nationally, although the two industries are
hard to compare side-by-side because one is illegal.

Lilga, who lives in Santa Rosa, was evacuated herself when the wildfire ran
over her neighborhood. She’s not sure she has a home to return to: “That cash
that all these growers should be bringing in next month would help rebuild our
burning cities if it were not all taken away.”

Lilga predicted that an otherwise good crop year means the state’s overall
supply should be enough to meet demand without significantly impacting price.
Still, many cannabis dispensaries and distributors are setting up GoFundMe
accounts to help growers who have lost their crops.

Farmer Kim Tate of One Feather Ranch in Mendocino’s Redwood Valley said
wildfires forced her to evacuate with her horses, leaving behind her entire
year’s crop that was expected to yield about 350 pounds of cannabis. About
two-thirds of the crop had been harvested and stored before the fire broke
out, she said, but the rest remained in the fields and growing rooms.

As with wine, marijuana contaminated by wildfire smoke may leave behind an
unpleasant taste for consumers, Melrod said. Tate said she hoped to use ozone
to flush her organically raised plants of any toxins. Every bit will matter: A
pound of high-quality marijuana is worth about $1,200 on the wholesale market.

“We’re going to see have to see how smoky it is,” she said as she tried to
return to the ranch Thursday.

Source: https://eu.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2017/10/12/californias-
marijuana-farmers-fear-crops-could-go-up-smoke/758721001/ October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Environment,Latest News :

By Peter Fimrite

The legalization of cannabis in California has done almost nothing to halt
illegal marijuana growing by Mexican drug cartels, which are laying bare large
swaths of national forest in California, poisoning wildlife, and siphoning
precious water out of creeks and rivers, U.S. Attorney McGregor Scott said
Tuesday.

The situation is so dire that federal, state and local law enforcement
officials are using $2.5 million from the Trump administration this year to
crack down on illegal growers, who Scott said have been brazenly setting booby
traps, confronting hikers and attacking federal drug-sniffing dogs with
knives.

Instead of fading away after legal marijuana retail sales went into effect
this year, the problem has gotten worse, according to Scott, who was joined in
a news conference Tuesday in Sacramento by California Attorney General Xavier
Becerra and other federal forestry and law enforcement officials.

Most alarming, Scott said, is the increasing use of carbofuran, a federally
restricted insecticide so powerful that a teaspoon of it can kill a 600-pound
African lion. The insecticide is banned in California.

The problem of illegal growing operations and contaminated lands “is biblical
in proportion,” he said. “The chemicals have gone to a different level.”

The cartels, mainly from Mexico, use 760 tons of fertilizer on 400 grows every
year hidden on the 20 million acres of national forest land in California,
officials said.

The growers clear-cut trees, remove native vegetation, cause erosion, shoot
deer and other animals, and litter the landscape with garbage and human waste.
They also divert hundreds of millions of gallons of water from streams and
creeks, and the runoff is generally contaminated with pesticides, which are
also found in the plants, soil and wildlife in the area.

This year, 70 percent of the endangered spotted owls tested near sites that
had been used for illegal marijuana cultivation were found to have one
rodenticide or more in their systems, officials said. One owl died, leaving a
clutch of eggs. Last year, 43 poisoned animals were found, including deer,
bears, foxes, coyotes, rabbits and rare Pacific fishers. Another 47 animals
had been shot, most likely by illegal growers, authorities said.

Since 2012, 17 Pacific fishers have been killed by pesticides at grow sites,
said Mourad Gabriel, the director of the Integral Ecology Research Center, a
wildlife and environmental research nonprofit. He said carbofuran was found in
78 percent of the plantations eradicated in 2017. That’s compared with 40
percent in 2015 and only 10 to 12 percent in 2012, when he conducted the first
scientific study of illegal marijuana grow sites.

“It’s concerning, because now when we go into these sites we find
contamination in the native vegetation, the soil, the water; and it’s
increasing,” said Gabriel, whose research is funded by state and federal
grants. “Those sites are still contaminated two or three years later.”

In all, 1.4 million illegally grown marijuana plants were destroyed in raids
in national forests in California in 2017.

Bill Ruzzamenti, the former director of the Campaign Against Marijuana
Planting, said California supplies 60 to 80 percent of all the marijuana
consumed in the nation. In 2016, he said, 11 million pounds left the state,
which is illegal under Proposition 64, the initiative that legalized the drug
for recreational use in the state.

The people guarding the grow sites are inevitably armed and “a public safety
risk to all of us,” said Becerra.

Margaret Mims, the sheriff of Fresno County, said hikers, backpackers and
nature lovers have reported running across fishhooks hanging at eye level and
trip wires possibly attached to shotguns.

“I have grandkids and I like to go fishing, but there are places we will not
go because I am afraid for my grandkids,” said Ruzzamenti, who is now director
of the federal High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas program. “That should be
unacceptable to everybody.”

The problem isn’t new. Bootleg cannabis has been circulating around Mendocino,
Humboldt and Trinity counties — the famed Emerald Triangle — for decades, and
backwoods growing is ingrained in the culture.

Ruzzamenti said he has been trying to eradicate black-market growing on public
lands since 1983. And Mexican cartels aren’t the only problem. Only a few
hundred of the estimated 12,500 retail operators in the state last year have
become licensed so far, according to industry officials.

In Mendocino County alone, as many as 75 percent of residents in some remote
areas are marijuana growers, and only about 10 percent of the crop is being
grown legally.

The issue has taken on a new level of importance as the multibillion-dollar
California cannabis industry begins to ramp up. Legal growers and retailers
want desperately to protect the regulated, taxed marijuana market in
California.

The hope is that taxes collected by the government can fund law enforcement
efforts, which will, in turn, deter illegal operations and generate additional
taxes. Wholesale prices for marijuana are also expected to drop with the
mainstreaming of the industry, providing less incentive for bad actors.

But so far that hasn’t worked. In all, California collected $60.9 million in
excise, cultivation and sales taxes related to legal marijuana for the first
three months of 2018. Gov. Jerry Brown’s January budget proposal predicted
that $175 million would pour in over the first six months from the new taxes.
That would have translated to $87.5 million in January, February and March.

In his updated budget plan released earlier this month, Brown proposed
spending $14 million to create four investigative teams and one interdiction
team to combat illegal activities, tax evasion and crime. The money would come
from tax revenue and licensing fees over two years.

Even though marijuana is still illegal on the federal level, Scott said the
U.S. Attorney’s office plans to focus only on illegal growers on public lands.

Becerra said that without the help of the federal government, California
wouldn’t be able to handle the problem.

“You gotta make it so crime doesn’t pay,” he said.

Source: https://www.sfchronicle.com/green/article/Illegal-pot-grows-spread-
deadly-pesticides-other-12952302.php May 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Latest News,Political Sector :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/McKnight_MossbackRoadTrip_DayOneWackyTabacky_1-300x200.jpg)

Moe Ainsley, a grower with Kaya Collection, tends to marijuana plants at the
company’s Wacky Tabacky facility near Gold Bar. (Matt M. McKnight/Crosscut)

Washington’s pot is a bit more potent than the national average. And the
state’s teens are more likely to smoke marijuana than young people nationwide.

Although we have the same problems with marijuana as we do with liquor abuse,
no blockbuster conclusions came from a recent report on Washington’s marijuana
universe.

But a couple of somewhat unexpected environmental wrinkles from Washington’s
marijuana industry — both legal and illegal — also emerge in the second annual
look at the state's experience since passage of a 2012 initiative allowing
recreational pot sales.

Marijuana growers and processors use 1.63 percent of the state’s electricity,
which is a lot, according to the report by the Northwest High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Area — a combined effort by several federal, state and local
government agencies. By way of comparison, all forms of lighting — in homes,
commercial buildings and manufacturing — account for just 7 to 11 percent of
electrical consumption nationally. Or, as the report puts it, the power is
enough for 2 million homes.

The high power consumption stems from the heat lamps and the accompanying air
conditioning for indoor marijuana growing operations. “They are exceedingly
energy-consumptive,” said Steven Freng, manager for prevention and treatment
for the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area.

The carbon footprint, according to the report, equals that of about 3 million
cars.

And illegal pot growers siphoned off 43.2 million gallons of water from
streams and aquifers during the 2016 growing season — water that tribes,
farmers and cities would otherwise use as carefully as possible, in part to
protect salmon.

Sixty percent of Washington’s illegal pot was grown on state-owned land in
2016\. That’s because black-market growers tend to worry about gun-toting
owners on private lands, according to Freng and Luci McKean, the
organization's deputy director. The black-market operations use the water
during a roughly 120-day growing season.

Marijuana purchases have boomed in Washington. Legal marijuana sales were
almost $1 billion in fiscal year 2016 and were on track to be about $1.5
billion in fiscal 2017, which ended June 30. As of February, the state had
1,121 licensed producers, 1,106 licensed processors and 470 licensed
retailers.

What Washington's marijuana users are getting is above average in potency.
According to the report, nationwide marijuana products average a THC
percentage of 13.2 percent, while Washington state’s THC average percentage
was 21.6 percent.

Teen use of marijuana has grown slightly. Depending on how the numbers are
crunched, marijuana use among Washington’s young adults and teens ranges from
2 to 5 percent above the national average. Five percent of Washingtonians age
18-to-25 use pot daily, slightly above the national average, the report said.

According to a survey cited in the report, 17 percent of high school seniors
and 9 percent of high school sophomores have driven within three hours after
smoking pot.

Adult use before driving is still a fuzzy picture. A third of Washingtonians
arrested for driving under the influence had THC, the active ingredient in
marijuana, in their bloodstreams. One study found an increase in dead drivers
with THC above the legal limit in their blood from 7.8 percent in 2013 to 12.8
percent in 2014.

“Adults still don’t understand the effects of impairment behind the wheel of a
car,” Freng said.

McKean said that one major unknown is marijuana-laced edibles, which
authorities believe have become a significant factor in THC-impaired drivers,
but has not been studied enough to provide solid numbers.

Another major unknown, McKean and Freng said, is how marijuana consumption
contributes to emergency room and hospital cases because the state hospitals
have not agreed to release that data to government officials.

_This story has been updated since it first appeared to add a link to the
report._

Source: https://crosscut.com/2017/10/washingtons-pot-industry-not-
environmentally-friendly-marijuana October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Economic,Environment,Latest News,Youth :

Christina Brezing, MD, Frances Levin, MD

It is vital that physicians—particularly psychiatrists who are on the
frontlines with patients who struggle with cannabis use—are able to identify
and characterize cannabis use disorders; provide education; and offer
effective, evidence-based treatments. This article provides a brief overview
of each of these topics by walking through clinical decision-making with a
case vignette that touches on common experiences in treating a patient with
cannabis use disorder.

A separate and important issue is screening for emerging drugs of abuse,
including synthetic “marijuana” products such as K2 and spice. Although these
products are chemically distinct from the psychoactive compounds in the
traditional cannabis plant, some cannabis users have tried synthetic
“marijuana” products because of their gross physical similarity to cannabis
plant matter.

_**CASE VIGNETTE**_

_Mr. M is a 43-year-old legal clerk who has been working in the same office
for 20 years. He presents as a referral from his primary care physician to
your outpatient psychiatry office for an initial evaluation regarding
“managing some mid-life issues.” He states that while he likes his job, it is
the only job he has had since graduating college and he finds the work boring,
noting that most of his co-workers have gone on to law school or more senior
positions in the firm. When asked what factors have prevented him from seeking
different career opportunities, he states that he would “fail a drug test.”
Upon further inquiry, Mr. M says he has been smoking 2 or 3 “joints” or taking
a few hits off of his “vaping pen” of cannabis daily for many years, for which
he spends approximately $70 to $100 a week._

_He first used cannabis in college and initially only smoked “a couple hits”
in social settings. Over time, he has needed more cannabis to “take the edge
off” and has strong cravings to use daily. He reports liking how cannabis
decreases his anxiety and helps him fall asleep, although he thinks the
cannabis sometimes makes him “paranoid,” which results in his avoidance of
family and friends._

_More recently, he identifies conflict and regular arguments with his wife
over his cannabis use—she feels it prevents him from being present with his
family and is a financial burden. He admits missing an important awards
ceremony for her work and sporting events for his children, for which he had
to “come up with excuses,” but the truth is that he ended up smoking more than
he had intended and lost track of the time._

_Mr. M reports multiple previous unsuccessful attempts to reduce his use and 2
days when he stopped completely, which resulted in “terrible dreams,” poor
sleep, sweating, no appetite, anxiety, irritability, and strong cravings for
cannabis. Resumption of his cannabis use relieved these symptoms. He denies
tobacco or other drug use, including use of synthetic marijuana products such
as K2 or spice, and reports having a glass of wine or champagne once or twice
a year for special occasions._

**The diagnosis**

In the transition from DSM IV-TR to DSM-5, cannabis use disorders, along with
all substance use disorders, have been redefined in line with characterizing a
spectrum of pathology and impairment. The criteria to qualify for a cannabis
use disorder remain the same except for the following:

**1.** The criterion for recurrent legal problems has been removed.

**2.** A new criterion for craving or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis
has been added, and the terms abuse and dependence were eliminated.

To qualify as having a cannabis use disorder, a threshold of 2 criteria must
be met. Severity of the disorder is characterized as “mild” if 2 or 3 criteria
are met, “moderate” if 4 or 5 criteria are met, and “severe” if 6 or more
criteria are met. Mr. M demonstrates 3 symptoms of impaired control: using
longer than intended, unsuccessful efforts to cut back, and craving; 3
symptoms of social impairment: failure to fulfill home obligations, persistent
problems with his wife, and reduced pursuit of occupational opportunities; 1
symptom of risky use: continued use despite paranoia; and 2 symptoms of
pharmacological properties: tolerance and withdrawal. As such, he meets 9
criteria, which qualify him for a diagnosis of severe cannabis use disorder.

You summarize Mr. M’s 9 symptoms and counsel him about severe cannabis use
disorder. He becomes upset and states that he was not aware one could develop
an “addiction” to cannabis. He expresses an interest in treatment and asks
what options are available.

**Treatment options**

Psychotherapeutic treatments, including motivational enhancement treatment
(MET), cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and contingency management (CM),
have demonstrated effectiveness in reducing frequency and quantity of cannabis
use, but abstinence rates remain modest and decline after treatment.
Generally, MET is effective at engaging individuals who are ambivalent about
treatment; CM can lead to longer periods of abstinence during treatment by
incentivizing abstinence; and CBT can work to enhance abstinence following
treatment (preventing relapse). Longer duration of psychotherapy is associated
with better outcomes. However, access to evidence-based psychotherapy is
frequently limited, and poor adherence to evidence-based psychotherapy is
common.

In conjunction with psychotherapy, medication strategies should be considered.
Because there are no FDA-approved pharmacological agents for cannabis use
disorder, patients should understand during the informed consent process that
all pharmacotherapies used to treat this disorder are off-label. A number of
clinical trials provide evidence for the off-label use of medications in the
treatment of cannabis use disorder. The current strategies for the off-label
treatment of cannabis use disorder target withdrawal symptoms, aim to initiate
abstinence and prevent relapse or reduce use depending on the patient’s goals,
and treat psychiatric comorbidity and symptoms that may be driving cannabis
use. Here we focus on the evidence supporting these key strategies.

**Targeting withdrawal and craving**

Cannabis withdrawal is defined by DSM-5 as having 3 or more of the following
signs and symptoms that develop after the cessation of prolonged cannabis use:

• Irritability, anger, or aggression

• Nervousness or anxiety

• Sleep difficulty

• Decreased appetite or weight loss

• Restlessness

• Depressed mood

• At least one of the following physical symptoms that causes discomfort:
abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or headache

Withdrawal symptoms may be present within the first 24 hours. Overall, they
peak within the first week and persist up to 1 month following the last use of
cannabis. In the case of Mr. M, insomnia, poor appetite, and irritability as
well as sweating are identified, which meet DSM-5 criteria for cannabis
withdrawal during the 2 days he abstained from use. He also identifies strong
craving and vivid dreams, which are additional withdrawal symptoms included on
marijuana withdrawal checklists in research studies, although not included in
DSM-5 criteria. These and other symptoms should be considered in clinical
treatment.

Medication treatment studies for cannabis withdrawal have hypothesized that if
withdrawal symptoms can be reduced or alleviated during cessation from regular
cannabis use, people will be less likely to resume cannabis use and will have
better treatment outcomes. Studies have shown that dronabinol and nabilone
improved multiple withdrawal symptoms, including craving; and quetiapine,
zolpidem, and mirtazapine help with withdrawal-induced sleep disturbances.

Combining dronabinol and lofexidine (an alpha-2 agonist) was superior to
placebo in reducing craving, withdrawal, and self-administration during
abstinence in a laboratory model. However, in a subsequent treatment trial,
the combined medication treatment was not superior to placebo in reducing
cannabis use or promoting abstinence.

Six double-blind placebo-controlled pharmacotherapy trials in adults with
cannabis use disorder have looked at withdrawal as an outcome. Of these
studies, only dronabinol, bupropion, and gabapentin reduced withdrawal
symptoms. In addition to reducing withdrawal symptoms, nabiximols/Sativex (a
combination tetrahydrocannabinol [THC] and cannabidiol nasal spray not
available in the US) increased retention (while actively on the medication in
an inpatient setting) but did not reduce outpatient cannabis use at follow-up.

All of the medications available for prescription in the US can be monitored
reliably with urine drug screening to assess for illicit cannabis use except
dronabinol, which will result in a positive screen for cannabis. When using
urine drug screening, remember that for heavy cannabis users the qualitative
urine drug screen can be positive for cannabis up to a month following
cessation. When selecting a medication, take into account the cost of the
medication, particularly since insurance will likely not cover THC agonists
such as dronabinol for this indication, and possible misuse or diversion of
scheduled substances (eg, dronabinol, nabilone). In addition, monitoring for
reductions in substance use and withdrawal symptoms is key.

**Abstinence initiation and relapse prevention**

Other clinical trials have looked at medications to promote abstinence by
reducing stress-induced relapse, craving (not as a component of withdrawal),
and the reinforcing aspects of cannabis. Of these trials, the following
results show potential promise with positive findings: gabapentin reduced
quantitative THC urine levels and improved cognitive functioning (in addition
to decreasing withdrawal), and buspirone led to more negative urine drug
screens for cannabis (although the difference was not significant compared
with placebo). However, in a follow-up larger study, no differences were seen
compared with placebo and women had worse cannabis use outcomes on buspirone.

_N_ -acetylcysteine resulted in twice the odds of a negative urine drug screen
in young adults and adolescents (although there was no difference between
adolescent groups in self-report of cannabis use).Gray and colleagues reported
that no differences were seen between _N_ -acetylcysteine and placebo (results
of the trial are soon to be published). Topiramate resulted in significantly
decreased grams of cannabis used but no difference in percent days used or
proportion of positive urine drug screens.16 In a recent small clinical trial,
reductions in cannabis use were seen with oxytocin in combination with
MET.17Studies with nabilone and long-term naltrexone administration reduced
relapse and cannabis self-administration and subjective effects, respectively,
which suggests promising avenues yet to be explored by clinical trials.

**Treatment of psychiatric comorbidity**

Other studies have looked at the effects of treating common comorbid
psychiatric disorders in adults with cannabis use disorder, postulating that
if the psychiatric disorder is treated, the individual may be more likely to
abstain or reduce his or her cannabis use. For example, if a person is less
depressed, he may better engage in CBT for relapse prevention.

Fluoxetine for depression and cannabis use disorder in adolescents decreased
cannabis use and depression, although there was no difference compared with
placebo. A trial of venlafaxine for adults with depression and cannabis use
disorder demonstrated less abstinence with greater withdrawal-like symptoms
compared with placebo. These findings suggest that this antidepressant might
not be beneficial for treatment-seeking individuals with cannabis use disorder
and may actually negatively affect outcomes.

_**CASE VIGNETTE CONT 'D**_

_After discussing and presenting the different psychotherapy and medication
treatment options to Mr. M, you and he decide to start CBT to help with
abstinence initiation. In addition, you prescribe 20 mg of dronabinol up to 2
times daily in combination with 50 mg of naltrexone daily, to help globally
target Mr. M’s withdrawal symptoms and prevent relapse once abstinence is
achieved. However, a few days later, Mr. M calls to say that his insurance
will not cover the prescription for dronabinol and he cannot afford the high
cost. Given his main concerns of cannabis withdrawal symptoms, you select
gabapentin up to 400 mg 3 times daily and continue weekly individual CBT._

_Mr. M calls back several days later and reports that he has made some
improvements in reducing the frequency of his cannabis use, which he
attributes to the medication, but he thinks he needs additional assistance.
After reviewing the treatment options again, he gives informed consent to
start 1200 mg of N-acetylcysteine twice daily. After 10 weeks of this
medication, his urine screens are negative._

_You continue to provide relapse prevention CBT. He reports to you that his
anxiety and insomnia are almost resolved, and you suspect that withdrawal was
the cause of these symptoms. He reports significant improvement in his
relationship with his family and recently received a promotion at work for
“going above and beyond” on a project he was given the lead._

_Over the next 6 months, he has 2 relapses that in functional analysis with
you are determined to be triggered by unsolicited contact from his former drug
dealer. Together, you develop a plan to block any further contact from the
drug dealer. After several months, both the gabapentin and N-acetylcysteine
are tapered and discontinued. Mr. M continues to see you for biweekly therapy
sessions with random drug screens every 4 to 6 weeks._

**Conclusion**

Based on the available evidence, gabapentin, THC agonists, naltrexone, and
possibly _N_ -acetylcysteine show the greatest promise in the off-label
treatment of cannabis use disorders. System considerations, such as medication
cost, need to be factored into the decision-making as well as combination
medication and psychotherapy approaches, which—as demonstrated in the case of
Mr. M—may ultimately work best. Until further research elucidates the standard
of medication practices for cannabis use disorder, the best off-label
medication strategy should target any co-occurring disorders as well as any
identified problematic symptoms related to cannabis use and cessation of use.
When available, referral for evidence-based psychotherapy should be made.

Source: https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/special-reports/treatment-cannabis-
use-disorders-case-report/ August 2017

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Latest News,Treatment and
Addiction :

Häuser W1, Fitzcharles MA, Radbruch L, Petzke F.

### Abstract

#### BACKGROUND:

There are conflicting interpretations of the evidence regarding the efficacy,
tolerability, and safety of cannabinoids in pain management and palliative
medicine.

#### METHODS:

We conducted a systematic review (SR) of systematic reviews of randomized
controlled trials (RCT) and prospective long-term observational studies of the
use of cannabinoids in pain management and palliative medicine. Pertinent
publications from January 2009 to January 2017 were retrieved by a selective
search in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, the Database of
Abstracts of Reviews of Effects, and Medline. The methodological quality of
the SRs was assessed with the AMSTAR instrument, and the clinical relevance of
quantitative data syntheses was assessed according to the standards of the
Cochrane Collaboration.

#### RESULTS:

Of the 750 publications identified, 11 SRs met the inclusion criteria; 3 of
them were of high and 8 of moderate methodological quality. 2 prospective
long-term observational studies with medical cannabis and 1 with
tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol spray (THC/CBD spray) were also analyzed.
There is limited evidence for a benefit of THC/CBD spray in the treatment of
neuropathic pain. There is inadequate evidence for any benefit of cannabinoids
(dronabinol, nabilone, medical cannabis, or THC/CBD spray) to treat cancer
pain, pain of rheumatic or gastrointestinal origin, or anorexia in cancer or
AIDS. Treatment with cannabis-based medicines is associated with central
nervous and psychiatric side effects.

#### CONCLUSION:

The public perception of the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of cannabis-
based medicines in pain management and palliative medicine conflicts with the
findings of systematic reviews and prospective observational studies conducted
according to the standards of evidence-based medicine.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29017688 September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Latest News,Marijuana and Medicine :

In a backpacking hostel during a stag weekend 10 years ago, I fell asleep on a
top bunk next to an open window. Of course, that now strikes me as a stupid
thing to have done, but at the time I didn’t give it a thought. I was on a
weekend away, not a health-and-safety awareness course. At some point during
the night, I tried getting out of the bunk, but instead of turning left and
using the ladder, I turned right and hopped straight out of the window.

I fell 24ft on to concrete. From a survival point of view, I was lucky to land
on my feet. The downside was that some rather important sections of my legs
did not come out of it so well.

My left heel was crushed, while over on the right, my tibia and fibula – the
two long bones in the lower leg – detached from their couplings and shattered.
The next few weeks involved operations, plates, screws and quite unimaginable
levels of agony. At one point, I felt a kind of blinding calm, as though the
pain had gone all the way up the scale and rung a bell at the top.

While those pain levels have never returned, over the years there have been
generous helpings of it; my legs didn’t take too kindly to being smashed up
and bolted back together, and they seem to enjoy reminding me of this. After
trying many different ways of managing the pain, eight months ago I started
taking cannabidiol, or CBD for short – a non-psychoactive compound found in
both hemp and cannabis plants.

The effect on the pain has been profound. It comes as an oil that I put under
my tongue whenever pain moves from a dull niggle to the kind that is difficult
to ignore.

CBD influences the release and uptake of neurotransmitters such as dopamine
and serotonin, leading to many potential therapeutic uses. Crucially, it does
not contain any THC, the psychoactive component of cannabis; in other words,
CBD does not get you high. Since last year, it has been legal to buy in the
UK, after the government’s Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(MHPR) approved its use as a medicine under licence.

CBD oil has since been prescribed to an 11-year-old British boy suffering from
epilepsy, in what is believed to be the first instance of a cannabis-
derivative being prescribed on the NHS.

Last month, a cancer patient diagnosed four years ago with an incurable brain
tumour and given just six months to live, ascribed her incredible recovery to
turning to cannabis oil as a last resort.

While research into the medical benefits of CBD oil is in its infancy, it is
certainly encouraging. Recent reports suggest it could be a more useful anti-
inflammatory than ibuprofen.

“There has been some early scientific evidence that CBD can help with
inflammation,” says Dr Henry Fisher, of drug policy thinktank Volteface. **“**
There is also a lot of anecdotal evidence that it helps people who do contact
sports, because of the tendency to get inflamed joints. Taking other anti-
inflammatories like ibuprofen on a long-term basis – as many sportspeople do –
is not a good idea because of potential damage to your liver.”

It also has distinct advantages over opioid medicines, says Dr Fisher. “With
CBD, there is no evidence of any long-term negative impact, and no likelihood
of addiction. And, of course, there are no known cases of anybody overdosing
on CBD.”

The comparison to prescription medicine is particularly pertinent for me. For
several months after my accident, I took Oxycontin, a common opioid
painkiller. It was very useful at that time because it gave me a warm fuzzy
feeling, making everything seem okay. But after a while, I started waking up
feeling groggy and crushed. So I decided to stop, and the withdrawal was
horrendous. It was several days of indescribable misery, so bad that it made
the pain from the injuries feel like a slightly over-zealous massage.

# _Q &A | CBD and cannabis oil_

# _What is CBD oil?_

_Cannabidiol, or CBD, is one of more than 80 cannabinoids, natural compounds
found in the marijuana plant. It is extracted from the plant via steam
distillation and usually bottled with a dropper. Unlike THC,
Tetrahydrocannabinol – the most abundant cannabinoid, CBD does not have an
intoxicating effect._

# _What does it do?_

_Most studies of CBD’s effects are preclinical, but is been shown useful in
treating social anxiety and lessening episodes of schizophrenia. The most
complete research on the benefits of CBD is on treatment of childhood epilepsy
and a plant-based medicine, Epidiolex is scheduled for FDA approval in the
US._

_Another cannabis-based drug, Sativex, is already approved to relive the pain
of muscle spasms in people suffering from multiple sclerosis. Clinical trials
are also underway to test this category of drugs for cancer pain, glaucoma and
appetite loss in people with HIV or AIDS._

# _Is it legal?_

_A low-concentration CBD oil is available in UK pharmacies as a health
supplement. Campaigners have called for a high-concentration oil to also be
made legal here. In December 2016, the government’s Medicines and Healthcare
Products Regulatory Agency ruled that “products containing CBD used for
medical purposes are a medicine”._

_Read more from the NHS onCannabis: the facts_

Getting off that heavy-duty medicine was key for my recovery. Because this
kind of medication saps your energy, and the one thing you need to fight back
to full fitness is energy. I spent months in a wheelchair, then on crutches,
then finally I was able to start taking slow, painful steps on legs that had
forgotten what their purpose was. I had always done a lot of sport,
particularly martial arts – I got my black belt in kickboxing when I was 21
and spent some time working as an instructor. This training helped after the
accident because I was in reasonably good shape – mashed bones notwithstanding
– and I was used to pushing myself.

I never thought I would be able to fight again. So I just concentrated on
simply being able to take care of myself. I also just got on with my life,
somehow managing to acquire a lovely wife, daughter and son along the way.
Then three years ago, I decided that the legs must have healed as much as they
were ever going to, and I started doing martial arts again.

Rather than risk going back to kickboxing, I took up Brazilian jiu-jitsu, a
grappling discipline where you subdue your opponent with chokes and joint-
locks. If you watch beginners, it can look a bit like playground wrestling,
but done properly it is graceful but deadly. I started off gently, but after a
while I put the injuries behind me and trained as hard as ever. It was through
the men I train with that I found out about CBD.

Everyone that uses it tells a similar story: they sleep better and feel less
pain. While there are ongoing trials for CBD as a treatment for everything
from multiple sclerosis to Parkinson’s disease, all I know is that for me it
can make the difference being sitting on the sofa and being able to go
training. I can now lift and carry my children without wincing.

CBD does not make the pain go away completely, but that is okay – a bit of
pain is necessary, an alarm system to warn of imminent peril. But once the
message has been received, it is nice to be able to turn the volume down a
little bit.

Source: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/health-fitness/body/could-cannabis-
extract-cbd-replace-ibuprofen-painkiller/ October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Latest News,Marijuana and
Medicine,Social Affairs :

Abstract

BACKGROUND:

Violence is a major concern and is prevalent across several mental disorders.
The use of substances has been associated with an exacerbation of psychiatric
symptoms as well as with violence. Compared to other substances such as
alcohol and cocaine, existing literature on the cannabis-violence relationship
has been more limited, with most studies being conducted in the general
population, and has shown controversial results. Evidence has suggested a
stronger relationship when examining the effects of the persistency of
cannabis use on future violent behaviors. Though, while cannabis use is highly
prevalent amid psychiatric patients, far less literature on the subject has
been conducted in this population. Hence, the present prospective study aims
to investigate the persistency of cannabis use in psychiatric patients.

METHOD:

The sample comprised of 1,136 recently discharged psychiatric patients
provided by the MacArthur Risk Assessment Study. A multi-wave (five-
assessment) follow-up design was employed to allow temporal sequencing between
substance use and violent behaviors. Generalized estimating equations (GEE)
were used to examine the effect of persistency of cannabis use on violence,
while controlling for potential confounding factors. Potential bidirectional
association was also investigated using the same statistical approach.

RESULTS:

Our results suggest a unidirectional association between cannabis use and
violence. GEE model revealed that the continuity of cannabis use across more
than one time wave was associated with increased risks of future violent
behavior. Patients who reported having used cannabis at each follow-up periods
were 2.44 times more likely to display violent behaviors (OR = 2.44, 95% CI:
1.06-5.63, _p_ < 0.05).

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/fpsyt-08-00176-g001-300x193.jpg)

Odds ratios for violent behaviors associated with substance use across each
time points. _x_ -Axis represent the number of follow-up periods with
substance-use, _y_ -axis represent the Odds Ratios; Reference is no use of
substance across time points; Odds Ratios are controlled for the effects of
time, other substances used at each time point, age, age at first
hospitalization, sex, ethnicity, Schizophrenia-Spectrum disorders
(presence/absence), affective disorders (presence/absence), psychopathic
traits (PCL), impulsivity (BIS-11) ( __p_ < 0.05; **_p_ < 0.01; **_ _p_ <
0.001; N.S., Not statistically significant).

CONCLUSION:

These findings are particularly relevant as they suggest that the longer
individuals report having used cannabis after a psychiatric discharge, the
more likely they are of being violent in the following time waves. These
results add to our understanding of the negative consequences of chronic
cannabis use amid psychiatric patients.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28983261 September 2017

Filed under: Brain and
Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Latest News :

Marijuana advocates can no longer claim legalization is devoid of catastrophic
results.

The Denver Post, which has embraced legalization, analyzed federal and state
data and found results so alarming they published a story last week under the
headline "Traffic fatalities linked to marijuana are up sharply in Colorado.
Is legalization to blame?"

Of course legalization is to blame. It ushered in a commercial industry that
encourages consumption and produces an ever-increasing supply of pot
substantially more potent than most users could find when the drug was
illegal.

The post reported a 40 percent increase in the number of all drivers, impaired
or otherwise, involved in fatal crashes in Colorado between 2013 and 2016.
That's why the Colorado State Patrol posts fatality numbers on electronic
signs over the highways.

"Increasingly potent levels of marijuana were found in positive-testing
drivers who died in crashes in Front Range counties, according to coroner data
since 2013 compiled by The Denver Post. Nearly a dozen in 2016 had levels five
times the amount allowed by law, and one was at 22 times the limit. Levels
were not as elevated in earlier years," The Post explained.

All drivers in marijuana-related crashes who survived last year tested at
levels indicating use within a few hours of the tests.

"The trends coincide with the legalization of recreational marijuana in
Colorado that began with adult use in late 2012, followed by sales in 2014,"
the Post reported.

Greenwood Village Police Chief John Jackson called the trend "a huge public
safety problem."

Colorado Springs Councilwoman Jill Gaebler, who wants a ballot measure to
legalize recreational pot in Colorado Springs, tried to downplay the Post's
findings in a comment on Gazette.com.

"…33% or 196 of all traffic deaths that occurred in 2016 were alcohol-
related," Gaebler wrote. "Yet you don't hear anyone trying to ban alcohol,
even though it is far more dangerous, in every regard, to marijuana."

The Post found fatal crashes involving drivers under the influence of alcohol
grew 17 percent from 2013 to 2015. Figures for 2016 were not available.
Drivers testing positive for pot during that span grew by 145 percent, and
"prevalence of testing drivers for marijuana use did not change appreciably,
federal fatal-crash data show."

The entire country has an enormous problem with alcohol-related traffic
fatalities. Given our inability to resolve that problem, it is arguably
idiotic to throw another intoxicating substance into the mix with the
predictable result of more traffic deaths caused by impairment.

El Paso County Commissioner Longinos Gonzalez gets it, as shown by a comment
he left on gazette.com

"Recent data indicates crime is up statewide, homelessness up, black and
Hispanic teen arrests related to MJ are up a lot," Gonzalez wrote. "A Denver
TV station did a month long data poll last year at a hospital in Pueblo (which
has fully embraced MJ) and found that nearly half of all newborns were testing
positive for THC in their bloodstream at birth. Who would want to expand MJ
sales in face of such data? And the big supporters of rec MJ can only fall
back on their 'go-to' arguments, that 'it isn't as bad as alcohol' or that the
negative articles are biased or not credible."

Another Gazette commenter expressed surprise at Gaebler's "casual attitude"
about the Denver Post's findings.

"…We already have alcohol, let's add MJ, and why stop there — people want and
need their opioids. Let there be drinking, toking, shooting up in our
beautiful city," the commenter wrote.

One must stretch the imagination to deny that legalized pot has caused a
substantial increase in Colorado highway deaths. Pot is an intoxicating,
psychoactive drug. That means it cannot be harmless. Expect emerging and
troubling data to make this fact increasingly clear.

Source: https://gazette.com/editorial-surprise-legal-pot-correlates-with-
rising-traffic-deaths/article_2b2d9b27-4ab5-56fa-a042-028433ae1044.html August
2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drugs and Accidents,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Latest News,Social Affairs :

Cannabis labelled ‘Sativa’ and ‘Indica’ may not come from distinct ancestries,
according to a study performed by the Canadian Dalhousie University in
cooperation with Bedrocan on the genetic differences between the two types and
their hybrids. In this study 149 Dutch cannabis samples were analysed,
correlating the genotype and chemotype to their reported ancestries. Indica-
and Sativa-labelled samples were not as distinct as sub species would be
assumed to be, but the genetic differences between them do correlate to their
terpene profile (resin fragrance), which could explain the variation between
them. Results of this new study have been presented on the International
Association for Cannabis as Medicine (IACM) congress in Cologne, Germany,
September 2017.

There is perhaps no debate in the world of cannabis more contentious than that
of species. The genus **Cannabis sativa** L. is the only official species, but
the terms ‘Sativa’, ‘Indica’ and ‘Hybrid’ have been widely adopted by cannabis
breeders and cultivators as a way of advertising their product’s effects,
aromas or purported pedigree. The degree to which these labels correspond to
their actual ancestry, however, is dubious, and how this informal
classification scheme relates to genotype or phenotype has been largely
unexplored.

In the study an analysis of 149 cannabis samples was performed, correlating
the genotype and chemotype (based on terpene and cannabinoid content of the
flowers) to their reported ‘ancestry’. The researchers then compared the
reported labels to new scales they generated by reclassifying the samples
based on their genetic and chemical similarity.

The Indica/Sativa classification of Dutch cannabis does not correspond to
distinct genetic lineages or to cannabinoid type, but there are genetic and
chemical similarities that explain the variation between the groups.
Deconvolution of the Indica-Sativa ancestry showed a strong relationship
between the chemical and genetic profiles, suggesting that the distinct
terpene contents of the types are heritable and important to the identity of
these two groups. It is likely that strains are classified by their distinct
aromas, and not their lineages, which has a direct impact on the genetics of
this crop.

Bedrocan, worldwide producer of standardised medicinal cannabis, is already
working on the terpene profiles that are associated with the current Bedrocan
products. Hugo Maassen, head of the phyto engineering department at Bedrocan:
“This study shows that the Indica/Sativa differences could be largely based on
terpene content, which instead of the current Indica/Sativa labelling might
require for more insight in the terpene profiles related to the Bedrocan
products available for patient use.”

The terpene profiles of the Bedrocan products are expected to be announced in
the near future.

Source: https://bedrocan.com/no-clear-evidence/ September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Latest News,Marijuana and Medicine :

LASSEN NATIONAL FOREST (KPIX 5) — It’s a massive crime scene, deep in Lassen
National Forest. Through dense ground cover and brutal terrain, federal agents
are making their way to what might well qualify as an industrial-scale farm
operation. There are living quarters, kitchens, bathrooms and trash dumps, all
for the purpose of growing a lot of marijuana.

“This one was in excess of 15,000 plants,” said Stephen Frick, a special agent
with the U.S. Forest Service. A plant count that high requires multiple plots,
across several miles, fed by an endless network of pipes, all drawing right
from natural waterways. Scattered over all of this, there are the chemicals.
In every single direction there are fertilizers, poisons, and insecticides.

“The malathion, the pesticides a lot of the over the counter stuff, those are
pretty common,” says Frick. “The uncommon ones are the restricted use
pesticides like the carbofuran.”

Carbofuran, an extremely toxic pesticide that’s effectively banned in the
United States, is fast becoming a favorite tool among Mexican drug cartels,
which operate in California’s public lands. Once a rare find, it’s now turning
up at 60 to 70 percent of illegal grow sites, often mixed in bottles that have
no warning label.

“A mountain biker, a hiker, a child, could be hiking out here, find this and
think it’s a full bottle of vitamin water,” explained Dr. Mourad Gabriel,
field agent for the Integral Ecology Research Center. “An eighth of a teaspoon
would kill a 300 pound black bear.”

That is exactly what is happening. Illegal growers aren’t just using
carbofuran as an insecticide, they’re using it to kill anything that wanders
into their grow sites. “If you want to kill wildlife, then let’s just go ahead
and place poison in food, and have wildlife come,” says Gabriel.

Bears that were photographed walking into camps contaminated with carbofuran
were subsequently found dead, and agents are now routinely finding dead
wildlife near grows, with testing often proving carbofuran to be the killer.

The situation has become so toxic that hazardous materials experts are now
involved, trying to figure out just how long carbofuran hangs around in our
soil and water. “In order to determine how lethal this is,” said Gabriel. “Or
how harmful this potentially may be for wildlife and humans.”

The forest service is now approaching 400 illegal grow sites this year in
California. There is no specific designated budget for mitigating the sites,
which are increasingly complicated and expensive to resolve with the presence
of carbofuran.

The grows are an old problem, but the illegal, pink poison is just a new,
lethal twist. The toll it’s taking on our public lands is just starting to
surface. As Dr. Gabriel sees it, “the impact to wildlife and fisheries, this
is a whole completely new frontier.”

Source: https://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2017/09/28/toxic-chemicals-
california-wildlife-marijuana-grows/ September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Latest News :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Toxicants-In-

Dabbing-300x164.jpg)

As the legalization of marijuana continues to spread among various states
within the U.S., researchers, and physicians are trying to fully grasp the
potential health hazards of the recreational use of the drug. Since marijuana
can be consumed through a variety of methods—e.g. _,_ eating, smoking, or
vaporizing—it is important to understand if and how drug delivery methods
affect users. With that in mind, a recent study from investigators at Portland
State University found benzene and other potentially cancer-causing chemicals
in the vapor produced by butane hash oil, a cannabis extract.

Findings from the new study—published recently in _ACS Omega_ in an article
entitled “Toxicant Formation in Dabbing: The Terpene Story”—raises health
concerns about dabbing, or vaporizing hash oil—a practice that is growing in
popularity, especially in states that have legalized medical or recreational
marijuana. Dabbing is already controversial. The practice consists of placing
a small amount of cannabis extract (a dab) on a heated surface and inhaling
the resulting vapor. The practice has raised concerns because it produces
extremely elevated levels of cannabinoids—the active ingredients in marijuana.

“Given the widespread legalization of marijuana in the U.S., it is imperative
to study the full toxicology of its consumption to guide future policy,” noted
senior study author Robert Strongin, Ph.D., professor of organic chemistry at
Portland State University. “The results of these studies clearly indicate that
dabbing, while considered a form of vaporization, may, in fact, deliver
significant amounts of toxins.”

Dr. Strongin and his colleagues analyzed the chemical profile of terpenes—the
fragrant oils in marijuana and other plants—by vaporizing them in much the
same way as a user would vaporize hash oil.

“The practice of 'dabbing' with butane hash oil has emerged with great
popularity in states that have legalized cannabis,” the authors wrote.
“Despite their growing popularity, the degradation product profiles of these
new products have not been extensively investigated.”

The authors continued, stating that the current study focused on the
“chemistry of myrcene and other common terpenes found in cannabis extracts.
Methacrolein, benzene, and several other products of concern to human health
were formed under the conditions that simulated real-world dabbing. The
terpene degradation products observed are consistent with those reported in
the atmospheric chemistry literature.”

Many of the terpenes that the researchers discovered in the vaporized hash oil
are also used in e-cigarette liquids. Moreover, previous experiments by Dr.
Strongin and his colleagues found similar toxic chemicals in e-cigarette vapor
when the devices were used at high-temperature settings. The dabbing
experiments in the current study produced benzene—a known carcinogen—at levels
many times higher than the ambient air, the researchers noted. It also
produced high levels of methacrolein, a chemical similar to acrolein, another
carcinogen.

“The results of these studies clearly indicate that dabbing, although
considered a form of vaporization, may, in fact, deliver significant amounts
of toxic degradation products,” the authors concluded. “The difficulty users
find in controlling the nail temperature put[s] users at risk of exposing
themselves to not only methacrolein but also benzene. Additionally, the heavy
focus on terpenes as additives seen as of late in the cannabis industry is of
great concern due to the oxidative liability of these compounds when heated.
This research also has significant implications for flavored e-cigarette
products due to the extensive use of terpenes as flavorings.”

Source: https://www.genengnews.com/topics/translational-medicine/cancer-
causing-compounds-found-in-cannabis-oil/ September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health :

#### Illegal pot growers have turned public lands into industrial agricultural

sites. And the ecosystem effects are alarming.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/high-

consequences-1-300x231.jpg)

Research ecologist Mourad Gabriel is one of the few scientists studying
illegal grow sites in California’s overrun national forests.

On a hot August morning, Mourad Gabriel steps out of his pickup onto the
gravel road that winds up the side of Rattlesnake Peak. Dark-bearded and
muscular, the research ecologist sports a uniform of blue work clothes, sturdy
boots and a floppy, Army-style camo hat. He straps on a pistol. “Just to let
you know,” Gabriel says, sensitive to the impression the gun makes, “it’s
public land, so I open-carry.”

Another 100-degree day is promised. Gabriel and his four field assistants are
headed to work in California’s Plumas National Forest, a few hours’ drive from
Lake Tahoe, at the northern terminus of the Sierra Nevada. The U.S. Forest
Service (USFS) has enlisted Gabriel to assess the scars from rampant marijuana
cultivation. Today’s field site: an illegal marijuana plantation known as the
Rattlesnake Grow.

Gabriel doesn’t take chances because he’s been threatened personally. In 2014,
someone poisoned his family dog with a pesticide that’s used at the grow
sites. The intruder crept onto Gabriel’s property at night and scattered
poisoned meat in his backyard. And last year during raids on plots elsewhere
in California, two police dogs were stabbed by men fleeing the scene.

So whenever Gabriel enters a cultivation site with his research team — even
one that’s been abandoned, as this one is — he always goes in first.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/high-

consequences-2-300x231.jpg)

U.S. Forest Service officers collect coils of plastic pipe used to divert
water from springs to marijuana plants at an illegal grow site on public
lands.

Most of the U.S. domestic marijuana supply is raised in California. Some pot
is grown on private property for legal use by medical marijuana patients.
These operations can be monitored, and with Californians having legalized
recreational pot last November, the regulation is sure to tighten. But in
popular pot-growing regions like Humboldt, Mendocino and Trinity counties —
closer to the Northern California coast in the so-called Emerald Triangle —
environmental regulation has been slow to catch up. Commandeering streams,
growers divert the water into high-tech greenhouses, to the detriment of the
aquatic life lower in the drainage, including the threatened coho salmon.
Biologists for the California Department of Fish and Wildlife have shown that
thirsty marijuana plantations can dry up water sources.

What’s more, the rest of the crop — the vast black-market portion — is planted
on public or tribal lands by people who ignore the environmental consequences
of their activity. When they’re captured, some turn out to be Mexican drug
cartel workers, and others come from smaller independent groups. U.S.
authorities concede that the great majority of these “trespass grows” are
never detected. Even after sites are cleared, the shadowy growers may reclaim
them the next year.

“The public doesn’t understand the industrial scale of this,” says wildlife
biologist Craig Thompson.

But if you have heard anything about streams being polluted or animals and
birds being poisoned by marijuana production, it’s almost certainly because of
Gabriel, a soft-spoken scientist who now and then unleashes his inner Rambo.

**After the Bust**

Gabriel takes his team of biologists over the top of an open, sunbaked ridge
and down the other side of the mountain. Immediately, burnt and toppled trunks
of pine and fir and head-high tangles of wild lilac shrubs impede the way.

Ten years ago, the Moonlight Fire destroyed 65,000 acres of forest in the
Plumas. The marijuana growers stole into the broad footprint left by the blaze
in dozens of places. In the section we’re hiking, they cut trails and cleared
a series of plots on a steep slope above a ravine. Then the trespassers dug
out three springs and diverted their flow into half-inch black plastic piping,
which they threaded through the cover of vegetation to their network of plots
below. The waterlines emptied into tarp-sealed pits that could store hundreds
of gallons of water. Having started thousands of marijuana seedlings in
plastic cups, the growers planted them among the shrubs throughout the plots.
Each bright green plant was irrigated via drip lines, some triggered by a
battery-powered timer. Although the mountainside faced north and east, light
was no problem. Where it used to be blocked by trees, the strong California
sun now slathered the crop.

Gabriel was with the rangers and deputies when they busted the site in 2015
and uprooted more than 16,000 plants. Judging by bags left around the site
back then, he suspects at least 4,000 pounds of potent fertilizer were used.
He also recorded several empty containers of a concentrated organophosphate
insecticide — a lethal nerve poison that’s toxic to wildlife.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/trouble-in-pot-

country2-503x1024.jpeg)

Gabriel’s non-profit organization, Integral Ecology Research Center (IERC),
was hired to assess the damage to water sources, soils and sensitive plants
and animals. They also inventoried toxic waste, piping, camp materials and
trash. Now it’s up to the Forest Service to decide how to repair the damage.
Gabriel, enlisting local volunteer groups, will assist with the cleanup, too.
The service he offers is soup-to-nuts.

“He’s passionate. He’s a character,” says USFS’s Thompson, who collaborates
with Gabriel on research. “He has continued to shine a light on the issue,
though it’s still under the radar.”

**Connecting the Dots**

The first glimmer of impacts to wildlife came to Gabriel from fishers. A
fisher — a type of weasel whose body is about the size of a housecat’s — is a
denizen of deep woods. It has a wide face and long furry tail, and it can run
up and down trees like the woodrats and squirrels it hunts. Fishers have never
been overly abundant in the mountains of the West Coast, and their population
plummeted after a century of logging and trapping. In the 21st century,
biologists have tried to restore the Pacific fisher by reintroducing young
animals and tracking them with radio collars. But the fishers’ expansion has
been slow because they have been dying more rapidly than researchers expected.

Gabriel joined the fisher reintroduction project in 2009. At the time, he was
completing his Ph.D. at the University of California, Davis. He credits an
uncle for interesting him in the outdoors. The uncle was also a taxidermist;
hence, young Mourad developed an interest in the interiors of animals. In high
school, a vocational aptitude test suggested that he could be a game warden,
park ranger or biologist. As an undergrad at Humboldt State University, he
took courses supporting all three. Gabriel met his future wife, Greta Wengert,
while they were both studying wildlife biology in college. After marrying, the
two founded IERC in Blue Lake, Calif.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/high-

consequences-3-300x231.jpg)

Craig Thompson, a USFS biologist, drops a water filter into a High Sierra
stream near a marijuana grow site. Tests have turned up pesticides and
fertilizers coming from the grows.

Gabriel’s work for the fisher reintroduction project was lab-based. He
conducted necropsies of dead animals that Thompson’s field researchers had
picked up. Examining a fisher carcass one day, Gabriel found that its organs
had turned to mush. The fisher had been poisoned by a compound that blocks
clotting and prompts unchecked internal bleeding, a so-called second-
generation anticoagulant rodenticide (AR). D-CON, commonly used against mice
and rats, is a familiar brand of AR. But how did a forest carnivore absorb a
pesticide typically used around farms and houses?

Gabriel remembers wondering if this one fisher was an outlier. “So we went
back to the archival liver tissue,” he says. When he inspected frozen
specimens and collected additional carcasses from colleagues, Gabriel
discovered that rodenticides had, if not killed, then at least tainted 85
percent of expired fishers.

“It took a while to connect the dots,” he says. From his field experience he
was familiar with illegal pot grows, which had plagued the backcountry terrain
for 20 years or more. “We’ve all run into it. We’ve been trained,” Gabriel
says. “If you come upon a site, you do a 180 and walk away.”

**Mounds of Pesticide**

Law enforcement officers from different agencies asked him if rat bait from
grow sites might be the culprit. It made sense; woodrats and squirrels would
gnaw the marijuana plants.

If the growers scattered AR and the rodents were sapped by internal bleeding,
they would become easier prey for fishers. Bioaccumulation, as the process is
known, would pass the rodenticide up the food chain, where concentrations
increase. The fishers in turn might have become prey for bobcats and mountain
lions.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/high-

consequences-4-300x231.jpg)

Wildlife biologist Greta Wengert (above) carefully handles a suspected
neurotoxin found in a Gatorade bottle.

Raids turned up empty bags of AR and sometimes even mounds of the pesticide.
To test their hypothesis about bioaccumulation, Thompson, Gabriel and state
toxicologists tried to tie the levels of AR exposure in fishers with the
locations of grow sites found by law enforcement.

The researchers analyzed 46 female fishers that died over five years. Their
results showed that the animals that lived longest had the least rodenticide
in their livers and the fewest grow sites within their home ranges.
Conversely, animals with roughly four or more grow sites nearby died the
soonest.

In a 2015 paper in the journal PLoS ONE, the researchers stepped back and
examined all the causes of mortality in their collared fishers. Predation
accounted for 70 percent of the deaths, disease an additional 16 percent, and
poisoning, which until lately hadn’t been considered, 10 percent. The new
factor might explain why fishers weren’t rebounding as fast as they might be.
Pesticides might be the major factor in most of the deaths, even those not
poisoned outright. “You can argue that the animals that are affected by
rodenticide are weaker,” Thompson says, “and that the predation rates on them,
as I suspect, are higher.”

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/animals-at-

risk-504x1024.jpg)

**Sounding the Siren**

In a parallel case, rodenticides have worked their way into some of
California’s northern spotted owls, a threatened species. The owls also eat
tainted rodents near grow sites. The evidence here is less direct, and depends
on analyses of a competing species, the barred owl. For decades, barred owls
from Eastern states have been invading the breeding territory of the northern
spotted owl in California, Oregon and Washington. Already on the ropes from
the logging of old-growth woods, spotted owls were disappearing, and so
biologists tried a desperate measure: shooting barred owls.

At the Hoopa Valley Indian Reservation in Humboldt County, forestry biologist
Mark Higley, who has helped with the fisher project, also takes part in the
culling of barred owls. Higley says he and his staff have had run-ins with
illegal growers, “taking risks we shouldn’t take.” After Gabriel’s
breakthrough with AR and fishers, Higley sent him liver samples of more than
155 barred owls that had been collected at Hoopa. More than half were positive
for rodenticide. Gabriel also had positive results from two spotted owls that
were hit by cars. Since spotted owls are endangered, Higley and Gabriel use
barred owls as a surrogate — their dietary habits are similar — and infer that
up to half of spotted owls near grow sites might be exposed to rodenticide.
Now Thompson is looking for other examples of bioaccumulation. He’s testing
mountain lion scat for rat poison and pesticides.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/high-

consequences-5-300x231.jpg)

Researchers examine a Pacific fisher carcass (left). The animals are
struggling in part due to rat poison used by illegal marijuana growers

Only Gabriel, Thompson and a handful of other biologists are investigating the
ecological effects of toxins from the trespass grows. The funding
opportunities are scant, and the fieldwork is hard and potentially dangerous.
Although growers who have been surprised at their plots haven’t hurt anybody —
usually they just run away — sometimes shots are fired.Adding to the
frustration, many important questions are nearly impossible to answer. At what
levels do agricultural chemicals and rodenticide interfere with fishers’
reproduction? How much poison does it take to weaken an animal enough that it
becomes easy prey for fishers and bobcats? Wildlife toxicology’s pitfall is
that lab experiments can’t be performed on wild populations, let alone on
sensitive and rare species.

“You have these snippets of field-based evidence,” Gabriel says. “Maybe you
could do a liver biopsy on a captive fisher, but it would cause bleeding, and
if an anticoagulant were affecting the animal, [the test] could push it over
the edge. I’ll leave that work to someone else.” His role, as he sees it, is
sounding the siren. “The problem is getting worse,” he says, frustrated.
“Who’s documenting this?”

**The Unseen Grower**

Amid the lilac shrubs, pungent with pollen, marks of the Rattlesnake Grow
aren’t immediately obvious. Soon the paths and waterlines of the growers can
be spotted, and then other items like fertilizer bags, heavy-duty plant shears
and matted clothing, which the wilderness is swallowing up.

As Gabriel investigates a stream angling toward the ravine, the four techs
split into pairs. Two young field biologists push off in opposite directions,
using their GPS trackers to measure plot boundaries.

The slanting plot, still faintly pocked with bare spots where the marijuana
grew, is about 50 yards wide and 100 yards long. They crisscross the area with
cans of spray paint, tagging empty bags of chemicals as they count them. When
they take a break, they huddle in the shade thrown by the charred trees.

Walking on a diagonal line across the site, the biologists collect at least
five samples of soil in plastic bags. The samples will be tested for various
pesticides. Five samples for 1,500 square yards might not seem like much.
“That’s all we can get funded for,” says Gabriel, who has rejoined the others.
He reports spotting boot tracks. “I think they came back and took the tent and
sleeping bags, probably sometime last spring.”

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/high-

consequences-6-300x231.jpg)

Growers often squat in primitive camps on public lands, leaving their mess to
the Forest Service after harvest time.

Of all the species Gabriel studies, the human animal — the unseen grower — is
the hardest for him to figure out. “I’ve visited between 100 and 200 grow
sites,” he says, leaning against a fallen tree. He wonders, why would growers
plant so high up on this ridge with limited water?

“We saw a different approach last week,” Gabriel says. “Just 60 meters from a
paved road they were growing 5,000 plants. Maybe one criminal organization
decides, ‘We’ll go deep in the wilderness,’ and another, ‘Let’s put it by the
road.’ You’re trading easier access for greater risk.”

He sees each site as a piece of a larger puzzle. If researchers could better
understand the selection process, it might be possible to better handle these
trespass grows.

Later, over a beer in his motel room, Gabriel says, “There’s no way I can do
this physically 15 or 20 years from now.” He figures he’s got eight more
years, after which he hopes the field will be big enough for him to exit and
do something else, leaving others to carry on the research. He’s trying to
spur other biologists to study illegal grows too. He wants to track the long-
term effects of the chemicals by incorporating specialties like hydrology and
soil science.

“As an ecologist, I love working on species of conservation concern,” he says.
“I want a stable population of fishers and owls. I want basic research and
applied management. Not science just for the sake of science but science as a
solution.”

_[This article originally appeared in print as "High Consequences."]_

Source: http://discovermagazine.com/2017/sept/high-consequences September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Social Affairs :

Donald Trump’s choice of his VP running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, worries
the marijuana lobby. They question Pence’s belief that marijuana is a gateway
drug and its abuse is a crime, deserving penalty. While the marijuana lobby
claims “Marijuana is a happy, healthy, wonderful plant and everybody should
have the right to grow it, just as they grow dandelions,” the National
Insitute of Drugs (NIDA) findings support Pence’s objection to the
legalization of marijuana. According to NIDA’s latest available data, “illicit
drug use in the U.S. is on the rise, and “More than half of new illicit drug
users begin with marijuana.” Yet, marijuana legalization has become an issue
in the U.S. presidential elections.

How did we get here?

The impresario who staged and pushed to legally dope of the American people is
the billionaire financier George Soros. He found a kindred spirit in President
Obama who got this dog and pony show on the road. The chosen vehicle was
Obama-Care. And the first indication for this came on August 5, 2009, with the
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)’s little noticed tender for the
production and distribution of large quantities of marijuana cigarettes, for
purposes other than for research, clocked under the DEA control and supposedly
in compliance with FDA regulations

According to pro-legalization activist Sean Williams, “President Obama has
suggested that the best way to get the attention of Congress is to legalize
marijuana in as many states as possible at the state level. If a majority of
states approve marijuana measures, and public opinion continues to swell in
favor of cannabis, Congress may have no choice but to consider
decriminalization — or legalize the substance.” Not surprisingly, recently
there have been widely-reported leaks from the DEA that the agency anticipates
making “medical” marijuana” legal in all 50 states, even though this requires
FDA approval.

Until the early 1990s, the voices to legalize drugs in the United States were
not in sync. This changed with Soros’ first foray into U.S. domestic politics
in 1992-1993. Soros, who made his fortune by bidding on instability, is known
to say, “If I spend enough, I make it right.” While other billionaires give to
the arts, higher education and medicine to better the quality of the lives of
their fellow men, Soros chose to “right” illegal drug use, under the guise of
a social reformer. “The war on drugs is doing more harm to our society than
drug abuse itself.” Due to the widespread social and political opposition to
illegal drug use, he chose to begin his efforts to “right” the situation, with
a popular getaway drug, marijuana – a brain and mind altering drug that
creates life-long dependency. To make his decision more palatable, the
ultimate opportunistic Soros, declared marijuana is a “compassionate drug,”
and for more than two decades poured tens of millions of dollars into
campaigns to first legalize the use of “medical marijuana,” and more recently
to decriminalize the use of “recreational” marijuana.

Pretending to support an “open society,” Soros, uses his philanthropy to
“change” or more accurately deconstruct the moral values and attitudes of the
Western world, and particularly of the American people. He claims to support
humanitarianism, equality and individual and political freedom, what Karl
Pooper, the Austrian-born British philosopher argued were necessary for what
he considered an “open society.”nominal contact with Popper while studying at
the London School of Economics. Although Popper met with Soros once or twice
while Soros was a student at the London School of Economics, Soros failed to
make much of an impression on the old philosopher. According to Michael T.
Kaufman’s 2003 unauthorized biography of the billionaire, when Soros contacted
Popper in 1982 to let him know about how he’d been naming funds, foundations,
and various other entities after the concepts enshrined in the The Open
Society, Popper wrote back: “Let me first thank you for not having forgotten
me. I am afraid I forgot you completely; even your name created at first only
the most minute resonance. But I made some effort, and now, I think, I just
remember you, though I do not think I should recognize you.”

Not surprisingly, Soros’ “open society” Institute and foundations are not
about promoting any of Popper’s ideas. Certainly not freedom. Instead, by
working diligently to legalize drugs, **Soros advances the greatest slavery
ever–drug addiction**. This sits well with his rejection of the notion of
ordered liberty, in favor of a progressive ideology of rights and
entitlements.

On February 7, 1996, I opined in The Wall Street Journal that **Soros’s
“sponsorship unified the movement to legalize drugs and gave it the
respectability and credibility it lacked**.” I suggested “ **unchallenged,
Soros would change the political landscape of America.”** It took two decades
and lots of money to achieve what he set out to get. For him, legalizing
marijuana was a necessary stepping-stone to advancing drug policies in the
U.S. and elsewhere toward legalizing the use of all drugs.

Money is but one of the many possible speculations on Soros’s motivation to
legalize drugs. If asked, he’ll respond with gibberish that makes no sense.
However, the revenues from the illegal drug trade are enormous. There are no
other commodities on the market that yield such high and fast a return. Since
2014, legally listed marijuana producing and distributing companies will be
generating huge revenues. Soros seems to believe that state-controlled drug
distribution will best serve to increase dependency on the state.

The overwhelming evidence on the short and long term harm caused by marijuana
to the user and to society should have stopped any attempt to legalize the
drug. However, the vast amounts of money spent on influencing the public and
the politicians generated the desired social acceptance of the “compassionate
drug,” marijuana.

In November 1996, Soros’ efforts succeeded **** in California, making it the
first state to legalize “medical marijuana.”

Recreational use of marijuana has nothing to do with medical marijuana. As
with other drugs, the development of marijuana/cannabis as medicine has to
follow modern medical rules – advancing with clinical trials with specific
compounds, looking for side effects and interactions with other drugs, etc.

But when last November, the DEA Acting Administrator Chuck Rosenberg said, “We
can have an intellectually honest debate about whether or not we want to
legalize something that is bad and dangerous, but don’t call it medicine.
That’s a joke.” Rosenberg opined there was a need for “legitimate research
into the efficacy of marijuana for its constituent parts as a medicine. But I
think the notion that state legislatures just decree it so is ludicrous.” The
pro-drug lobby called for his dismissal.

Among the ill-effects of marijuana use (whether obtained legally or not) is
memory loss, as proven by researchers at Northwestern University. The study
also found “evidence of brain alterations … significant deterioration in the
thalamus, a key structure for learning, memory, and communications between
brain regions.” If this were not enough, the study concluded, “chronic
marijuana use could “memory-related structure [to] shrivel and
collapse.s..[and] boosts the underlying process driving schizophrenia.”

This study as many others documented the devastating long-term harm caused by
marijuana use. Another National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) study found
that “marijuana smoke contains 50% to 70% more carcinogenic hydrocarbons than
does tobacco smoke … which further increases the lungs’ exposure to
carcinogenic smoke.” Moreover, “marijuana users have a 4.8-fold increase in
the risk of heart attack in the first hour after smoking the drug. … This risk
may be greater in aging populations or those with cardiac vulnerabilities.”

Other studies documented “distorted perceptions, impaired coordination,
difficulty in thinking and problem-solving, and problems with learning and
memory.” As a result, someone who smokes marijuana every day may be
functioning at a suboptimal intellectual level all of the time.” In
conclusion: “Research clearly demonstrates that marijuana has the potential to
cause problems in daily life or make a person’s existing problems worse. In
fact, heavy marijuana users generally report lower life satisfaction, poorer
mental and physical health, relationship problems, and less academic and
career success compared to their peers who came from similar backgrounds. For
example, marijuana use is associated with a higher likelihood of dropping out
from school. Several studies also associate workers’ marijuana smoking with
increased absences, tardiness, accidents, workers’ compensation claims, and
job turnover.” NIDA’s latest survey from 2013, show that drug users are
exacting more than $700 billion annually in costs related to crime, lost work
productivity and health care. Add yo this the cost of newly hooked Americans
on social welfare, including food stamps, Obamacare, public housing, free cell
phones, and other entitlements.

Moving to relax Federal oversight on marijuana use, a Department of Justice
memo on August 29, 2013, clarified the government’s prosecutorial priorities
and stated that the federal government would rely on state and local law
enforcement to “address marijuana activity through enforcement of their own
narcotics laws.”

When Colorado legalized the use of “recreational” use of marijuana, on January
1, 2014, the TSA announced it stopped deploying detection dogs in the state’s
airports, even though these dogs are trained to also detect other illegal
drugs, explosives, blood, contraband electronics, stashed currency, and more.
Similar measures will take place once marijuana is legalized, exposing
American airport to terrorist attacks.

The Obama’s endorsed and Soros’ funded Democratic presidential candidate
Hillary Clinton, has promised to “defend and build on the progress…made under
President Obama,” including his and the billionaire’s efforts to legalize
marijuana. American voters should keep this in mind when voting for their next
President.

Source: http://acdemocracy.org/the-obama-soro-legacy/ July 2016

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Political
Sector,USA :

This week, the Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area released
its fifth annual report titled _The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The
Impact, Volume 5._ We devote today's issue of _The Marijuana Report_
newsletter to highlighting a few of many significant findings the report
contains.

National Families in Action has remade some of the graphs and charts in the
report to emphasize key findings. This one shows how many of Colorado's
students were expelled, referred to law enforcement, or suspended in the
2015-2016 school year. This is the first year the Colorado Department of
Education differentiated marijuana violations from all drug violations, and
this year's report will serve as a baseline to determine whether marijuana
violations increase, decrease, or stay fundamentally the same.

Read _The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The Impact, Volume 5here.
This information appears on page 41 (PDF page 49)._  
The new report explains that although Colorado created its own Healthy Kids
Survey, the combination of a poor response rate and the fact that several
major counties with large populations had low or no participation rendered the
2015 survey's results invalid. For a discussion of this see page 33 (PDF page
41). Volume 5 relies on the National Survey on Drug Use and Health to compare
Colorado marijuana use with the national average for ages 12-17, 18-25, and 26
& older over a ten year period (2005-2006 to 2014-2015).

See data for these graphs on the following pages:

  * Ages 12-17, page 36 (PDF page 44)
  * Ages 18-25, page 56 (PDF page 64)
  * Ages 26 & Older, page 60 (PDF page 68)

Read _The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The Impact, Volume 5here._  
The report notes that data from the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, 2006-2011 Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS), and
2012-2016 Colorado Department of Transportation show that drivers testing
positive for marijuana who were killed in traffic crashes rose from 6 percent
of all traffic deaths in 2006 to 20 percent eleven years later. Marijuana-
related traffic deaths jumped from 9 percent to 14 percent once the state
commercialized marijuana for medical use and from 11 percent to 20 percent
after legalizing the drug for recreational use.

Read more about marijuana-related driving in Colorado here starting on page 13
(PDF page 21).  
In 2016, more than one-third of Colorado drivers who tested positive for
marijuana had marijuana only in their systems. Another 36 percent had
marijuana and alcohol. Slightly over one-fifth tested positive for marijuana
and other drugs but no alcohol, while 7 percent had marijuana, alcohol, and
other drugs on board.

See page 18 (PDF page 26) in _The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The
Impact, Volume 5here_ _._  
The Marijuana Report is a weekly e-newsletter published by National Families
in Action in partnership with SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana).

Visit National Families in Action's website, The Marijuana Report.Org, to
learn more about the marijuana story unfolding across the nation.

Our mission is to protect children from addictive drugs  
by shining light on the science that underlies their effects.

Addictive drugs harm children, families, and communities.  
Legalizing them creates commercial industries that make drugs more available,  
increase use, and expand harms.

Science shows that addiction begins in childhood.  
It is a pediatric disease that is preventable.

We work to prevent the emergence of commercial  
addictive drug industries that will target children.

We support FDA approved medicines.

We support the assessment, treatment, and/or social and educational services  
for users and low-level dealers as alternatives to incarceration.

**About SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana)**

SAM is a nonpartisan alliance of lawmakers, scientists and other concerned
citizens who want to move beyond simplistic discussions of "incarceration
versus legalization" when discussing marijuana use and instead focus on
practical changes in marijuana policy that neither demonizes users nor
legalizes the drug. SAM supports a treatment, health-first marijuana policy.
SAM has four main goals:

  * To inform public policy with the science of today's marijuana.
  * To reduce the unintended consequences of current marijuana policies, such as lifelong stigma due to arrest.
  * To prevent the establishment of "Big Marijuana" - and a 21st-Century tobacco industry that would market marijuana to children.
  * To promote research of marijuana's medical properties and produce, non-smoked, non-psychoactive pharmacy-attainable medications.

Source: Email from National Families in Action http://nationalfamilies.org
October 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Drugs and Accidents,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts,USA :

Tom P. Freeman, Peggy van der Pol, Wil Kuijpers, Jeroen Wisselink,Ravi K. Das,
Sander Rigter, Margriet van Laar, Paul Griffiths, Wendy Swift,Raymond Niesink
and Michael T. Lynskey

ABSTRACT:

Background

The number of people entering specialist drug treatment for cannabis problems
has increased considerably in recent years. The reasons for this are unclear,
but rising cannabis potency could be a contributing factor. Methods Cannabis
potency data were obtained from an ongoing monitoring programme in the
Netherlands. We analysed concentrations of δ -9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
from the most popular variety of domestic herbal cannabis sold in each retail
outlet (2000–2015). Mixed effects linear regression models examined time-
dependent associations between THC and first-time cannabis admissions to
specialist drug treatment. Candidate time lags were 0–10 years, based on
normative European drug treatment data.

Results

THC increased from a mean (95% CI) of 8.62 (7.97–9.27) to 20.38 (19.09–21.67)
from 2000 to 2004 and then decreased to 15.31 (14.24–16.38) in 2015. First-
time cannabis admissions (per 100 000 inhabitants) rose from 7.08 to 26.36
from 2000 to 2010, and then decreased to 19.82 in 2015. THC was positively
associated with treatment entry at lags of 0–9 years, with the strongest
association at 5 years, b = 0.370 (0.317–0.424), p < 0.0001. After adjusting
for age, sex and non-cannabis drug treatment admissions, these positive
associations were attenuated but remained statistically significant at lags of
5–7 years and were again strongest at 5 years, b = 0.082 (0.052–0.111), p <
0.0001.

Conclusions

In this 16-year observational study, we found positive time-dependent
associations between changes in cannabis potency and first-time cannabis
admissions to drug treatment. These associations are biologically plausible,
but their strength after adjustment suggests that other factors are also
important.

Source:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322830280_Changes_in_cannabis_potency_and_first-
time_admissions_to_drug_treatment_A_16-year_study_in_the_Netherlands January
2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Treatment and Addiction :

Science Spotlight

New research suggests that marijuana users may be more likely than nonusers to
misuse prescription opioids and develop prescription opioid use disorder. The
study was conducted by researchers at the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA), part of the National Institutes of Health, and Columbia University.

The investigators analyzed data from the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions, which interviewed more than 43,000 American
adults in 2001-2002, and followed up with more than 34,000 of them in
2004-2005. The analysis indicated that respondents who reported past-year
marijuana use in their initial interview had 2.2 times higher odds than
nonusers of meeting DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for prescription opioid use
disorder by the follow-up. They also had 2.6 times greater odds of initiating
prescription opioid misuse, defined as using a drug without a prescription, in
higher doses, for longer periods, or for other reasons than prescribed.

A number of recent papers suggest that marijuana may reduce prescription
opioid addiction and overdoses by providing an alternate or complementary pain
relief option. That suggestion is partly based on comparisons of aggregate
data from states that legalized marijuana for medical use vs. those that
didn’t. In contrast, the current study focuses on individual marijuana users
vs. nonusers and their trajectories with regard to opioid misuse and
disorders. These findings are in-line with previous research demonstrating
that people who use marijuana are more likely than non-users to use other
drugs and develop problems with drug use.

For a copy of the paper, go to – "Cannabis Use and Risk of Prescription Opioid
Use Disorder in the United States" – published in the _American Journal of
Psychiatry_.

For information about the link between marijuana use and increased risk of
addiction to other drugs, go to: www.drugabuse.gov/news-events/latest-
science/marijuana-use-raises-sud-risk.

For more information, contact the NIDA press office at media@nida.nih.gov or
301-443-6245. Follow NIDA on Twitter and Facebook.

Source: https://www.drugabuse.gov/news-events/news-releases/2017/09/marijuana-
use-associated-increased-risk-prescription-opioid-misuse-use-disorders
September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Heroin/Methadone :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/dfaf.jpg)

Drug Free America Foundation launched its new _Marijuana and the Workplace
Tool Kit_ this morning at a forum co-sponsored with Drug Free Manatee and the
Manatee Chamber of Commerce at Pier 22 in Bradenton FL. The forum featured a
presentation by Amy Ronshausen, Deputy Director of Drug Free America
Foundation who unveiled the _Tool Kit_ and discussed how the implementation of
Florida’s medical marijuana program will affect employers in the state. The
forum also included a panel discussion with a group of experts that includes
healthcare and labor attorneys, insurance representatives and a state
legislator.

As marijuana legalization efforts gain traction around the country as it has
in Florida, the business community needs to be prepared. “Employers must be
diligent and proactive in understanding how the use of marijuana affects
individuals, the overall influence to their business, and the level of
financial liability that is acceptable,” according to Calvina Fay, executive
director of Drug Free America Foundation. “It is critical that an evaluation
be completed based upon legitimate science, the safety-sensitive nature of the
business, and risk analysis as opposed to perception and emotion,” she said.

Employees that use marijuana and other drugs negatively impact the bottom line
for employers due to increased workplace accidents, injuries, and other
effects, increasing the cost of doing business. “The safety of all employees,
vendors, customers, other drivers, pedestrians, or generally anyone
encountering an employee while driving under the influence of pot could be
impacted,” said Fay.

The tangled web of conflicting and diverse laws and statutes being drawn
across the country varies from state to state, from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction, making this issue very confusing for all concerned. No two
states’ marijuana laws are identical, further complicating the issue.

Identifying and defining liability related to marijuana use is perhaps one of
the most evolving areas of risk management and insurance practices. “From the
viewpoint of an insurer, the conflicting laws are particularly troublesome for
insuring a business against unexpected loss with no clear best practice and
can potentially impact workers compensation claims and well as health, life
and other business insurance coverage and premiums,” Fay suggested.

A smart approach for employers is to implement workplace practices that
encourage safe, healthy lifestyles, and discourage behaviors that are counter-
productive, both from a personal and a business standpoint. “In this
tumultuous time of conflicting laws, confusion, and change, employers are
encouraged to stay the course where a drug-free workplace is concerned,”
continued Fay. “We also encourage employers to remain consistent and fair in
the application of workplace rules and procedures and to regularly review
their program in relation to applicable laws, regulations and statutes that
may have changed,” she concluded.

The _Marijuana and the Workplace Tool Kit_ can be found at
http://www.ndwa.org/resources/marijuana-in-the-workplace-toolkit/

Source: Email from Drug Free American Foundation

September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

Thomas M. Nappe, DO* and Christopher O. Hoyte, MD

## Abstract

Since marijuana legalization, pediatric exposures to cannabis have increased.
To date, pediatric deaths from cannabis exposure have not been reported. The
authors report an 11-month-old male who, following cannabis exposure,
presented with central nervous system depression after seizure, and progressed
to cardiac arrest and died. Myocarditis was diagnosed post-mortem and cannabis
exposure was confirmed.

Given the temporal relationship of these two rare occurrences – cannabis
exposure and sudden death secondary to myocarditis in an 11-month-old – as
well as histological consistency with drug-induced myocarditis without
confirmed alternate causes, and prior reported cases of cannabis-associated
myocarditis, a possible relationship exists between cannabis exposure in this
child and myocarditis leading to death. In areas where marijuana is
commercially available or decriminalized, the authors urge clinicians to
preventively counsel parents and to include cannabis exposure in the
differential diagnosis of patients presenting with myocarditis.

## INTRODUCTION

Since marijuana legalization, pediatric exposures to cannabis have increased,
resulting in increased pediatric emergency department (ED) visits. Neurologic
toxicity is most common after pediatric exposure; however, gastrointestinal
and cardiopulmonary toxicity are reported. According to a retrospective review
of 986 pediatric cannabis ingestions from 2005 to 2011, pediatric exposure has
been specifically linked to a multitude of symptoms including, but not limited
to, drowsiness, lethargy, irritability, seizures, nausea and vomiting,
respiratory depression, bradycardia and hypotension.Prognosis is often
reassuring.

Specific myocardial complications related to cannabis toxicity that are well
documented in adolescence through older adulthood include acute coronary
syndrome, cardiomyopathy, myocarditis, pericarditis, dysrhythmias and cardiac
arrest. To date, there are no reported pediatric deaths from myocarditis after
confirmed, recent cannabis exposure. The authors report an 11-month-old male
who, following cannabis exposure, presented in cardiac arrest after seizure
and died. Myocarditis was diagnosed post-mortem and cannabis exposure was
confirmed. Analyses of serum cannabis metabolites, post-mortem infectious
testing, cardiac histopathology, as well as clinical course, support a
potential link between the cannabis exposure and myocarditis that would
justify preventive parental counseling and consideration of urine drug
screening in this reported setting.

CASE REPORT

An 11-month-old male with no known past medical history presented to the ED
with central nervous system (CNS) depression and then went into cardiac
arrest. The patient was lethargic for two hours after awakening that morning
and then had a seizure. During the prior 24–48 hours, he was irritable with
decreased activity and was later retching. He was noted to be healthy before
developing these symptoms. Upon arrival in the ED, he was unresponsive with no
gag reflex. Vital signs were temperature 36.1° Celsius, heart rate 156 beats
per minute, respiratory rate 8 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 80% on
room air.

Physical exam revealed a well-nourished, 20.5 lb., 11-month-old male, with
normal development, no trauma, normal oropharynx, normal tympanic membranes,
no lymphadenopathy, tachycardia, clear lungs, normal abdomen and Glasgow Coma
Scale rating of 4. He was intubated for significant CNS depression and
required no medications for induction or paralysis. Post-intubation chest
radiograph is shown in Image 2. He subsequently became bradycardic with a
heart rate in the 40s with a wide complex rhythm. Initial electrocardiogram
(ECG) was performed and is shown in Image 1.

He then became pulseless, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated.
Laboratory analysis revealed sodium 136 mmol/L, potassium 7.7 mmol/L, chloride
115 mmol/L, bicarbonate 8.0 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 24 mg/dL, creatinine
0.9 mg/dL, and glucose 175 mg/dL Venous blood gas pH was 6.77. An ECG was
repeated (Image 3). He received intravenous fluid resuscitation, sodium
bicarbonate infusion, calcium chloride, insulin, glucose, ceftriaxone and four
doses of epinephrine. Resuscitation continued for approximately one hour but
the patient ultimately died.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/image1-300x159.jpg)

Initial electrocardiogram demonstrating wide-complex tachycardia.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/image2-272x300.jpg)

Post-intubation chest radiograph. Measurement indicates distance of
endotracheal tube tip above carina.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/image3-300x159.jpg)

Repeat electrocardiogram showing disorganized rhythm, peri-arrest.

Further laboratory findings in the ED included a complete blood count (CBC)
with differential, liver function tests (LFTs), one blood culture and
toxicology screen. CBC demonstrated white blood cell count 13.8 K/mcL with
absolute neutrophil count of 2.5 K/mcL and absolute lymphocyte count of 10.7
K/mcL, hemoglobin 10.0 gm/dL, hematocrit 34.7%, and platelet count 321 K/mcL.
LFTs showed total bilirubin 0.6 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 77 IU/L, and
alanine transferase 97 IU/U. A single blood culture from the right external
jugular vein revealed aerobic gram-positive rods that were reported two days
later as Bacillus species (not _Bacillus anthracis_ ). Toxicology screening
revealed urine enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay positive for
tetrahydrocannabinol-carboxylic acid (THC-COOH) and undetectable serum
acetaminophen and salicylate concentrations. Route and timing of exposure to
cannabis were unknown.

Autopsy revealed a non-dilated heart with normal coronary arteries.
Microscopic examination showed a severe, diffuse, primarily lymphocytic
myocarditis, with a mixed cellular infiltrate in some areas consisting of
histiocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. Myocyte necrosis was also
observed. There was no evidence of concomitant bacterial or viral infection
based on post-mortem cultures obtained from cardiac and peripheral blood, lung
pleura, nasopharynx and cerebrospinal fluid. Post-mortem cardiac blood
analysis confirmed the presence of Δ-9-carboxy-tetrahydrocannabinol
(Δ-9-carboxy-THC) at a concentration of 7.8 ng/mL. Additional history
disclosed an unstable motel-living situation and parental admission of drug
possession, including cannabis.

## DISCUSSION

As of this writing, this is the first reported pediatric death associated with
cannabis exposure. Given the existing relationship between cannabis and
cardiovascular (CV) toxicity, as well as the temporal progression of events,
post-mortem analysis, and previously reported cases of cannabis-induced
myocarditis, the authors propose a relationship between cannabis exposure in
this patient and myocarditis, leading to cardiac arrest and ultimately death.
This occurrence should justify consideration of urine drug screening for
cannabis in pediatric patients presenting with myocarditis of unknown etiology
in areas where cannabis is widely used. In addition, parents should be
counseled regarding measures to prevent such exposures.

The progressive clinical presentation of this patient during the prior 24–48
hours, including symptoms of somnolence, lethargy, irritability, nausea,
seizure and respiratory depression are consistent with previously documented,
known complications of recent cannabis exposure in the pediatric population.
It is well known that common CV effects of cannabis exposure include
tachycardia and decreased vascular resistance with acute use and bradycardia
in more chronic use. These effects are believed to be multifactorial, and
evidence suggests that cannabinoid effect on the autonomic nervous system,
peripheral vasculature, cardiac microvasculature, and myocardial tissue and
Purkinje fibers are all likely contributory. The pathogenesis of myocarditis
is not fully understood. In general, myocarditis results from direct damage to
myocytes from an offending agent such as a virus, or in this case, potentially
a toxin. The resulting cellular injury leads to a local inflammatory response.
Destruction of cardiac tissue may result in myocyte necrosis and
arrhythmogenic activity, or cellular remodeling in chronic myocarditis.

Autopsy findings in this patient were consistent with noninfectious
myocarditis as a cause of death. The histological findings of myocyte necrosis
with mature lymphocytic mixed cellular infiltrate are consistent with drug-
induced, toxic myocarditis.The presence of THC metabolites in the patient’s
urine and serum, most likely secondary to ingestion, is the only uncovered
risk factor in the etiology for his myocarditis. This is highly unlikely
attributable to passive exposure.

It is difficult to extrapolate a specific time of cannabis ingestion given the
unknown dose of THC, the individual variability of metabolism and excretion,
as well as the lack of data on this topic in the pediatric population and
post-mortem redistribution (PMR) kinetics. However, the THC metabolite
detected in the patient’s blood, Δ-9-carboxy-THC, is known to peak in less
than six hours and be detectable for at least a day, while the parent
compound, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is expected to rapidly metabolize and
distribute much more quickly, being potentially undetectable six hours after
exposure in an infrequent user.

The parent compound was below threshold for detection in this patient’s blood.
In addition, if cannabis ingestion occurred the day of presentation, it would
have been more likely that THC would have been detected with its metabolite
after PMR. Given this information, the authors deduce that cannabis
consumption occurred within the recent two to six days, assuming this was a
single, acute high-potency ingestion. This time frame would overlap with the
patient’s symptomatology and allow time for the development of myocarditis,
thus supporting cannabis as the etiology.

The link between cannabis use and myocarditis has been documented in multiple
teenagers and young adults. In 2008 Leontiadis reported a 16-year-old with
severe heart failure requiring a left ventricular assist device, associated
with biopsy-diagnosed myocarditis.The authors attributed the heart failure to
cannabis use of unknown chronicity. In 2014 Rodríguez-Castro reported a
29-year-old male who had two episodes of myopericarditis several months
apart.Each episode occurred within two days of smoking cannabis.In 2016,
Tournebize reported a 15-year-old male diagnosed with myocarditis, clinically
and by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, after initiating regular cannabis
use eight months earlier. There were no other causes for myocarditis,
including infectious, uncovered by these authors, and no adulterants were
identified in these patients’ consumed marijuana.Unlike our patient, all three
of these previously reported patients recovered.

In the age of legalized marijuana, children are at increased risk of exposure,
mainly through ingestion of food products, or “edibles.”These products are
attractive in appearance and have very high concentrations of THC, which can
make small exposures exceptionally more toxic in small children.

Limitations in this report include the case study design, the limitations on
interpreting an exact time, dose and route of cannabis exposure, the
specificity of histopathology being used to classify etiology of myocarditis,
and inconsistent blood culture results. The inconsistency in blood culture
results also raises concern of a contributing bacterial etiology in the
development of myocarditis, lending to the possibility that cannabis may have
potentially induced the fatal symptomatology in an already-developing silent
myocarditis. However, due to high contaminant rates associated with bacillus
species and negative subsequent blood cultures, the authors believe this was
more likely a contaminant. In addition, the patient had no source of infection
on exam or recent history and was afebrile without leukocytosis. All of his
subsequent cultures from multiple sites were negative.

## CONCLUSION

Of all the previously reported cases of cannabis-induced myocarditis, patients
were previously healthy and no evidence was found for other etiologies. All of
the prior reported cases were associated with full recovery. In this reported
case, however, the patient died after myocarditis-associated cardiac arrest.
Given two rare occurrences with a clear temporal relationship – the recent
exposure to cannabis and the myocarditis-associated cardiac arrest – we
believe there exists a plausible relationship that justifies further research
into cannabis-associated cardiotoxicity and related practice adjustments. In
states where cannabis is legalized, it is important that physicians not only
counsel parents on preventing exposure to cannabis, but to also consider
cannabis toxicity in unexplained pediatric myocarditis and cardiac deaths as a
basis for urine drug screening in this setting.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5965161/ March 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health,Medicine and
Marijuana :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/libby-277x300-150x150.jpg)Libby Stuyt, MD spoke at the
Oregon Health Forum with Drs. Esther Choo of OHSU and Katrina Hedberg who is
the State Epidemiologist and State Health Officer at the Oregon Public Health
Division, and at the Oregon Law & Mental Health Conference in June 2017 on the
unintended consequences of marijuana legalization.

Stuyt is an addictions psychiatrist and medical director at the Colorado State
Hospital in Pueblo. She is also the president of the National Acupuncture
Detoxification Association.

Stuyt has a unique and expert view on the effect of increased marijuana
availability and use, and as Colorado is about two years ahead of Oregon in
the process of legalization and regulation of marijuana.

Stuyt’s data is from information collected by the state of Colorado and from
her experience as a clinician and researcher.

  * Colorado has had significant increase in marijuana use by people under 18 years old. All use by under-age persons is illicit use. Most Colorado youth get marijuana from adults they know – not from retail stores.
  * Pueblo Colorado, with a population of 106,000 has over 7000 homeless people (Portland with a population of 583,000 has about 4500); many are people who arrived seeking employment in the marijuana industry.
  * 13% of children given CBD for seizure disorders have had “really bad” reactions; the CBD made seizures worse.
  * Estimates of marijuana addiction at 9-10% is from research on low-potency THC; this data should no longer be used. Scientists don’t know addiction rate to high potency THC, but use by youth is increasing, for daily users addiction rate is about 50%, withdrawal is harder, and violence associated with high potency THC is higher.
  * Stuyt calls marijuana addiction a “learning disorder.”
  * Marijuana use significantly reduces neurogenesis in the brain.
  * Doctors are seeing more psychosis related to high-potency THC marijuana.
  * 75% of Stuyt’s patients have PTSD. 83% of her patients are seeking treatment for marijuana addiction. Marijuana masks symptoms of marijuana, it does not treat or cure PTSD. PTSD is treatable and curable – but not with active marijuana use.
  * Increased correlation – not causation – of suicide in adolescents who use marijuana

Source: http://www.mentalhealthportland.org/report-on-marijuana-use-in-
colorado/ August 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts :

  * US Department of Veteran Affairs found an increase in PTSD symptoms from veterans who used medical marijuana 
  * Among patients who use medical marijuana, 80% use it for chronic pain and 33% for PTSD
  * Use for chronic pain can lead to increased risk of motor vehicle accidents and short-term cognitive impairment, experts warn
  * Medical marijuana is allowed in 30 states including DC 
  * The NFL is looking into medical marijuana use for its players for pain relief

There is no conclusive evidence that marijuana helps with chronic pain and
post-traumatic stress disorder, experts say.

Since legalization, 80 percent of medical marijuana patients use it for
chronic pain and about 33 percent use it for PTSD.

However, experts warn that there isn't enough research to confirm it is
effective for users.

Researchers around the country are scrambling to find evidence of the harms
and benefits of patients using medical marijuana as it becomes legalized in
more states.

And now they have found that there is still an insufficient amount of evidence
to prove if medical marijuana can help with chronic pain and PTSD.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/DM_chronic_ptsd-300x192.jpg)

Researchers from the US Department of Veterans Affairs analyzed data into the
treatment of chronic pain and PTSD in patients.

With chronic pain, the results in one clinical trial showed only 28 percent of
participants feeling a change when using nabiximols, which is a mixture THC
and CBD.

Also, there was 16 percent of participants who felt a change when taking a
placebo.

This suggests psychological symptoms are possible when someone thinks they are
feeling pain.

Experts also warn the use of marijuana for chronic pain could lead to an
increase risk of harm such as motor vehicle accidents, psychotic symptoms and
short-term cognitive impairment.

Dr Thomas O'Brien, who has run his own medical marijuana office in New York
City for the past year-and-a-half, told Daily Mail Online that he's seen high
success rates from his patients dealing with chronic pain.

The type of marijuana he gives to his patients is high in CBD, so he says it
doesn't have the psychotic symptoms that critics worry about.

'My patients do not feel sleepy or experience memory loss when they take it,'
Dr O'Brien said.

The marijuana he prescribes is from an indica-dominant strain. This means
there is high CBD and low THC, which he says won't give patients the same
'high' feeling that is felt from recreational marijuana.

### NFL says it WILL study marijuana in terms of pain relief for players

Early this month, the NFL confirmed with Daily Mail Online that it will look
into using medical marijuana for its players.

The NFL has had a strict stance against their players using marijuana.

But a report came out saying 50 percent of NFL players admitted to using
marijuana to relieve pain.

The league usually prescribes highly addictive opioid painkillers to help
players deal with game-related injuries and pain.

This change comes after player Calvin Johnson retired due to chronic pain and
injury.

He said the players were given opioids from doctors 'like candy'.

Currently, a player caught with THC in their system will face a fine and full-
season suspension.

_Source: Bleacher Report_

He will prescribe a dose with a higher level of THC only if his patient's
symptoms are so bad that they can't sleep.

He works with his patients to figure out the best mixture for them and their
symptoms based on a spectrum level.

'They are in pain and suffering from their conditions,' Dr O'Brien said. 'This
is not recreational.'

Dr O'Brien has worked with more than 600 patients and claims that close to 90
percent have seen success.

'The key is to educate the community that it is not like you're going out back
and sneaking a puff.'

In a large observational study of veterans, the researchers found an increase
in participants who experienced a heightening of their PTSD symptoms when
using medical marijuana.

The study looked at evidence from 47,000 veterans dealing with PTSD from 1992
to 2011.

From this group of veterans, the researchers could not conclusively say that
medical marijuana has benefits when dealing with people with PTSD.

US Secretary of Veterans Affairs David Shulkin said: 'My opinion is, is that
some of the states that have put in appropriate controls, there may be some
evidence that this is beginning to be helpful. And we're interested in looking
at that and learning from that.'

But the VA does not prescribe medical marijuana to its veterans currently.

'Until the time that federal law changes, we are not able to be able to
prescribe medical marijuana for conditions that may be helpful,' Shulkin said.

Marijuana is legal for medical and recreational use in eight states:
Massachusetts, Colorado, Washington, Alaska, Oregon, Nevada, California and
Maine.

It is also legal for strictly medical use in the District of Columbia and 21
states: Montana, North Dakota, Arizona, New Mexico, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Florida, Illinois, Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Vermont, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
Delaware and Hawaii.

### _How is THC used and what its effects_

_Tetrahydrocannabinoil (THC) is a natural element found in a cannabis plant.
It is the most common cannabinoid element found in the cannabis plant. THC is
found in the recreational form of marijuana._

_THC is psychoactive:_

_This means that the drug has a significant effect on the mental processes of
the person taking it._

_Effects on people taking it:_

  * _Produces the 'high' feeling_
  * _Relaxation_
  * _Altered senses_
  * _Fatigue_
  * _Hunger_

_How it helps medically:_

_Marijuana with THC are used to help with chemotherapy, multiple sclerosis and
glaucoma._

_Medical marijuana practitioners can diagnose a mixture of THC and CBD to the
patient for treatment._

### _How is CBD used and what its effects_

_Cannabidiol (CBD) is a natural element found in a cannabis plant. It is
lesser known than THC and does not produce the same 'high' that people
experience when they have recreational marijuana._

_CBD is an antipsychotic:_

_This means that the drug helps manage psychosis such as hallucinations,
delusions or paranoia. Antipsychotic drugs are used for bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia._

_Effects on people taking it:_

  * _Reduces anxiety and paranoia_
  * _Boosts energy_
  * _Helps with pain and inflammation_

_How it helps medically:_

_Marijuana with CBD strains are used to help with chronic pain, PTSD and
epilepsy_

_Medical marijuana practitioners can diagnose a mixture of THC and CBD to the
patient for treatment._

The study notes that there is still a lack of evidence and clinical trials to
conclusively say there are benefits or harms to medical marijuana.

Former Surgeon General Dr Vivek Gupta released a report in November saying:
'Marijuana is in fact addictive.'

But he supported the idea of easing up restrictions on marijuana studies to
help better understand the drug since its legalization is moving fast through
the US.

Dr O'Brien said part of the issue was people not understanding the difference
between the use of THC and the use of CBD.

'It is very safe [CBD],' he said. 'We need to study it for other medical
conditions that haven't been approved by the states yet.'

The restrictions on marijuana studies are partly due to the Drug Enforcement
Agency's hesitation on allowing medical marijuana across the US.

Last year, the DEA said it would accept applications for new growers to be
used for clinical trials and other studies.

Currently, there is only one federally regulated operation that studies
marijuana use and it is at the University of Mississippi.

There have been 25 applicants so far to host a new grow operation but none
have been approved yet, according to Scientific American.

This has led to many critics saying that the DEA is still trying to slow down
the research into medical marijuana to prevent its use federally.

Source: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-4789388/Medical-marijuana-
does-not-help-chronic-pain-PTSD.html August 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,Marijuana and
Medicine,Political Sector :

  * In California, illegal marijuana farms are taking over thousands of acres of land as toxic wastes are increasingly corrupting ecosystems
  * California is responsible for the majority of illegal U.S. marijuana farming
  * New data says the state holds '731,000 pounds of solid fertilizer, 491,000 ounces of concentrated liquid fertilizer and 200,000 ounces of toxic pesticides.'
  * The United States Environmental Protection Agency announced in 2011 its planned to ban toxic fertilizers like zinc phosphide 
  * Chemicals of the kind have been linked to serious health effects in both animals and humans

Illegal marijuana farms are taking over thousands of acres of land as toxic
waste continues to corrupt ecosystems in areas along the West Coast.

According to a new report accessed by Reuters, the state of California, which
is responsible for more than '90 percent of illegal U.S. marijuana farming,'
has shown a drastic increase in the use of nationally restricted fertilizers
and pesticides such as carbofuran and zinc phosphide, ecologists say.

'Increasingly, dangerous, unregistered pesticides are being encountered by law
enforcement officers who investigate illegal marijuana grows,' Special Agent-
in-Charge of the Environmental Protection Agency criminal enforcement program,
Jay M. Green, announced in a public release.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/1-300x200.jpg)

  * Illegal marijuana farms are corrupting ecosystems on the West Coast

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/2-300x225.jpg)

  * Thousands of used butane cans used to process concentrated marijuana dumped in the forest in Humboldt County, California

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/3-300x246.jpg)

  * Fertilizer seen in a makeshift pond with irrigation hoses attached in order to funnel water to grow sites in Mendocino County is California

'Through their indiscriminate application, these unregistered pesticides
pollute our lands and waters, create a significant safety risk to humans and
animals, and present a mounting cleanup expense for taxpayers.'

Expert ecologist Mourad Gabriel, who reports over the issue for the U.S.
Forest Service, said California is utilizing '41 times more solid fertilizers
and 80 times more liquid pesticides' than the state's initial reported cited
in 2013.

Chemicals of these kind have been linked to health defects and death in both
animals and humans.

The agency cited 'a single swallow can be fatal to a small child, and
carbofuran to be 'highly toxic to vertebrates and birds. In granular form, a
single grain will kill a bird; for humans, one quarter of a teaspoon is a
sufficient dose to be fatal.'

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/5-300x225.jpg)

  * Blue tinted water with fertilizer at an illegal marijuana growing site in Mendocino County, California

The Environmental Protection Agency announced in 2011 the department would ban
the inorganic chemical compound zinc phosphide.

Included in the unpublished data accessed by Reuters, Gabriel said federal
land in California currently holds '731,000 pounds of solid fertilizer,
491,000 ounces of concentrated liquid fertilizer and 200,000 ounces of toxic
pesticides.'

Illegal pot growers could face jail time and numerous charges for growing
illegally, while taxpayers could expect to be left with hefty bills to aid in
the sterilization of the toxic waste sites.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/6-300x200.jpg)

  * A pot growing greenhouse is nestled into a clearing in Shelter Cove

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/7-300x200.jpg)

  * Taxpayers could expect to be left with hefty bills to aid in the sterilization of toxic waste sites

Since marijuana was legalized in the state of California, officials have been
pushing to properly license growers and carefully supervise the production,
testing and distribution of hemp.

Supervisor of Trinity County Keith Groves said there are roughly 4,000 illegal
growers in the region currently.

'I'll be happy if we can get 500 of them to become licensed,' he told Reuters.

The expense and danger of cleanup has created a backlog of 639 illegal
marijuana farms awaiting restoration in California, according to U.S. Forest
Service data compiled for Reuters. Each farm covers up to 50 acres.

'We're getting contamination over and over again at those locations,' said
Gabriel, as toxins move from unsafe containers into the soil and water.

At sites that state officials said they had cleaned up completely, his team
found 30-50 percent of the chemicals were still there.

'They are like superfund sites,' said Assistant U.S. Attorney Karen Escobar,

Source: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4768664/Marijuana-farms-
forming-toxic-waste-dumps-California.html August 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Legal Sector :

LONDON (Reuters) - People who smoke marijuana have a three times greater risk
of dying from hypertension, or high blood pressure, than those who have never
used the drug, scientists said on Wednesday. The risk grows with every year of
use, they said. The findings, from a study of some 1,200 people, could have
implications in the United States among other countries. Several states have
legalized marijuana and others are moving toward it. It is decriminalized in a
number of other countries.

“Support for liberal marijuana use is partly due to claims that it is
beneficial and possibly not harmful to health,” said Barbara Yankey, who co-
led the research at the school of public health at Georgia State University in
the United States. “It is important to establish whether any health benefits
outweigh the potential health, social and economic risks. If marijuana use is
implicated in cardiovascular diseases and deaths, then it rests on the health
community and policy makers to protect the public.” Marijuana is also
sometimes used for medicinal purposes, such as for glaucoma.

The study, published in the European Journal of Preventive Cardiology, was a
retrospective follow-up study of 1,213 people aged 20 or above who had been
involved in a large and ongoing National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey. In 2005–2006, they were asked if they had ever used marijuana.

For Yankey’s study, information on marijuana use was merged with mortality
data in 2011 from the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, and adjusted
for confounding factors such as tobacco smoking and variables including sex,
age and ethnicity. The average duration of use among users of marijuana, or
cannabis, was 11.5 years. The results showed marijuana users had a 3.42-times
higher risk of death from hypertension than non-users, and a 1.04 greater risk
for each year of use. There was no link between marijuana use and dying from
heart or cerebrovascular diseases such as strokes.

Yankey said were limitations in the way marijuana use was assessed ― including
that researchers could not be sure whether people had used the drug
continuously since they first tried it. But she said the results chimed with
plausible risks, since marijuana is known to affect the cardiovascular system.
“Marijuana stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, leading to increases in
heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen demand,” she said.

Experts not directly involved in the study said its findings would need to be
replicated, but already raised concerns. “Despite the widely held view that
cannabis is benign, this research adds to previous work suggesting otherwise,”
said Ian Hamilton, a lecturer in mental health at Britain’s York University.

Reporting by Kate Kelland, editing by Jeremy Gaunt

Source: https://www.huffpost.com/entry/marijuana-use-holds-three-fold-blood-
pressure-death-risk_n_598b4b2be4b0d793738c2917 September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health :

  * **The rapper is suing insurance company, claiming it is refusing to pay him after he was forced to cancel shows in November last year**
  * **In legal documents Lloyd 's suggest marijuana may have led to Kanye's mental health issues in a bid to invalidate the performer's insurance claim**
  * **Psychosis affects the mind and causes the sufferer to lose touch with reality**
  * **Dr Lucy Troup, from Colorado State University, explained it cannabis use could cause a psychotic breakdown**
  * **She said there are a variety of factors that influence it, but research shows it is linked to psychosis and other mental health issues**

By Abigail Miller

Kanye West is suing his tour's insurer after the company allegedly refused to
pay for his canceled shows in November - and blamed his cannabis use.

The rapper was forced to cancel the last 21 shows of his North American tour
after he had a mental breakdown and had to be checked into a hospital.

While his insurer Lloyd's of London would normally cover the costs, the
company said they don't have to pay because his marijuana use caused the
breakdown.

The 40-year-old is asking for $10 million in damages from Lloyd's, claiming
the company has yet to pay him out for his cancelled shows, and has no intent
to do so.

His company said in a legal document filed on Tuesday that insurers have yet
to pay and is 'implying that Kanye's use of marijuana may provide them with
the basis to deny the claim'.

Here, Daily Mail Online takes a closer look at how marijuana use could cause
psychosis and potentially cause a mental breakdown, as Lloyd's claims.

Marijuana legalization began in the United States in 1996, when California
legalized the drug for medical use.

That sparked a wave.

In the next decade, 14 states followed suit: Oregon, Alaska, Washington,
Maine, Hawaii, Nevada, Colorado, Montana, Vermont, New Mexico, Michigan, New
Jersey, Arizona and Massachusetts.

Then in 2012, Colorado and Washington state legalized the drug for
recreational use.

Now, just five years later, marijuana is legal for medical and recreational
use in eight states: Massachusetts, Colorado, Washington, Alaska, Oregon,
Nevada, California and Maine.

It is also legal for strictly medical use in the District of Columbia and 21
states: Montana, North Dakota, Arizona, New Mexico, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Florida, Illinois, Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Vermont, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
Delaware and Hawaii.

The wave has given rise to a booming industry of edibles, dispensaries,
cannabis healthcare professionals, and paraphernalia.

Marijuana is the national favorite according to a report published by
Addictions.com, making up more than 70 percent of all drug use in the United
States.

But experts warn researchers are struggling to keep up with the pace of
legalization, and there are still many gaps in our knowledge.

However, some experts warn people are using the drug to self medicate for
things like depression and anxiety despite research showing it does more harm
than good.

In fact, there research shows that increased risk of depression as a result of
frequent marijuana use is thought to be behind psychosis' onset. The two
mental health conditions have previously been linked.

'A number of people choose to self medicate, but it could actually make things
like anxiety and depression worse,' Dr Lucy Troup, a professor of cognitive
neuroscience at Colorado State University told Daily Mail Online.

'We can't fully understand yet the brain mechanisms that cause mental illness,
but we've seen a clear link between marijuana use and users who report
psychotic breaks. But again, it's different for every person.'

In California medical marijuana can be used as a treatment for anxiety. In the
other states and DC, someone suffering from anxiety or depression can apply
for a medical marijuana license if their conditions are considered to be
severe and debilitating.

COULD CANNABIS TREAT MIGRAINES?

Chemicals in cannabis could be effective at treating painful migraines,
research revealed last month.

Cannabinoids, the compounds in marijuana that make you feel high, may be
better at treating pain than recommended migraine medication, a study found.

Researchers from the Interuniversity Center in Florence found that pills
containing the chemicals reduce the pain felt by migraine sufferers by 43.5
per cent.

The drug also had a number of additional effects, including stopping stomach
aches and muscle pain, according to the researchers.

Previous research has found cannabis reduces migraines by targeting cells in
the body that control pain relief and inflammation.

CAN MARIJUANA USE CAUSE A PSYCHOTIC BREAK?

Psychosis is defined as a condition that affects the mind and causes the
sufferer to lose touch with reality.

Symptoms include:

  * delusions and hallucinations
  * feelings of paranoia and suspiciousness
  * disorganized thinking and speaking
  * loss of or decreased motivation
  * loss of or decreased ability to initiate or come up with new ideas
  * difficulties expressing emotion

Studies have found that marijuana is thought to cause psychosis-like
experiences by increasing a user's risk of depression. The two mental health
conditions have been linked.

Frequently abusing the substance also significantly reduces a user's ability
to resist socially unacceptable behavior when provoked, research suggests.

'We don't understand the precise mechanisms for psychosis, but there is clear
research that supports that cannabis use can lead to it,' Dr Lucy Troup, a
professor of cognitive neuroscience at Colorado State University told Daily
Mail Online.

'I can't comment particularly on Kanye West's case, because I don't know a lot
about him other than what the media says. But there are different variables
that could have made it more likely such as how long it's been used, when
someone first started, how concentrated or potent the drug is that they are
using, how they are taking it, and their specific genotype.'

Drug-induced psychosis is most commonly associated with LSD or amphetamines,
but can also be caused by marijuana, cocaine and alcohol.

Results of a study by the University of Montreal revealed that going from
being an occasional marijuana user to abusing the substance once a week or as
often as every day, increases the risk of psychosis-like experiences by 159
percent.

The results also demonstrated that marijuana use reduces a person's ability to
resist socially unacceptable behavior in response to a particular stimulus.

KANYE WEST'S PAST MARIJUANA USE: COULD THE DRUG HAVE CAUSED THE RAPPER'S
MENTAL BREAK?

In the past Kanye has been candid about his weed habit. He's made multiple
references in his songs. He also admitted to smoking before the 2015 Video
Music Awards where he infamously announced his 2020 presidential candidacy.

Dr Troup explained that while she doesn't know much about the rapper's
circumstance in particular, she was surprised to hear that Lloyd's of London
isn't paying out.

She said that if a bank makes that claim about anyone, be it Kanye or someone
less well known, the process to support that claim is long and complicated.

'There isn't enough knowledge about his [Kanye's] medical history for anyone
but his doctor to say for sure what caused his mental break,' Dr Troup
explained. 'It would be a long and complicated process because they would have
to look at his blood work, a hospital report, and a number of other things.'

'I'm guessing when you insure a rock star you have to expect these kinds of
things,' she added.

A source has also told InTouch that Kim and Kanye are now worried footage
taken by the rapper's team in days prior to the tour's cancellation could be
used against him in court.

The video allegedly shows his mental state deteriorating before he broke down
in the days leading up to his hospitalization.

Source: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-4758542/Could-marijuana-
caused-Kanye-s-mental-breakdown.html  
August 2017

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana :

**_Psychology of Addictive Behaviors journal makes corrections, SAM calls on
media to correct stories_**

A prominent journal article about marijuana and health which resulted in media
outlets reporting on marijuana's harmlessness has now been corrected. A
recheck of the statistics has now found that the incidence of psychotic
disorders trended toward a 2.5-fold increase in marijuana users, a difference
that went beyond a trend to reach significance in a one-tailed statistical
test. This degree of impact matches very well the results of many prior
studies involving marijuana use and psychosis though falls short of the five-
fold increase in psychosis risk for marijuana users seen with the high
strength strains that are more recently available.

Dr. Christine Miller, a former schizophrenia researcher from Johns Hopkins
University and now Director of SAM Maryland, first alerted the journal,
_Psychology of Addictive Behaviors,_ last December. Some media outlets have
already corrected their original story.

"We commend the Washington Post's Ariana Cha for now updating her story, and
hope many more will follow her lead," remarked Dr. Miller. "The flaw in the
original University of Pittsburgh report were certain correction factors
applied to the raw data, factors which are strongly affected by psychosis
rather than being causes of such a disorder. These inappropriate corrections
overpowered the marijuana effect. We're glad the corrections have been made."

SAM urges other media outlets to correct their headlines and stories.

The new data comes on the heels of a major report released by the State of
Vermont's Health Department which found that marijuana worsened conditions
ranging from mental illness to motor vehicle accidents to negative pregnancy
effects - and almost all of them are found to be worsened by marijuana:

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/sam1.png)

Source: Email from SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana) info@learnaboutsam.org,
January 2016

Link to clarification:

https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2015-58335-001

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Health :

Abstract

BACKGROUND

Cannabis is one of the most abused drugs worldwide, with more than 20 million
users in the United States (US). As access to cannabis products increases with
expanding US legislation and decriminalization of marijuana, emergency
physicians must be adept in recognizing unintentional cannabis toxicity in
young children, which can range from altered mental status to encephalopathy
and coma.

CASE REPORT

We report the case of a 13-month-old female presenting with self-limiting
altered mental status and lethargy, with a subsequent diagnosis of
tetrahydrocannabinol exposure on confirmatory urine gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry.

Why Should an Emergency Physician Be Aware of This?

Considering caretakers rarely report possible cannabis exposure, history-
taking must review caretakers’ medicinal and recreational drug exposures to
prevent inadvertently missing the diagnosis. In the young child with altered
mental status, prompt urine screening for cannabinoid detection can prevent
further invasive and costly diagnostic investigations, such as brain imaging
and lumbar puncture.

CASE REPORT  
A healthy 13-month-old, 12-kg female presented to the ED with injected
conjunctiva and inappropriate staring for 2 h, followed by a half-hour period
of somnolence. The mother denied any possible ingestions, fevers, vomiting,
seizures, or head trauma. Birth and medical history were unremarkable.  
Growth and development were age appropriate. On presentation, patient was
somnolent, but arousable with stimulation. Vital signs were: temperature
36.6C, heart rate of 127 beats/min, respiratory rate of 39 breaths/min, blood
pressure of 98/66mmHg, and an SpO2 of 100% on room air. Pupils were equal and
dilated to 6mm bilaterally.  
Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Computed tomography of the
head, chest x-ray study, electrocardiogram, complete blood count,
comprehensive metabolic panel, and serum toxicology were unremarkable.  
The mother appeared intoxicated, with slurred speech and injected conjunctiva.
Maternal cannabinoid intoxication was suspected and urine cannabinoids on the
child were sent and returned positive. Upon result disclosure, the mother
stated that the child recently consumed hemp seed milk. Urine gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) confirmatory test was positive for
d-9- tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Within 8 h, the child returned to baseline
without any medical interventions other than observation. Poison control,
social work, and child protection services were all notified and involved.

DISCUSSION  
Cannabis is one of the most abused drugs worldwide. Cannabis formulations,
such as marijuana (dried, leaves), hashish (resin), and hashish oil
(concentrated resin extract) can be inhaled or ingested. THC is the main
psychoactive ingredient that binds to brain cannabinoid receptors, producing
dose- and time-dependent stimulant, hallucinogenic, or sedative effects.
Effects of inhaled cannabis occur within minutes after ingestion, peak within
15–30 min, and last up to 4 h post ingestion.

INTRODUCTION  
Cannabis is a psychoactive plant composed of more than 500 chemical components
called cannabinoids, which exert their psychoactive effect by activating
specific receptors in the central nervous system and immune system.
Cannabinoids are among the most abused drugs worldwide, with an estimated 22.2
million users in the United States. Since 2017, medical marijuana has been
legalized in 31 states, and 9 states have decriminalized recreational
marijuana. In such states, emergency department (ED) visits and poison center
calls for accidental cannabis intoxication have increased. With these changes,
emergency physicians must be adept in recognizing unintentional cannabis
toxicity in young children, as intoxication can result in encephalopathy and
coma.

Orally consumed cannabis has delayed effects, with onset ranging from 30 min
to 3 h, lasting up to 12 h post ingestion. With the increased bioavailability
of cannabis concentrates and the smaller body mass in children, toddler
cannabis ingestion results in high serum THC levels, despite a small amount
ingested.

Pediatric cannabis intoxication has variable presentations, ranging from
mentation changes to encephalopathy and coma. The most common symptoms are
central nervous system depression (i.e., lethargy, coma), confusion,
agitation, hypotonia, bilateral reactive mydriasis, and ataxia. Nausea and
vomiting have been reported, along with bradycardia, bradypnea, hypotension,
and respiratory depression necessitating mechanical ventilation. Other
symptoms include tremor, hallucinations, nystagmus, slurred speech, and muscle
weakness. With such nonspecific symptomatology, cannabis toxicity can mimic
postictal states, encephalitis,or sepsis, which lead to unnecessary diagnostic
evaluations.  
Prompt urine screening can prevent further invasive and costly workups, such
as brain imaging and lumbar puncture, and may thwart the need for mechanical
ventilation or i.v. antibiotics/antivirals for presumed meningoencephalitis.
Initial urine screening is typically performed with the highly sensitive
enzyme multiplied immunoassay technique, but can have false-positive results,
as many drug metabolites can influence the test, including hemp seed products.
The confirmatory test, GC-MS, will only test positive for THC, making it
highly specific for cannabis ingestion.

Hemp is derived from a strain of the cannabis sativa plant species that
contains a much lower concentration of the psychoactive component, THC, and
higher concentrations of cannabidiol. Due to the increased availability in
natural grocery stores, hemp products have become increasingly popular as
health supplements in children. In order for hemp products to be commercially
sold in the United States, strict regulations enforce the THC component to be
< 0.3% of the total product weight. Despite these strict regulations on THC
content, a recent study byYang et al. demonstrated that hemp products, in
fact, have a variable THC component and may contain up to 12 times the legal
THC limit. Therefore, prolonged use of hemp seed oil may induce neurologic
symptoms of THC.

A recent case by Chinello et al. described a case of a 2-year-old child who
developed neurologic symptoms after taking 2 teaspoons of hemp seed oil per
day for 3 weeks. No antidote exists for cannabis toxicity and activated
charcoal is not effective. Management is largely supportive and most pediatric
patients are observed and return to baseline within 8–12 h. Pediatric cannabis
intoxication should be reported to child protection services to identify
neglect and at-risk families and enhance child safety.

Pediatric cannabis ingestions are more frequent due to rising marijuana use in
the United States (US). In a comparison of state trends in unintentional
pediatric marijuana exposures, as measured by call volume to US poison
centers, call rates in states that had passed legislation prior to 2005 were
increased by 30%, juxtaposed to non-legal states, where call volume remained
unchanged. Despite its increasing availability, reports of unintentional
pediatric cannabis ingestion leading to toxicity are uncommon. History taking
must review both medicinal and recreational drug exposures to prevent missing
the diagnosis. Knowledge of substances that can lead to false positives is
imperative. Pertinent to our case, hemp product consumption will not result in
a positive cannabinoid urine confirmatory test, as hemp does not contain
enough THC to induce toxicity. However, recent data show hemp seed oil
products may have substantially more THC than the level acceptable for
commercial hemp use, and with prolonged exposure may induce toxicity. Our case
involved an acute exposure and is therefore unlikely to cause any related
toxicities.

Lastly, with the growing popularity of edible marijuana products, which
typically resemble candy and may be alluring to the exploratory toddler,
emergency physicians must be vigilant when considering potential cannabis
toxicity.

WHY SHOULD AN EMERGENCY PHYSICIAN BE AWARE OF THIS?  
As access to cannabis increases, emergency physicians must recognize pediatric
unintentional cannabis toxicity. Prompt cannabinoid urine screening can
prevent further invasive diagnostic investigations.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30340924 January 2019

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/mail-1024x775.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/mail2-1024x775.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/mail3-767x1024.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/mail4-776x1024.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/mail5-778x1024.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/mail6-765x1024.png)

The new 2016-2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health State Estimates is
out this week. The graphs above illustrate a few of the findings from this
annual survey conducted by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration. Numbers in graphs are percentages. The graphs can be
downloaded starting Thursday, December 6 here. National Families in Action
grants permission to reproduce them for educational purposes.

Source: Email from National Families in Action's The Marijuana Report
nfia@nationalfamilies.org December 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Youth :

  * **Cannabis interferes with a user 's ability to recognize, process and empathize with human emotions including happiness, sadness and anger**
  * **Pot smokers were shown faces depicting different emotions in tests**
  * **They were hooked up to brain monitoring device, looking at activity levels**
  * **Cannabis users showed greater response to negative emotions**
  * **And those smoking marijuana showed lower response to happy emotions**

Smoking cannabis alters a person's ability to perceive and judge emotions, a
study has found.

The drug interferes with user's capacity to recognize, process and empathize
with human emotions, including happiness, sadness and anger.

But the results also suggest that the brain may be able to counteract these
effects depending on whether the emotions are directly, or indirectly
detected.

The complex biochemistry of marijuana and how it affects the brain is only
beginning to be understood.

Dr Lucy Troup, assistant professor of psychology at Colorado State University,
has set out to answer specifically how, if at all, cannabis use affects a
person's ability to process emotions.

She has long been fascinated by the psychology of drugs and addiction.

'We're not taking a pro or anti stance, but we just want to know, what does it
do? It's really about making sense of it,' she said.

For almost 20 years Dr Troup and her graduate students have been conducting
experiments to measure the brain activity of about 70 volunteers.

They all identified themselves as chronic, moderate or non-users of cannabis.

They were all vetted as legal users of cannabis, and were either medical
marijuana users aged 18 or older, or recreational users aged 21 or older.

The experiments involved the participants looking at faces depicting four
separate expressions: neutral, happy, fearful and angry, while they were
hooked up to an electroencephalogram (EEG), which shows the electrical
activity of the brain.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/31BF129B00000578-0-Cannabis_users_showed_a_greater_response_to_faces_showing_negati-a-6_1456869632046-300x269.jpg)

Cannabis users showed a greater response to faces showing negative
expressions, especially angry faces, when compared with a control group of
non-cannabis users. In contrast, those who used the drug showed a smaller
response to positive expressions - happy faces - compared with the control
group

Cannabis users showed a greater response to faces showing negative
expressions, especially angry faces, when compared with a control group of
non-cannabis users.

In contrast, those who used the drug showed a smaller response to positive
expressions - happy faces - compared with the control group.

Those taking part in the study were also asked to pay attention to the emotion
and identify it.

Researchers noted in those cases, users and non-users of cannabis could not be
told apart.

But, when they were asked to focus on the sex of the face, and then identify
the emotion, cannabis users scored much lower than non-users.

This signified a depressed ability to 'implicitly' identify emotions.

Cannabis users were also less able to empathize with the emotions, the
scientists found.

They said their findings seem to suggest the brain's ability to process
emotion is affected by cannabis, but there may be some compensation that
counteracts those differences.

The study is published in the journal PLOS ONE.

Source: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3472039/Cannabis-DOES-
alter-brain-s-ability-process-emotions-experts-warn.html March 2016

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana :

Dear David,

I am sending you below a copy of a letter I have sent to the Premiers of
Canada – and other members of the worldwide drug prevention community, plus an
email to UN HQ in New York. Since they get so many letters I thought it would
be sensible to send you a copy direct as it might take time for you to receive
it through UN internal mail.

Dear Premiers,

As members of the worldwide drug prevention community we have been reading
with increasing concern and disbelief the way that Canada seems to be
bulldozing through legislation that can only damage the citizens of your
country – not the least the children.

The Rights of the Child Treaty, under article 33 of the international drug
conventions, would be breached if this legislation is allowed to be ratified.

Under the terms of the convention, governments are required to **meet
children’s basic needs** and help them **reach their full potential**. Since
it was adopted by the United Nations in November 1989, **194 countries** have
signed up to the UNCRC,

**United Nations Conven** **tion on the Rights of the Child (CRC) is an
important international legal** **instrument that obligates States Parties to
protect children and youth from involvement with illicit drugs and the drug
trade**.

Canada is a signatory to the CRC – which is a legally binding document. Should
your country go ahead with the decision to legalise marijuana – against all
the evidence from respected scientists and Health authorities worldwide Canada
would be an outcast by those 193 nations who have agreed and signed to Article
33.

We find it astonishing that the wealth of evidence and opinion in Canada and
worldwide, on the harmfulness of marijuana would seem to have been totally
ignored by your parliamentarians. Indeed new evidence relating to the epidemic
of gastrochisis was submitted in good time by our Australian colleague Dr.
Stuart Reece and was not allowed to be presented. Instead you have been
persuaded by groups that want marijuana to be ‘the new tobacco’ – headed of
course by George Soros, that this will not be harmful to your citizens, that
it will bring in tax revenues and that it would destroy the black market.

However, there was a study done a few weeks ago by the _Canadian Centre on
Substance Abuse and Addiction_ finding that just in Canada alone, a much
smaller country than the U.S. in population, _marijuana-related car crashes
cost a billion dollars._ That 's just the car crashes, and those were directly
related to marijuana. And the report came from a government think tank, not
any kind of anti-drug group.

We heard many of these same promises in 2012 when Colorado legalized
recreational marijuana. Yet in the years since, Colorado has seen an increase
in marijuana related traffic deaths, poison control calls, and emergency room
visits. The marijuana black market has increased in Colorado, not decreased.
And, numerous Colorado marijuana regulators have been indicted for corruption.

New reports out of Colorado indicate that legal marijuana is posing real risks
to the safety of young people. As Colorado rethinks marijuana, the rest of the
nation should watch carefully this failing experiment.

Healthcare officials representing three hospitals in Pueblo, Colorado, issued
a statement on April 27 in support of a ballot measure that would end
Marijuana commercialization in the city and county of Pueblo. “We continue to
see first-hand the increased patient harm caused by retail marijuana, and we
want the Pueblo community to understand that the _commercialization of
marijuana is a significant public health and safety issue_ ,” said Mike
Baxter, president and CEO of Parkview Medical Center.

Among their concerns are a 51 percent increase in number of children under 18
being treated in Parkview Medical Center emergency rooms. Furthermore, of
newborn babies at St. Mary-Corwin Hospital, drug tested due to suspected
prenatal exposure, nearly half tested positive for marijuana.

Having read the above, how can Canadian legislators possibly believe that
legalising marijuana would, in any way, be advantageous for their country ?

Yours faithfully,

Peter Stoker, Director, National Drug Prevention Alliance (UK)

Source: A letter forwarded by Peter Stoker to David Dadge, spokesperson for UN
Office ON Drugs and Crime (UNODC), originally sent to the Premiers of Canada
September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Legal Sector,Political
Sector :

A three-month-old baby boy died after being left alone overnight while his
mother smoked cannabis, a serious case review has found.

Social services dealt repeatedly with the child's family before his death but
closed the case after the woman said she had stopped using drugs.

A police investigation into potential neglect is currently ongoing. The review
found the level of support provided to the family was "a proportionate
response".

The baby, who can be identified only as Child E, suffered a cardiac arrest in
September 2017 after being found unresponsive with a blanket over his head at
a home in Rochdale.

His mother, who also cannot be named, subsequently told police she had been
using cannabis on the night before his death and had left the house between
01:00 and 02:00 BST to go to a local garage. The baby had been left lying in
his pram for 12 hours without being checked.

**Substance misuse**

A serious case review by the Rochdale Borough Safeguarding Children Board
found the family had interacted with police and health and social care workers
repeatedly in the months before his death.

An anonymous referral made to Children's Social Care also raised concerns
about the mother's substance misuse and the state of the home in which the
family were living, the Board found.

The Board's report said the mother "reported cannabis to be her drug of choice
and cocaine less frequently."

"It is true that many parents' use of drugs does not present a risk of harm to
their children. It is also true that many parents who use drugs have chaotic
and unpredictable lifestyles that do impact on their ability to maintain
stability and safe parenting of their children," it said.

Despite this, the case was closed after the mother said she had stopped using
drugs.

**Risk  
**  
"This review therefore begs the question about how well professionals can be
reassured that substance misuse that impacts on parenting is ever really
resolved or whether some level of risk will always remain," the report said.

It also found that the mother had been given detailed advice on safe sleeping
guidelines for babies on three occasions.

"The learning from this review will be important to all agencies and will
result in changes to procedures in line with the recommendations," said the
Board's independent chair, Jane Booth.

_Source: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-45970026 24th
October 2018_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth :

OCTOBER 25, 2018 BY PARTNERSHIP NEWS SERVICE STAFF

A new study finds traffic accidents are increasing in states that have
legalized recreational marijuana, Bloomberg reports.

Crashes have risen by as much as 6 percent in Colorado, Nevada, Oregon and
Washington, compared with neighboring states that haven’t legalized marijuana
for recreational use, according to research from the Insurance Institute for
Highway Safety (IIHS) and Highway Loss Data Institute (HLDI).

“The new IIHS-HLDI research on marijuana and crashes indicates that legalizing
marijuana for all uses is having a negative impact on the safety of our
roads,” IIHS-HLDI President David Harkey said in a news release. “States
exploring legalizing marijuana should consider this effect on highway safety.”

In a separate study, IIHS examined police-reported crashes before and after
retail marijuana sales began in Colorado, Oregon and

Washington. The study found the three states combined saw a 5.2 percent
increase in the rate of crashes per million vehicle registrations, compared
with neighboring states that did not legalize marijuana.

_Source: https://drugfree.org/learn/drug-and-alcohol-news/traffic-accidents-
rising-in-states-with-legalized-recreational-marijuana Oct. 2018_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Drugs and
Accidents,USA :

Anybody wondering what happens to the 8 per cent of the skunk-smoking
population who develop mental illness should visit any psychiatric hospital in
Britain or speak to somebody who has done so What is really needed in dealing
with cannabis is a “tobacco moment”, as with cigarettes 50 years ago, when a
majority of people became convinced that smoking might give them cancer and
kill them. Since then the number of cigarette smokers in Britain has fallen by
two-thirds.

A depressing aspect of the present debate about cannabis is that so many
proponents of legalisation or decriminalisation have clearly not taken on
board that the causal link between cannabis and psychosis has been
scientifically proven over the past ten years, just as the connection between
cancer and cigarettes was proved in the late 1940s and 1950s.

The proofs have emerged in a series of scientific studies that reach the same
grim conclusion: taking cannabis significantly increases the risk of
schizophrenia. One study in The Lancet Psychiatry concludes that “the risk of
individuals having a psychotic disorder showed a roughly three times increase
in users of skunk-like cannabis, compared with those who never used cannabis”.
As 94 per cent of cannabis seized by the police today is super-strength skunk,
compared to 51 per cent in 2005, almost all those who take the drug today will
be vulnerable to this three-fold increase in the likelihood that they will
develop psychosis.

Mental health professionals have long had no doubts about the danger. Five
years ago, I asked Sir Robin Murray, professor of psychiatric research at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London, about them. He said that studies showed
that “if the risk of schizophrenia for the general population is about one per
cent, the evidence is that, if you take ordinary cannabis, it is two per cent;
if you smoke regularly you might push it up to four per cent; and if you smoke
‘skunk’ every day you push it up to eight per cent”.

Anybody wondering what happens to this 8 per cent of the skunk-smoking
population should visit any mental hospital in Britain or speak to somebody
who has done so. Dr Humphrey Needham-Bennett, medical director and consultant
psychiatrist of Cygnet Hospital, Godden Green in Sevenoaks, explained to me
that among his patients “cannabis use is so common that I assume that people
use or used it. It’s quite surprising when people say ‘no, I don’t use
drugs’.”

The connection between schizophrenia and cannabis was long suspected by
specialists but it retained its reputation as a relatively benign drug, its
image softened by the afterglow of its association with cultural and sexual
liberation in the 1960s and 1970s.

This ill-deserved reputation was so widespread that even 20 years ago, the
possible toxic side effects of cannabis were barely considered. Zerrin Atakan,
formerly head of the National Psychosis Unit at the Maudsley Psychiatric
Hospital and later a researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry,

said: “I got interested in cannabis because I was working in the 1980s in an
intensive care unit where my patients would be fine after we got them well. We
would give them leave and they would celebrate their new found freedom with a
joint and come back psychotic a few hours later.”

She did not find it easy to pursue her professional interest in the drug. She
recalls: “I was astonished to discover that cannabis, which is the most widely
used illicit substance, was hardly researched in the 1990s and there was no
research on how it affected the brain.” She and fellow researchers made eight
different applications for research grants and had them all turned down, so
they were reduced to taking the almost unheard of course of pursuing their
research without the support of a grant.

Studies by Dr Atakan and other psychiatrists all showed the connection between
cannabis and schizophrenia, yet this is only slowly becoming conventional
wisdom. Perhaps this should not be too surprising because in 1960, long after
the link between cigarettes and lung cancer had been scientifically
established, only a third of US doctors were persuaded that this was the case.

A difficulty is that people are frightened of mental illness and ignorant of
its causes in a way that is no longer true of physical illnesses, such as
cancer or even HIV. I have always found that three quarters of those I speak
to at random about mental health know nothing about psychosis and its causes,
and the other quarter know all too much about it because they have a relative
or friend who has been affected.

Even those who do have experience of schizophrenia do not talk about it very
much because they are frightened of a loved one being stigmatised. They may
also be wary of mentioning the role of cannabis because they fear that
somebody they love will be dismissed as a junkie who has brought their fate
upon themselves.

This fear of being stigmatised affects institutions as well as individuals.
Schools and universities are often happy to have a policy about everything
from sex to climate change, but steer away from informing their students about
the dangers of drugs. A social scientist specialising in drugs policy
explained to me that the reason for this is because “they’re frightened that,
if they do, everybody will think they have a drugs problem which, of course,
they all do”.

The current debate about cannabis – sparked by the confiscation of the
cannabis oil needed by Billy Caldwell to treat his epilepsy and by William
Hague’s call for the legalisation of the drug – is missing the main point. It
is all about the merits and failings of different degrees of prohibition of
cannabis when it is obvious that legal restrictions alone will not stop the
2.1 million people who take cannabis from going on doing so. But the
legalisation of cannabis legitimises it and sends a message that the
government views it as relatively harmless. The very fact of illegality is a
powerful disincentive for many potential consumers, regardless of the chances
of being punished.

The legalisation of cannabis might take its production and sale out of the
hands of criminal gangs, but it would put it into the hands of commercial
companies who would want to make a profit, advertise their product and
increase the number of their customers. Commercialisation of cannabis has as
many dangers as criminalisation.

A new legal market in cannabis might be regulated and the toxicity of super-
strength skunk reduced. But the argument of those who want to legalise
cannabis is that the authorities are unable to enforce regulations when the
drug is illegal, so why should they be more successful in regulating it when
its production and sale is no longer against the law?

The problem with these rancorous but sterile arguments for and against
legalisation and decriminalisation is that they divert attention from what
should and can be done: a sustained campaign to persuade people of all ages
that cannabis can send them insane. To a degree people are learning this
already from bitter experience. As Professor Murray told me five years ago,
the average 19- to 23-year-old probably knows more about the dangers of
cannabis than the average doctor “because they have a friend who has gone
paranoid. People know a lot more about bad trips than they used to.”

_Patrick Cockburn is the co-author of Henry’s Demons: Living With
Schizophrenia, A Father and Son’s Story_

A depressing aspect of the present debate about cannabis is that so many
proponents of legalisation or decriminalisation have clearly not taken on
board that the causal link between cannabis and psychosis has been
scientifically proven over the past ten years, just as the connection between
cancer and cigarettes was proved in the late 1940s and 1950s.

The proofs have emerged in a series of scientific studies that reach the same
grim conclusion: taking cannabis significantly increases the risk of
schizophrenia. One study in The Lancet Psychiatry concludes that “the risk of
individuals having a psychotic disorder showed a roughly three times increase
in users of skunk-like cannabis, compared with those who never used cannabis”.
As 94 per cent of cannabis seized by the police today is super-strength skunk,
compared to 51 per cent in 2005, almost all those who take the drug today will
be vulnerable to this three-fold increase in the likelihood that they will
develop psychosis.

Home Secretary Sajid Javid: The government will carry out a review of the
scheduling of cannabis for medicinal use

Mental health professionals have long had no doubts about the danger. Five
years ago, I asked Sir Robin Murray, professor of psychiatric research at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London, about them. He said that studies showed
that “if the risk of schizophrenia for the general population is about one per
cent, the evidence is that, if you take ordinary cannabis, it is two per cent;
if you smoke regularly you might push it up to four per cent; and if you smoke
‘skunk’ every day you push it up to eight per cent”.

Filed under: Addiction,Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Health,Marijuana and Medicine,Psychiatric drugs :

According to a Colorado Springs Gazette editorial about legalization in
Colorado there has been a doubling of drivers involved in fatal crashes
testing positive for marijuana. [1]

Marijuana significantly impairs driving including time and distance estimation
and reaction times and motor coordination. [2] The National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration lists marijuana as the most prevalent drug in fatally
injured drivers with 28 % testing positive for marijuana. [3]

It is true that the crash risk for a driver on alcohol is higher than on
marijuana. But to suggest it is safe to drive after using marijuana is
irresponsible. An even greater danger is the combination of alcohol and
marijuana that has severe psychomotor effects that impair driving. [4]

What about our kids? Vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death among
those aged 16-25. [5] Weekend nighttime driving under the influence of
marijuana among young drivers has increased by 48%. [6] About 13 % of high
school seniors said they drove after using marijuana while only 10 % drove
after having five or more drinks.[7] Another study showed about 28,000 seniors
each year admitted to being in at least one motor vehicle accident after using
marijuana. [8]

The marijuana industry is backing legalization. Do we want more dangerous
drivers on our roads and dead kids so the industry can make money from selling
marijuana?

References regarding DUI

[1] http://gazette.com/editorial-the-sad-anniversary-of-big-commercial-pot-in-
colorado/article/1614900

[2] NHTSA, Use of Controlled Substances and Highway Safety; A Report to
Congress (U.S. Dept. of Transportation, Washington, D.C., 1988)

[3] http://cesar.umd.edu/cesar/cesarfax/vol19/19-49.pdf

[4] https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6448a1.htm?s_cid=mm6448a1_w

[5] Ibid.

[6] Ibid

[7] https://archives.drugabuse.gov/news-events/news-releases/drug-impaired-
driving-by-youth-remains-serious-problem

[8] "Unsafe Driving by High School Seniors: National Trends from 1976 to 2001
in Tickets and Accidents After Use of Alcohol, Marijuana and Other Illegal
Drugs." Journal of Studies on Alcohol. May 2003

LEGALIZING POT WILL CAUSE MORE OPIATE USE

Legalizing marijuana will cause more marijuana use. Marijuana use is
associated with an increased risk for substance use disorders. [1] The
interaction between the opioid and the cannabinoid system in the human body
might provide a neurobiological basis for a relationship between marijuana use
and opiate abuse.[2] Marijuana use appears to increase rather than decrease
the risk of developing nonmedical prescription opioid use and opioid use
disorder. [3] In 2017, the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) landmark report
written by top scientists concluded after a review of over 10,000 peer-
reviewed academic articles, that marijuana use is connected to progression to
and dependence on other drugs, including studies showing connections to heroin
use. [4]

New research suggests that marijuana users may be more likely than nonusers to
misuse prescription opioids and develop prescription opioid use disorder. The
investigators analyzed data from more than 43,000 American adults. The
respondents who reported past-year marijuana use had 2.2 times higher odds
than nonusers of meeting diagnostic criteria for prescription opioid use
disorder. They also had 2.6 times greater odds of initiating prescription
opioid misuse. [5]

Marijuana used as a medicine is being sold as reducing the need for other
medicines. However, a new study shows that medical marijuana users were
significantly more likely to use prescription drugs in the past 12 months.
Individuals who used medical marijuana were also significantly more likely to
report nonmedical use in the past 12 months of any prescription drug with
elevated risks for pain relievers, stimulants and tranquilizers. [6]

References regarding opiates

[1] JAMA Psychiatry. 2016 Apr;73(4):388-95. doi:
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.3229.

Cannabis Use and Risk of Psychiatric Disorders: Prospective Evidence From a US
National Longitudinal Study. Blanco C1, Hasin DS2, Wall MM2, Flórez-Salamanca
L3, Hoertel N4, Wang S2, Kerridge BT2, Olfson M2.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26886046

[2] Cadoni C, Pisanu A, Solinas M, Acquas E, Di Chiara G. Behavioural
sensitization after repeated exposure to Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
cross-sensitization with morphine. Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2001;158(3):259-266. Available from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/11640927_Behavioral_sensitization_after_repeated_exposure_to_D9-tetrahydrocannabinol_and_cross-
sensitization_with_morphine

[3] Cannabis Use and Risk of Prescription Opioid Use Disorder in the United
States, Mark Olfson, M.D., M.P.H., Melanie M. Wall, Ph.D., Shang-Min Liu,
M.S., Carlos Blanco, M.D., Ph.D. Published online: September 26, 2017at:
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.17040413

[4] Health Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Current State of Evidence and
Recommendations for Research. See:
http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Report%20Files/2017/Cannabis-
Health-Effects/Cannabis-chapter-highlights.pdf

[5] https://www.drugabuse.gov/news-events/news-releases/2017/09/marijuana-use-
associated-increased-risk-prescription-opioid-misuse-use-disorders

[6] Journal of Addiction Medicine,
http://www.newswise.com/articles/view/693004/?sc=dwtn

MARIJUANA USE BEFORE, DURING OR AFTER PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE SERIOUS MEDICAL
CONDITIONS, LEARNING PROBLEMS, AND BIRTH DEFECTS

Legalizing marijuana will cause more marijuana use among women of child
bearing age. Prenatal marijuana use has been linked with:

1\. Developmental and neurological disorders and learning deficits in
children.

3\. Premature birth, miscarriage, stillbirth.

4\. An increased likelihood of a person using marijuana as a young adult.

5\. The American Medical Association states that marijuana use may be linked
with low birth weight, premature birth, behavioral and other problems in young
children.

6\. Birth defects and childhood cancer.

7\. Reproductive toxicity affecting spermatogenesis which is the process of
the formation of male gamete including meiosis and formation of sperm cells.

Moderate concentrations of THC, the main psychoactive substance in marijuana,
when ingested by mothers while pregnant or nursing, could have long-lasting
effects on the child, including increasing stress responsivity and abnormal
patterns of social interactions. THC consumed in breast milk could affect
brain development.

References regarding pregnancy

Volkow ND, Compton WM, Wargo EM. The risks of marijuana use during pregnancy.
JAMA. 2017;317(2):129-130.

https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana/letter-
director

https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-
Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Marijuana-Use-During-Pregnancy-and-
Lactation

> AMA pushes for regulation on pot use during pregnancy

http://omr.bayer.ca/omr/online/sativex-pm-en.pdf

https://www.cdc.gov/marijuana/pdf/marijuana-pregnancy-508.pdf

Risk of Selected Birth Defects with Prenatal Illicit Drug Use, Hawaii,
1986-2002, Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A, 70: 7-18,
2007

Maternal use of recreational drugs and neuroblastoma in offspring: a report
from the Children’s Ocology Group., Cancer Causes Control, 2006
Jun:17(5):663-9, Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill.

DO YOU CARE?

Do you care…about our Environment? Marijuana growing creates environmental
contamination. [1]

Do you care…about Pedestrian and Motor Vehicle Deaths caused by marijuana
impaired drivers?

Increased marijuana impaired driving due to the increased potency of THC
creates more risk.[2]

Do you care…about Freedom of Choice? Cannabis Use Disorder destroys freedom of
choice. [3]

Do you care…about Violence, Domestic Abuse and Child abuse? Oftentimes
marijuana is reported in incidents of violence. Continued marijuana use is
associated with a 7-fold greater odds for subsequent commission of violent
crimes. [4]

Do you care…about Safety in the Workplace? Numerous professions and trades
require alertness that marijuana use can impair. Employers experience
challenges to requirements for drug free workplaces, finding difficulty in
hiring with many failing marijuana THC drug tests. [5]

Do you care…about Substance Use Disorders and the growing Addiction Epidemic?
Recent data suggest that 30% of those who use marijuana may have some degree
of marijuana use disorder. That sounds small? 22,000,000 US marijuana users x
30% = over 6,000,000 with a marijuana use disorder. There is a link between
adolescent pot smoking and psychosis. [6]

Do you care…about Suicide Prevention? Marijuana use greatly increases risk of
suicide especially among young people. [7]

Do you care…about your Pets? Vets report increases in marijuana poisoned pets
since normalizing and commercializing of marijuana. [8]

Do you care…about our Students and Schools? Normalization of marijuana use
brought increased use to schools. Edibles and vaping have made use harder to
detect. Colorado has had an increase in high school drug violations of 71%
since legalization and school suspensions for drugs increased 45%. [9]

Do you care…about Racial Inequality? Marijuana growers and sellers typically
locate in poorer neighborhoods and degrade the quality of the areas. Arrests
of people of color have increased since drug legalization while arrests of
Caucasians have decreased. [10].

Do you care…about Our Kids and Grandkids, the Next Generations? Help protect
them by advocating for their futures. [11] Please oppose increasing the use of
marijuana

References

[1] https://silentpoison.com/

[2] https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6448a1.htm?s_cid=mm6448a1_w

[3] https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-
reports/marijuana/marijuana-addictive

[4] https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-new-brain/201603/marijuana-use-
increases-violent-behavior

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/297718566_Continuity_of_cannabis_use_and_violent_offending_over_the_life_course

https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/marijuana-violence-and-
law-2155-6105-S11-014.pdf https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-
stages/teen/substance-abuse/Pages/legalizing-marijuana.aspx
http://www.poppot.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/020518-Child-dangers-fact-
sheet-FINAL_updated.pdf?x47959

[5] http://www.questdiagnostics.com/home/physicians/health-trends/drug-
testing.html

[6] https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/fullarticle/2464591

https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana/what-scope-
marijuana-use-in-united-states
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/link-between-adolescent-pot-
smoking-and-psychosis-strengthens/

[7] https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/wps.20170

http://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lanpsy/PIIS2215-0366(14)70307-4.pdf

[8] http://www.petpoisonhelpline.com/poison/marijuana/

[9] http://gazette.com/editorial-the-sad-anniversary-of-big-commercial-pot-in-
colorado/article/1614900

https://youtu.be/BApEKGUpcXs Weed Documentary from a high school in Oregon

[10] https://learnaboutsam.org/comprehensive-study-finds-marijuana-
legalization-drives-youth-use-crime-rates-black-market-harms-communities-
color/

[11] https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/teen/substance-
abuse/Pages/legalizing-marijuana.aspx

> Legalization

http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Report%20Files/2017/Cannabis-
Health-Effects/Cannabis-chapter-highlights.pdf

MARIJUANA EXPOSURES AMONG CHILDREN INCREASE BY UP TO OVER 600%

The rate of marijuana exposures among children under the age of six increased
by 610% in the “medical” marijuana states according to a study published in
Clinical Pediatrics. The data comes from the National Poison Data System. 75%
percent of the children ingested edible marijuana products such as marijuana-
infused candy. Clinical effects include drowsiness or lethargy, ataxia
[failure of muscle coordination], agitation or irritability, confusion and
coma, respiratory depression, and single or multiple seizures.

http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0009922815589912

MORE FACTS

Today’s marijuana is very high in potency and can reach 99% THC. It is very
destructive and causes addiction, mental illness, violence, crime, DUIs and
many health and social problems.

https://herb.co/marijuana/news/thc-a-crystalline

FACTS FROM COLORADO

The people who are pushing marijuana legalization paint Colorado as a pot
paradise. This is not true according to Peter Droege who is the Marijuana and
Drug Addiction Policy Fellow for the Centennial Institute a policy think tank
in Lakewood Colorado. In a April 20, 2018 opinion article he states that:

According to the 2016 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), Colorado
is a national leader among 12-17-year-olds in (1) Last year marijuana use; (2)
Last month marijuana use; and (3) The percentage of youth who tried marijuana
for the first time.

A 2017 analysis by the Denver Post showed Colorado had experienced a 145%
increase in the number of fatal crashes involving marijuana-impaired drivers
between 2013 and 2016. While the analysis stresses that the increase cannot
definitively be attributed to the legalization of marijuana, it reports that
the number of marijuana-impaired drivers involved in fatal crashes has more
than doubled since 2013, the year before the state legalized recreational
marijuana use.

A July 20, 2016 article in Westword magazine reports that increased
homelessness, drugs, and crime are causing local residents and convention
visitors to shun Denver’s 16th Street Mall, once one of the most vibrant
tourist destinations in the region.

A group of concerned scientists from Harvard University and other institutions
wrote a letter to Governor Hickenlooper on March 10, 2017, seeking to correct
the record after his Feb. 26, 2017, interview on Meet the Press in which he
told Chuck Todd that Colorado had not seen a spike in youth drug use after the
legalization of recreational marijuana, and that there was “anecdotal”
evidence of a decline in drug dealers - claims he repeated in Rolling Stone.

In the letter, the scientists reference numerous studies, including the NSDUH
survey, that report a dramatic increase in youth marijuana use, emergency room
visits, mental health issues and crime tied to the legalization of marijuana
in Colorado. They quote an official from the state's attorney general’s office
saying legalization “has inadvertently helped fuel the business of Mexican
drug cartels … cartels are now trading drugs like heroin for marijuana, and
the trade has since opened the door to drug and human trafficking.”

Today’s high-potency “crack weed” is marketed to youth through vapes, candies,
energy drinks, lip balms and other products easy to conceal in homes and
schools. Most dispensaries in Colorado are located in low-income
neighborhoods, targeting young people who do not need another obstacle in
fulfilling their great potential in life. *

  * https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2018/04/20/colorado-governor-marijuana-hickenlooper-column/53

3731002/

MARIJUANA RELATED SUICIDES OF YOUNG PEOPLE IN COLORADO

Marijuana is the Number 1 substance now found in suicides of young people in
Colorado who are 10-19 years old. Go to the below Colorado website and click
on the box that lists “methods, circumstances and toxicology” and then click
on the two boxes for 10-19 years olds. The marijuana data will appear.

https://cohealthviz.dphe.state.co.us/t/HSEBPublic/views/CoVDRS_12_1_17/Story1?:embed=y&:showAppBanner=false&:showShareOptions=true&:display_count=no&:showVizHome=no#4)

55% OF COLORADO MARIJUANA USERS THINK IT’S SAFE TO DRIVE WHILE HIGH

55% of marijuana users surveyed by the Colorado Department of Transportation
last November said they believed it was safe to drive under the influence of
marijuana. Within that group, the same percentage said they had driven high in
the past 30 days, on average 12 times. A recent analysis of federal traffic
fatality data by the Denver Post found that the number of Colorado drivers
involved in fatal crashes who tested positive for marijuana has doubled since
2013.

> CDOT survey: More than half of Colorado marijuana users think it's safe to
drive while high

TODDLERS WITH LUNG INFLAMMATION

In Colorado one in six infants and toddlers hospitalized for lung inflammation
are testing positive for marijuana exposure. This has been a 100% increase
since legalization (10% to 21%). Non-white kids are more likely to be exposed
than white kids.

https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/04/160430100247.htm

TEEN ER VISITS

Marijuana related emergency room visits by Colorado teens is substantially on
the rise. They see more kids with psychotic symptoms and other mental health
problems and chronic vomiting due to marijuana use.

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-marijuana-kids/marijuana-related-er-
visits-by-colorado-teens-on-the-rise-idUSKBN1HO38A

LOW BIRTH WEIGHTS

The Colorado School of Public Health reports that there is a 50% increase in
low birth weights among women who use marijuana during pregnancy. Low birth
weight sets the stage for future

health problems including infection and time spent in neonatal intensive care.

https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/04/180423125052.htm

EMERGENCY CARE

Colorado Cannabis Legalization and Its Effect on Emergency Care

"Not surprisingly, increased marijuana use after legalization has been
accompanied by an increase in the number of ED visits and hospitalizations
related to acute marijuana intoxication. Retrospective data from the Colorado
Hospital Association, a consortium of more than 100 hospitals in the state,
has shown that the prevalence of hospitalizations for marijuana exposure in
patients aged 9 years and older doubled after the legalization of medical
marijuana and that ED visits nearly doubled after the legalization of
recreational marijuana, although these findings may be limited because of
stigma surrounding disclosure of marijuana use in the prelegalization era.
However, this same trend is reflected in the number of civilian calls to the
Colorado poison control center. In the years after both medical and
recreational marijuana legalization, the call volume for marijuana exposure
doubled compared with that during the year before legalization.

Kim HS, Monte AA. Colorado cannabis legalization and its effect on emergency
care. Ann Emerg Med. 2016;68:71-75.

https://search.aol.com/aol/search?q=http%3a%2f%2fcolorado%2520cannabis%2520legalization%2520and%2520its%2520effect%2520on%2520emergency%2520care%2e&s_it=loki-
dnserror

CONTAMINATION OF MARIJUANA PRODUCTS

There is contamination in marijuana products in Colorado. The Colorado
Department of Public Health and Environment claims that “Cannabis is a novel
industry, and currently, no recognized standard methods exist for the testing
of cannabis or cannabis products.”

https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/cdphe/marijuana-sciences-reference-library

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Drug use-various
effects,Drugs and Accidents,Environment,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Health :

Unified Police Sgt. Melody Gray described the process as similar to making a
pipe bomb.

But some marijuana users — and dealers — are willing to take that risk despite
potentially dangerous results.

For the past several years, law enforcement in several states have been
combating the increasing popularity of something called "dabs." Dabs, or hash
oil concentrate, are made by extracting THC from marijuana plants. Other
similar concentrate products include marijuana wax and "shatter."

While marijuana typically contains about 15 percent THC, a dab has 80 to 90
percent THC, said Unified police detective Orin Neal.

"It’s a greater high, it's a more intense high,” he said, noting that the
potency makes it dangerous.

But in order to get that extraction, a solvent is needed, and dab producers
typically use butane, which is why dabs are also referred to as butane hash
oil. And sometimes, those attempting to extract THC using butane try to speed
up the process by adding a heating element such as a hot plate.

Neal said the combination of butane and heat or an open flame often results in
explosions.

"It’s a recipe for disaster, really,” Neal said.

Police say that's what happened June 26, when a 33-year-old woman was
critically injured in an explosion in a basement at 3329 S. Scott Ave.

"In this situation and many other situations, I think it happens accidentally.
They’re doing this operation in an area that’s not properly ventilated. And
because butane is so combustible and highly flammable, any exposure to any
open flame — from a pilot light on a water heater or a furnace in a house to
an oven to lighting a cigarette in a house or anything like that — could cause
a huge explosion, which is what happened the other day,” he said.

Neal said the result was like a bomb going off inside the small, enclosed
basement room.

Dabs have become a nationwide trend. In some states, the drug and the
dangerous manufacturing of it have been a problem for law enforcers for
several years.

"The use of butane has caused multiple explosions all over the country,
including one in a university housing complex near the University of Montana
in October of 2014. These explosions have killed and severely burned people of
all ages nationwide. The explosions are also causing serious structural damage
to property and neighboring properties," officer Jermaine Galloway wrote in
Utah State Trooper magazine in 2017.

Some states have made possession of dabs a felony crime while marijuana
possession is a misdemeanor. Utah does not distinguish between the two.

The fad has only recently become an issue in Utah. But police fear as it
catches on and more people attempt to manufacture their own dabs, it will
become like the meth lab problem of 30 years ago.

Neal said he has seen two or three explosions locally due to THC extraction.

The dab trend "is currently sweeping the country and is overwhelming some law
enforcement, educators, safety officials and parents," Galloway wrote a year
ago. "This 'new' marijuana is completely different than anything we have dealt
with in the past."

_Source: Officer Galloway & The Northwest Alcohol Conference
jermaine@tallcopsaysstop.comJuly2018 _

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Drugs and
Accidents,Environment :

The medical marijuana market is in a downward spiral as businesses, lured by
big money, shift to recreational

At the height of the medical marijuana industry there were 420 dispensaries in
Oregon. Now there are only eight.

In 2015, Erich Berkovitz opened his medical marijuana processing company,
PharmEx, with the intention of getting sick people their medicine. His passion
stemmed from his own illness. Berkovitz has Tourette syndrome, which triggers
ticks in his shoulder that causes chronic pain. Cannabis takes that away.

Yet in the rapidly changing marijuana landscape, PharmEx is now one of three
medical-only processors left in the entire state of Oregon.

On the retail end, it’s also grim. At the height of the medical marijuana
industry in 2016, there were 420 dispensaries in Oregon available to medical
cardholders. Today, only eight are left standing and only one of these medical
dispensaries carries Berkovitz’s products.

Ironically, Oregon’s medical marijuana market has been on a downward spiral
since the state legalized cannabis for recreational use in 2014. The option of
making big money inspired many medical businesses to go recreational,
dramatically shifting the focus away from patients to consumers. In 2015, the
Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC) took over the recreational industry.
Between 2016 and 2018, nine bills were passed that expanded consumer access to
marijuana while changing regulatory procedures on growing, processing and
packaging.

In the shuffle, recreational marijuana turned into a million-dollar industry
in Oregon, while the personalized patient-grower network of the medical
program quietly dried up.

Now, sick people are suffering.

“For those patients that would need their medicine in an area that’s opted out
of recreational sales, and they don’t have a grower or they’re not growing on
their own, it does present a real access issue for those individuals,” said
André Ourso, an administrator for the Center for Health Protection at the
Oregon Health Authority. The woes of the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program
(OMMP) were outlined in a recently published report by the Oregon Health
Authority. The analysis found the program suffers from “insufficient and
inaccurate reporting and tracking,” “inspections that did not keep pace with
applications”, and “insufficient funding and staffing”.

Operating outside of Salem, Oregon, PharmEx primarily makes extracts – a solid
or liquid form of concentrated cannabinoids. Through his OMMP-licensed supply
chain, he gets his high dose medicine to people who suffer from cancer,
Crohn’s, HIV and other autoimmune diseases. Many are end-of-life patients.

These days, most recreational dispensaries sell both consumer and medical
products, which are tax-free for cardholders. The problem for Berkovitz is
that he’s only medically licensed. This means recreational dispensaries can’t
carry his exacts. Legally, they can

only sell products from companies with an OLCC license. Since issuing almost
1,900 licenses, the OLCC has paused on accepting new applications until
further notice.

Limits on THC – a powerful active ingredient in cannabis products – are also
an issue, according to Berkovitz. With the dawn of recreational dispensaries,
the Oregon Health Authority began regulating THC content. A medical edible,
typically in the form of a sweet treat, is now capped at 100mg THC, which
Berkovitz says is not enough for a really sick person.

“If you need two 3000mg a day orally and you’re capped at a 100mg candy bar,
that means you need 20 candy bars, which cost $20 a pop,” he said. “So you’re
spending $400 a day to eat 20 candy bars.”

“The dispensaries never worked for high dose patients, even in the medical
program,” continued Berkovitz. “What worked was people who grew their own and
were able to legally process it themselves, or go to a processor who did it at
a reasonable rate.”

But with increased processing and testing costs, and a decrease on the number
of plants a medical grower can produce, patients are likely to seek cannabis
products in a more shadowy place – the black market.

“All the people that we made these laws for – the ones who are desperately ill
– are being screwed right now and are directed to the black market,” said
Karla Kay, the chief of operations at PharmEx.

Kay, who also holds a medical marijuana card for her kidney disease, said some
patients she knows have resorted to buying high dose medical marijuana
products illegally from local farmers markets – in a state that was one of the
first to legally establish a medical cannabis industry back in 1998.

Moreover, the networks between medical patients, growers and processors have
diminished.

The OMMP maintains a record of processors and the few remaining dispensaries,
but no published list of patients or grow sites – a privacy right protected
under Oregon law, much to the chagrin of law enforcement.

According to the Oregon Health Authority’s report, just 58 of more than 20,000
medical growers were inspected last year.

In eastern Oregon’s Deschutes county, the sheriff’s office and the district
attorney have repeatedly requested the location of each medical marijuana
grower in their county. They’ve been consistently denied by the Oregon Health
Authority.

Recently, the sheriff has gone as far as hiring a detective to focus solely on
enforcing marijuana operations.

“There is an overproduction of marijuana in Oregon and the state doesn’t have
adequate resources to enforce the laws when it comes to recreational
marijuana, medical marijuana, as well as ensuring the growth of hemp is within
the THC guidelines,” said the Deschutes sheriff, Shane Nelson. As of last
February, the state database logged 1.1m pounds of cannabis flower, as
reported by the Willamette Week in April. That’s three times what residents
buy in a year, which means the excess is slipping out of the regulated market.
To help curb the trend, senate bill 1544 was passed this year to funnel part
of the state’s marijuana tax revenues into the Criminal Justice Commission and
provide the funding needed to go after the black market, especially when it
comes to illicit Oregon weed being smuggled to other states. The program’s
priority is “placed on rural areas with lots of production and diversion, and
little law enforcement”, said Rob Bovett, the legal counsel with the
Association of Oregon Counties, who crafted the bill.

In a May 2018 memo on his marijuana enforcement priorities, Billy J Williams,
a US attorney for the district of Oregon, noted that “since broader
legalization took effect in 2015, large quantities of marijuana from Oregon
have been seized in 30 states, most of which continue to prohibit marijuana.”

As of 1 July, however, all medical growers that produce plants for three or
more patients – about 2,000 growers in Oregon – must track their marijuana
from seed-to-sale using the OLCC’s Cannabis Tracking System.

Berkovitz, however, is looking to cut out the middle man (namely dispensaries)
to keep PharmEx afloat. “The only way the patients are going to have large,
high doses of medicine is if we revive the patient-grower networks. They need
to communicate with each other. No one’s going to get rich, but everybody
involved will get clean medicine from the people they trust at a more
affordable rate.”

_Source: https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/jul/31/oregon-cannabis-
medical-marijuana-problems-sick-people_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts,Health,Marijuana and Medicine,Medicine and Marijuana :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/couldvapingl.jpg)

Teens who use e-cigarettes may be more likely to try marijuana in the future,
especially if they start vaping at a younger age, a new study shows.

More than 1 in 4 teenagers who reported e-cigarette use eventually progressed
to smoking pot, according to the survey of more than 10,000 teens.

That compared with just 8 percent of non-vapers, said lead researcher Hongying
Dai, senior biostatistician with Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Mo.

Further, teens who started vaping early had a greater risk of subsequent
marijuana use.

Kids aged 12 to 14 who used e-cigarettes were 2.7 times more likely to try
marijuana than their peers, compared with a 1.6 times greater risk for teens
who tried vaping between 15 and 17.

"Our findings suggest that the widespread use of e-cigarettes among youth may
have implications for uptake of other drugs of abuse beyond nicotine and
tobacco products," Dai said.

For the study, Dai and her colleagues twice surveyed 10,364 kids aged 12 to
17—once in 2013-2014, and again a year later.

The researchers found that teens who'd reported using e-cigarettes in the
first wave were more likely to have tried marijuana for the first time during
the subsequent year.

Results also showed that 12- to 14-year-olds who had tried e-cigs were 2.5
times more likely to become heavy marijuana users, smoking pot at least once a
week.

Worse still, the researchers found that the more often young teens used
e-cigarettes, the more likely they were to either try marijuana or become a
heavy pot smoker.

Dai said the nicotine contained in e-cigarette vapor could be altering the
brain chemistry of young teens.

"The brain is still developing during the teen years; nicotine exposure might
lead to changes in the central nervous system that predisposes teens to
dependence on other drugs of abuse," Dai said.

It's also possible that experimenting with e-cigarettes might increase a
teen's curiosity about marijuana, and reduce any worries about marijuana use,
Dai added.

Additionally, kids who use e-cigarettes could be more likely to run with a
crowd that tries other substances, said Dai and Dr. Scott Krakower, assistant
unit chief of psychiatry at Zucker Hillside Hospital in Glen Oaks, N.Y.

"E-cigarettes are going to be in the same drug culture as other things,"
Krakower said.

These findings should be concerning to parents because kids might not stop at
trying marijuana, he said.

"If you go to marijuana, is that going to lead to pills? Is that going to lead
to something else?" Krakower said. "When we see progression to another
substance, it's like the 'and then what' cascade—they went to marijuana, and
then what?"

Since this is a survey, it can't prove a cause-and-effect relationship. And
it's possible that wild, risk-taking teens who try e-cigarettes are
predisposed to be adventurous with other drugs, Dai and Krakower said.

"It could be that they have more of that sensation-seeking personality, and if
they pick up one they're going to pick up the other," Krakower said.

But Dai said her team took that into account, and even after adjusting for
sensation seeking, "ever e-cigarette use was still significantly associated
with subsequent marijuana use."

Krakower recommends that parents look for warning signs of e-cigarette
use—marked irritability, hiding things, skirting the truth—and put their foot
down hard.

"There should be zero tolerance for this kind of behavior," Krakower said.

Gregory Conley, president of the American Vaping Association, agreed.

"E-cigarettes are adult products and are not intended for youth of any age,"
Conley said. "We agree with the authors' conclusion that more education is
needed to help young people understand the consequences of using age-
restricted products and illicit drugs."

The new study was published online April 23 in the journal _Pediatrics_.

Source: https://medicalxpress.com/news/2018-04-vaping-teens-pot.html April
2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Nicotine,Youth :

There are several principal pathways to inheritable genotoxicity, mutagenicity
and teratogenes is induced by cannabis which are known and well established at
this time including the following.  
These three papers discuss different aspects of these effects.

1) Stops Brain Waves and Thinking The brain has both stimulatory and
inhibitory pathways. GABA is the main brain inhibitory pathway. Brain centres
talk to each other on gamma (about 40 cycles/sec) and theta frequencies (about
5 cycles/sec), where the theta waves are used as the carrier waves for the
gamma wave which then interacts like harmonics in music.  
The degree to which the waves are in and out of phase carries information
which can be monitored externally. GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) inhibition is
key to the generation of the synchronized firing which underpins these various
brain oscillations. These GABA transmissions are controlled presynaptically by
type 1 cannabinoid receptors (CB1R’s) and CB1R stimulation shuts them down.
This is why cannabis users forget and fall asleep.

2) Blocks GABA Pathway and Brain Formation GABA is also a key neurotransmitter
in brain formation in that it guides and direct neural stem cell formation and
transmission and development and growth of the cerebral cortex and other major
brain areas. Gamma and theta brain waves also direct neural stem cell
formation, sculpting and connectivity.

Derangements then of GABA physiology imply that the brain will not form
properly. Thin frontal cortical plate measurements have been shown in humans
prenatally exposed to cannabis by fMRI.  
This implies that their brains can never be structurally normal which then
explains the long lasting and persistent defects identified into adulthood.

3) Epigenetic Damage DNA not only carries the genetic hardware of our genetic
code but it also carries the software of the code which works like traffic
lights along the sequence of DNA bases to direct when to switch the genes on
and off. This is known as the “epigenetic code”.

Fetal alcohol syndrome is believed to be due to damage to the software
epigenetic code. The long lasting intellectual, mood regulation, attention and
concentration defects which have been described after in utero cannabis
exposure in the primary, middle and high schools and as college age young
adults are likely due to these defects. Epigenetics “sets in stone” the errors
of brain structure made in (2) above.

4) Arterial Damage. Cannabis has a well described effect to damage arteries
through (CB1R’s) (American Heart Association 2007) which they carry in high
concentration (Nature Reviews Cardiology 2018). In adults this causes heart
attack (500% elevation in the first hour after smoking), stroke, severe
cardiac arrhythmias including sudden cardiac death; but in developing babies
CB1R’s acting on the developing heart tissues can lead to at least six major
cardiac defects (Atrial- ventricular- and mixed atrio-ventricular and septal
defects, Tetralogy of Fallot, Epstein’s deformity amongst others), whilst
constriction of various babies’ arteries can lead to serious side effects such
as gastroschisis (bowels hanging out) and possibly absent limbs (in at least
one series).

5) Disruption of Mitotic Spindle. When cells divide the separating chromosomes
actually slide along “train tracks” which are long chains made of tubulin. The
tubulin chains are called “microtubules” and the whole football-shaped
structure is called a “mitotic spindle”. Cannabis inhibits tubulin formation,
disrupting microtubules and the mitotic spindle causing the separating
chromosomes to become cut off in tiny micronuclei, where they eventually
become smashed up and pulverized into “genetic junk”, which leads to foetal
malformations, cancer and cell death. High rates of Down’s syndrome,
chromosomal anomalies and cancers in cannabis exposed babies provide clinical
evidence of this.

6) Defective Energy Generation & Downstream DNA Damage DNA is the crown jewel
of the cell and its most complex molecule. Maintaining it in good repair is a
very energy intensive process. Without energy DNA cannot be properly
maintained. Cannabis has been known to reduce cellular energy production by
the cell’s power plants, mitochondria, for many decades now. This has now been
firmly linked with increased DNA damage, cancer formation and aging of the
cells and indeed the whole organism. As it is known to occur in eggs and
sperm, this will also damage the quality of the germ cells which go into
forming the baby and lead directly to damaged babies and babies lost and
wasted through spontaneous miscarriage and therapeutic termination for severe
deformities.

7) Cancer induction Cannabis causes 12 cancers and has been identified as a
carcinogen by the California Environmental Protection agency (2009). This
makes it also a mutagen. 4 of these cancers are inheritable to children; i.e.
inheritable carcinogenicity and mutagenicity. All four studies in testicular
cancer are strongly positive (elevation by three fold). Carcinogen = mutagen =
teratogen.

8) Colorado’s Teratology Profile. From the above described teratological
profile we would expect exactly the profile of congenital defects which have
been identified in Colorado (higher total defects and heart defects, and
chromosomal defects) and Ottawa in Canada (long lasting and persistent brain
damage seen on both functional testing and fMRI brain scans in children
exposed in utero) where cannabis use has become common.

Gastroschisis was shown to be higher in all seven studies looking at this; and
including in Canada, carefully controlled studies. Moreover in Australia,
Canada, North Carolina, Colorado, Mexico and New Zealand, gastroschisis and
sometimes other major congenital defects cluster where cannabis use is
highest. Colorado 2000-2013 has experienced an extra 20,152 severely abnormal
births above the rates prior to cannabis liberalization which if applied to
the whole USA would equate to more than 83,000 abnormal babies live born
annually (and probably about that number again therapeutically aborted);
actually much more since both the number of users and concentration of
cannabis have risen sharply since 2013, and cannabis has been well proven to
be much more severely genotoxic at higher doses.

9) Cannabidiol is also Genotoxic and tests positive in many genotoxicity
assays, just as tetrahydrocannabinol does.

10) Births defects registry data needs to be open and transparent and public.
At present it is not. This looks too much like a cover up.

Source: Email from Dr Stuart Reece to Drug Watch International members May
2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Drug use-various
effects on foetus, babies, children and youth,Health,Medical Studies :

[youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uTLLUKsbyaY&w=560&h=315]

Source: http://www.protectoursociety.org/

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana :

In the following video, GW Pharmaceuticals Chief Executive Justin Gover
explains what other medical uses for cannabis the drug maker is researching:

Source: https://news.sky.com/video/breakthrough-in-cannabis-medicine-for-
childhood-onset-epilepsy-11412608 June 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine :

Eleonora Patsenker, Ph.D. and Felix Stickel, M.D., Ph.D.

Mounting evidence indicates that the endocannabinoid (EC) system (ECS) plays
an important role in various liver diseases including viral hepatitis,
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), alcoholic liver disease, hepatic
encephalopathy, and autoimmune hepatitis. The ECS also impacts on involved
processes such as hepatic hemodynamics, nutrient intake and turnover, and
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) after liver transplantation. Although this
involvement is undisputed, therapeutic implications regarding the ECS are just
beginning to emerge; so far, no approved drug  
acting specifically on the ECS is available.

Source: https://aasldpubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cld.527 2016

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Medicine and Marijuana :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-1-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-2-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-3-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-4-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-5-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-6-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-7-765x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Persistent-

cannabis-users-show-neuropsychological-decline-from-childhood-to-

midlife-8-765x1024-1.png)

Source:

http://www.pnas.org/content/109/40/E2657

July 2012

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Effects of Drugs
(Papers),Health,Medical Studies :

As of yesterday, it’s now legal for adults in California to purchase
recreational marijuana. This is being hailed as a breakthrough against
marijuana prohibition, but the masses of would-be pot smokers in California
seem to carry a popular delusion that rests on the false idea that marijuana
is _safe_ to smoke in unlimited quantities because it’s “natural.”

As much as I disdain prohibition against any medicinal plant — and I’m
convinced the “War on Drugs” was a miserable failure — I have news for all
those who smoke pot: **Smoking anything is a health risk** because you’re
inhaling a toxic stew of carcinogens produced in the smoke itself. Whether
you’re smoking pot or tobacco, you’re still poisoning yourself with the very
kind of carcinogens that promote lung cancer, heart disease, accelerated aging
and cognitive decline.

Just because cannabis is now _legal_ to smoke in California doesn’t mean it’s
a wise habit to embrace. (There’s also a much better way to consume cannabis:
Liquid form for oral consumption, as explained below…)

California, which increasingly seems to be operating in a delusional fairy
tale bubble on every issue from immigration to transgenderism, believes the
legalization of recreational marijuana is a breakthrough worth celebrating.
“The dispensary staff cheered as hundreds stood in line outside the club,
waiting to shop and celebrate,” reports SF Gate. “At some shops, the coming-
out party was expected to feature live music, coffee and doughnuts, prizes for
those first in line and speeches from supportive local politicians…”

Because, y’know, in a state that’s being overrun by illegal aliens, the junk
science of “infinite genders” and university mobs of climate change cultists,
what’s really needed is a whole new wave of **lung cancer victims** to add
even more burden to the state’s health care costs. Genius! Gov. Brown should
run for President or something…

## Inhale some more pesticides and see how “natural” you feel

Sadly, many pro-cannabis consumers in California have convinced themselves
that Big Tobacco is evil, but smoking pot is safe and natural… even “green.”
Yet the cold hard truth of the matter it that marijuana in California is often
produced with a toxic cocktail of pesticides, herbicides and fungicides. Yep,
the very same people who buy “organic” at the grocery store are now smoking
and inhaling cancer-causing weed grown with conventional pesticides. These are
the same people who are concerned about 1 ppb of glyphosate in their Cheerios
while simultaneously smoking 1,000 ppb of Atrazine in their weed. But science
be damned, there’s a bong and a gas mask handy. Smoke up!

California pot has already been scientifically proven to be shockingly
contaminated. A whopping “…93 percent of samples collected by KNBC-TV from 15
dispensaries in four Southern California counties tested positive for
pesticides,” reports the UK Daily Mail, which also reports:

_That may come as a surprise for consumers who tend to trust what’s on store
shelves because of federal regulations by the US Agriculture Department or the
US Food and Drug Administration. ‘Unfortunately, that’s not true of cannabis,’
Land said. ‘They wrongly assume it’s been tested for safety.’_

I suppose all the science in the world is irrelevant when you have a mob of
people who just want to get high. These are the same people who will March
Against Monsanto, but they won’t even buy pesticide-free weed that they’re
_inhaling._

## Edible cannabis products often contain toxic solvents, too

It’s not just the pesticides in weed that are a major concern: Edible pot
products also frequently contain traces of toxic solvents such as hexane.
Because of the shocking lack of regulation of cannabis product production in
places like Colorado, many small-scale producers are using insanely dangerous
solvents to extract CBD, THC and other molecules from raw cannabis plants.
Those solvents include:

  * Hexane (a highly explosive solvent also used by the soy industry to extract soy protein)
  * IPA (isopropyl alcohol, which causes permanent nerve damage if you drink it)
  * Gasoline (also used to extract heroin in Third World countries)

Anyone who thinks consuming these solvents is somehow “healthy” may have
already suffered extensive brain damage from consuming those solvents. Yet
edible cannabis products are almost universally looked upon as health-
enhancing products, often with no thought given whatsoever to the pesticides,
solvents or other toxins they may contain. (Some shops do conduct lab testing
of their products, so if you’re going to consume these products, make sure you
get lab-tested cannabis products.)

In essence, the very same state where “progressives” have now come to believe
there are an infinite number of genders — and that global warming causes
extremely cold weather — have now embraced a delusional fairy tale about the
imagined safety of consuming cannabis. All the news about the health benefits
of cannabis only seems to have made the delusion worse: Some people now
perceive smoking weed as a form of nutritional supplementation. They’ve even
made it part of their holistic lifestyles, in a twisted kind of way.

But what California has actually unleashed with all this is a whole new wave
of:

  * Heart disease
  * Lung cancer
  * Cognitive decline
  * Accelerated aging
  * Increased health care costs state-wide

Check with your friends in California and you’ll find that **they have little
to no awareness of the devastating health consequences of long-term pot
smoking**. It’s not going to turn you into a raging lunatic as depicted in
_Refer Madness_ , but it is going to expose your lungs, bloodstream and brain
to a shockingly toxic stew of cell-damaging carcinogens. That gives pot smoke
many of the same health risks as cigarette smoke.

So what’s the right answer on all this? If you want to stay healthy, stop
smoking cannabis. Take it in liquid form instead.

## The safer option: Liquid cannabis extracts

Liquid cannabis extracts are not only far safer to consume (because they don’t
contain toxic carcinogens found in smoke); they also contain a far more
diverse composition of cannabinoids.

CBD-A, for example, the carboxylic acid form of cannabidiol, is destroyed by
heat. This means that when you smoke cannabis, you’re not getting any CBD-A,
even if it’s naturally present in the plant. The heat of the incineration
destroys it before you inhale.

The same is true with THC-A and other carboxylic acid forms of cannabinoids.
In fact, cannabis extracts that are heated to destroy those components are
called “decarboxylated” or just “de-carbed” for short. Lighting up a joint and
burning the cannabis as you inhale actually destroys many of the more
medicinal components of cannabis.

Taking cannabis extracts orally, on the other hand, gives you the full
complement of all the cannabinoids, terpenes and other constituents… without
the health risks associated with inhaling smoke.

The cannabis extract brand that we test and certify in our lab to meet or
exceed label claims is called Native Hemp Solutions. It’s a whole-plant
extract that maintains the natural cannabinoids and other constituents found
in the living plant. Because it’s not an isolate, its molecules work
synergistically to provide a more profound effect.

**Liquid forms of cannabis are vastly superior to cannabis smoke** in terms of
their synergistic phytonutrients (chemical constituents). While smoking
marijuana provides a more rapid assimilation of THC into your bloodstream, the
oral form of cannabis extracts actually provide a vastly more diverse array of
nutrients, many of which are being studied for therapeutic use.

That’s why I don’t smoke cannabis. In fact, the only cannabis I consume is
high-CBD, near-zero-THC liquid forms. That’s because I don’t want to give
myself lung cancer or heart disease as a side effect of consuming a cannabis
product.

## Smoking pot isn’t harmless: Think rationally about the way to ingest

cannabis molecules

The bottom line here is that I want to encourage you to think carefully about
the vectors through which you introduce cannabis molecules into your body.
Smoking pot is rapid but carries long-term health risks due to carcinogenic
smoke that you’re inhaling. I’m thrilled that California finally
decriminalized this healing plant, but the fanfare surrounding the change in
the law almost seems to be a celebration of _smoking_ , which is a truly
hazardous habit no matter what you’re smoking.

Oral forms are vastly superior in terms of ingesting the full array of
nutrients, and some people on the extreme end of the spectrum actually use
**cannabis suppositories** for a rapid effect that doesn’t involve damaging
the lungs. Personally, I’m happy with taking CBD oils as a dietary supplement
for the simple reason that I don’t ingest cannabis to get high; I ingest it
for its health supporting effects.

Now, let us hope Jeff Sessions and the feds can finally get around to ending
marijuana prohibition, too. It’s time to end the senseless war on this
promising natural herb, but we must also think carefully about the ways we
ingest it.

Source: https://www.naturalnews.com/2018-01-01-california-legalize-pot-
smokers-cannabis-contaminated-pesticides-mold-heavy-metals.html

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Health :

A warning about life-threatening bleeding linked to use of synthetic
cannabinoids -- commonly known as fake weed or spice -- was issued by the US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Thursday after two deaths and
dozens of patients appearing in ERs with serious unexplained bleeding.

A total of 94 people -- 89 in Illinois, two in Indiana and one each in
Maryland, Missouri and Wisconsin -- were seen in emergency departments with
heavy bleeding between March 10 and April 5, according to the CDC outbreak
alert.

Both of the fatalities occurred in Illinois. Interviews with 63 of the
Illinois patients revealed that all had used synthetic cannabinoids.

Synthetic cannabinoids are mind-altering chemicals that are made in a lab and
sold either sprayed on shredded plant material so it can be smoked like
marijuana or as liquid that can be vaporized in e-cigarettes. "Fake weed"
products are marketed in shiny packages with hundreds of brand names,
including Spice, K2, Joker, Black Mamba, Kush and Kronic.

At least three product samples in the latest outbreak tested positive for
brodifacoum -- rat poison -- and further laboratory tests confirmed this
exposure in at least 18 of the Illinois patients.

"A working hypothesis is the synthetic cannabinoids were contaminated with
brodifacoum," according to the CDC.

### 'Huge number of toxic effects'

"This is the first time bleeding has ever been associated with synthetic
cannabinioids," said Professor Paul L. Prather of the Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology at the University of Arkansas' College of
Medicine, who was not involved in the CDC report. "It is certainly possible
that the bleeding issues … might be due to products laced with the rat poison
brodifacoum."

However, he suggests that these adverse effects might be caused by an as-yet-
unidentified synthetic cannabinoid chemical.

Specifically, this newest synthetic cannabinoid chemical could be derived from
coumarin, a special class of chemical compounds, he believes.

A latecomer among synthetic cannabinoids, coumarin derivatives were first
identified in a 2012 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry paper. This class of
chemicals activates the cannabinoid receptors inthe brain while acting as
anticoagulants or blood thinners. Warfarin and phenprocoumon, blood clot-
preventing drugs prescribed to heart patients to protect them from getting
heart attacks, are coumarin derivatives.

Although bleeding, seen for the first time in Illinois, is a "whole other can
of worms," Prather said, "there's a huge number of toxic effects of synthetic
cannabinoids."

"They produce a lot of neurological side effects. Seizures actually bring
people into emergency departments a lot of the time," he said. Other important
neurological side effects include psychosis, panic attacks, agitation,
confusion and catatonia.

"Young patients will come in with acute renal or kidney failure," he said.
There are also troubling effects on the heart (chest pain and hypertension)
and, recently, gastrointestinal problems and hyperemesis syndrome: an extreme
amount of vomiting.

So why all the side effects?

### 'Guinea pigs'

"What happens with the synthetic cannabinoid clandestine laboratories is,
they're very smart people, and they look at these papers and they go, 'Oh,
this compound has been developed, and it binds to these [cannabinoid]
receptors, so if I produce this in my lab, I can probably sell this, because
when people take it, it will probably produce euphoria like marijuana does,' "
Prather explained.

Yet, he said, the compounds the clandestine scientists create -- even when the
formulas come from a published scientific paper -- are "totally unknown
chemicals." Plus, there's a lack of quality control.

"These drugs are made in a clandestine lab. Who knows what kind of
contaminants are in this laboratory, and who knows from batch to batch how
much of the chemical is actually made" -- or the concentration of each
chemical made, Prather added. One synthetic weed product might be four
specific chemicals of a weak concentration, but the next time you buy the same
product, it might be five chemicals of high concentration.

"If you've ever been to a drug company, they have the most rigid quality
control you can imagine," Prather said. Plus, there's a lot of testing to
ensure safety. "Believe me, in the drug industry, you kill a lot of rats and
you kill a lot of mice before you get to the point of that final drug."

Drug users are "the guinea pigs and the rats and the mice for the development
of these compounds," Prather said. "It's really kind of crazy."

At the National Institute on Drug Abuse, Dr. Ruben Baler, a health scientist
administrator, is getting the word out about the dangers of synthetic
cannabinoids by speaking at conferences, giving lectures across the nation and
talking with reporters.

He believes that "the perception of harm is going up and usage is going down,
at least among teenagers."

In fact, American Association of Poison Control Centers data indicates a
decreasing number of exposures to synthetic cannabinoids reported between 2011
and 2017. Poison control centers across the country received 6,968 calls about
these drugs in 2011, compared with 1,952 in 2017. As of March 31, there have
been 462 reports this year.

"I don't see an explosion of use among young people," Baler said. Mostly,
those who gravitate toward synthetic cannabinoids are "marginalized people,"
including the homeless and those affected by mental illness, he said. "That's
where you see the deaths so far."

Enforcement of the law is not the role played by the National Institute on
Drug Abuse; that role is played by the Drug Enforcement Administration, whose
spokesman, Rusty Payne, says synthetic cannabinoids are designed for one
reason only: "to get your credit card, get you high and addicted, and keep you
coming back for more."

### Links to terrorism

The DEA first encountered synthetic cannabinoids about 2006, Payne said.

In 2012, the US government passed the Synthetic Drug Abuse Prevention Act,
which classified a number of "designer drugs," including synthetic
cannabinoids and synthetic hallucinogens, under Schedule I of the Controlled
Substances Act -- meaning they have no accepted medical use and high potential
for abuse.

Synthetic cannabinoids are made mainly in labs in China and mostly distributed
online or at gas station convenience stores. "It used to be open shelf, but
now this stuff is in the back," Payne said.

"Ten-plus years of these problems," he said. Despite the constantly changing
chemical formulas, synthetic cannabinoids are considered illegal. Still, "that
doesn't mean it's easy to prosecute," he said.

"Terrorists are increasingly turning to drug trafficking to finance their
operations," Payne, said, adding that the DEA has seen "significant amount of
money transfers" into the Middle East of late, including Lebanon, Jordan,
Syria and areas of unrest that are "financial system black holes." Cash from
synthetic cannabinoids, in particular, is flowing to these nations.

Drug users who turn to synthetic cannabinoids are playing Russian roulette,
Payne said. They are dangerous and even life-threatening, as the CDC reports.
His thoughts are echoed by Baler and Prather, who added, "You hope you're
getting euphoria, but who knows what else you're going to get?"

Source: https://edition.cnn.com/2018/04/06/health/synthetic-weed-bleeding-
alert-cdc/index.html

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Synthetics :

  * **Cannabis is responsible for 91% of drug addiction cases involving teenagers**
  * **Skunk - high-potency herbal cannabis - causing more people to seek treatment**
  * **Backs up research that skunk is having detrimental impact on mental health**

Cannabis is responsible for 91 per cent of cases where teenagers end up being
treated for drug addiction, shocking new figures reveal.

Supporters of the drug claim it is harmless, but an official report now warns
the ‘increased dominance of high-potency herbal cannabis’ – known as skunk –
is causing more young people to seek treatment.

The revelation comes amid growing concerns that universities – and even some
public schools – are awash with high-strength cannabis and other drugs.

The findings also back up academic research, revealed in The Mail on Sunday
over the past three years, that skunk is having a serious detrimental impact
on the mental health of the young. At least two studies have shown repeated
use triples the risk of psychosis, with sufferers repeatedly experiencing
delusional thoughts. Some victims end up taking their own lives.

The latest UK Focal Point on Drugs report, drawn up by bodies including Public
Health England, the Scottish Government and the Home Office, found that:

![Cannabis is responsible for 91 per cent of cases where teenagers end up

being treated for drug addiction, shocking new figures reveal \(file

photo\)](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/newpix/2018/04/22/01/4B698CFF00000578-5642917-Cannabis_is_responsible_for_91_per_cent_of_cases_where_teenagers-a-3_1524355253506.jpg)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/4B698CFF00000578-5642917-Cannabis_is_responsible_for_91_per_cent_of_cases_where_teenagers-a-3_1524355253506.jpg)

Cannabis is responsible for 91 per cent of cases where teenagers end up being
treated for drug addiction, shocking new figures reveal

  * Over the past decade, the number of under-18s treated for cannabis abuse in England has jumped 40 per cent – from 9,043 in 2006 to 12,712 in 2017;
  * Treatment for all narcotics has increased by 20 per cent – up from 11,618 to 13,961;
  * The proportion of juvenile drug treatment for cannabis use is up from four in five cases (78 per cent) to nine in ten (91 per cent);
  * There has been a ‘sharp increase’ in cocaine use among 15-year-olds, up 56 per cent from 16,700 in 2014 to 26,200 in 2016.

Last night, Lord Nicholas Monson, whose 21-year-old son Rupert Green killed
himself last year after becoming hooked on high-strength cannabis, said:
‘These figures show the extent of the damage that high-potency cannabis wreaks
on the young.

‘The big danger for young people – particularly teens – is that their brains
can be really messed up by this stuff because they are still developing
biologically. If they develop drug-induced psychosis – as Rupert did – the
illness can stick for life.’

The large rise in the number of youngsters treated for cannabis abuse comes
despite the fact that total usage is falling slightly.

The report concludes: ‘While fewer people are using cannabis, those who are
using it are experiencing greater harm.’

Almost all cannabis on Britain’s streets is skunk, which is four times more
powerful than types that dominated the market until the early 2000s. It can
even trigger hallucinations.

Lord Monson said: ‘We really need Ministers to get a grip and launch a major
publicity campaign about the dangers.’

Source: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-5642917/Nine-ten-teens-drug-
clinics-treated-marijuana-use.html April 2018

Filed under: Addiction,Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Youth :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/080818-Child-

dangers-fact-sheet-FINAL_updated-1-791x1024.png)

Source: http://poppot.org/child-endangerment August 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Drugs and Accidents :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/14Nov2017-v5-costs-to-society-1-791x1024.png)

Source http://www.learnaboutsam.org

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

“Permission empowered models of drug policy interpretation are driving demand
for drug use – NOT prohibition models. The ‘law’ is not what ruins lives, it’s
those who tear down _that protective fence_ to simply ‘get wasted’, that do
that!”

“Acceptability – Accessibility – Availability, all increase consumption!” D.I

* * *

It is certainly no surprise that the pro-drug, cannabis promoting lobby,
manifesting itself through The Greens, continue to employ tired mantras that:

  * deny science,
  * ignore best health-care practice and
  * propagandize harms away, with promises of tax revenues!

Here’s the first anomaly: the same lobbyists rail against alcohol harms and
seek to limit the pervasive nature of this ‘legal’ drug – to the point of even
stating; _‘If alcohol was bought to market for the first time today, it would
be prohibited/banned!”_ Yet in breathtaking cognitive dissonance they want to
unleash cannabis into the same promotable arena that alcohol and tobacco
occupy – legal entitlement!

The second anomaly is: the tobacco fiasco – millions of dollars where spent on
keeping/promoting cigarettes as not only legal and socially acceptable, but
even _healthy for you_. Billions has been spent over the last 50 years dealing
with the health outcomes of this drug – and then Billions more spent on
driving this legal drug into the pariah space that is pseudo-prohibition!

_Make no mistake, the cannabis industry and those promoting its regulation is
just Big Tobacco all over again, but with new and greater levels of pernicious
harms._

The active push to normalise and legitimise Cannabis for ‘recreational’ use
has been in play since late 70’s with Richard Cowen, a former Director of
NORML (National Organisation for Reform of Marijuana Laws), going on public
record (speaking at 1993 conference celebrating the 50 year anniversary of the
discovery of LSD) stating _“The key to it_ [legalizing marijuana for
recreational use] _is to have 100’s of thousands of people using it
‘medically’ under medical supervision, the whole scam is going to be blown.
Once there is medical access and we do what we continually have to do, and we
will, then we will get full legalisation!”_

The National Drug Strategy

The latest National Drug Strategy 2017-26, now puts Demand Reduction as the
**priority**!  
The strategy states that _“Harm Minimisation includes a range of approaches to
help prevent and reduce drug related problems…including a _focus on
abstinence-oriented_ _strategies_ … _[Harm minimisation] _policy approach does
not condone drug use.”_ (page 6)

_“_ _ _Prevention of uptake reduces personal, family and community harms,
allow better use of health and law enforcement resources, generates
substantial social and economic benefits and produces a healthier workforce.__
_Demand Reduction strategies that prevent drug use are more cost effective
than treating established drug-related problems… _Strategies that delay the
onset of use prevent longer term harms and costs to the community_.” _ (page
8)

We need to be reducing demand for cannabis, not increasing it through the
undermining of both demand and supply reduction pillars in our National Drug
Strategy!

Is the de-facto legalisation and ‘regulation’ of cannabis going to reduce
demand, supply and harm, or will it promote/permit the same and to an even
wider cohort?

If we have a regulated market for _recreational Cannabis_ , will the already
law-breaking and recalcitrant users suddenly line up to pay for, a now taxed
product? We have seen the ‘black’ or ‘grey’ market on decriminalised
prostitution continue alongside the now regulated industry for the simple
reason that people do not want to _pay more_ or be _regulated_ as we are now
seeing in the US State of Colorado!

Let us cut through the propagandised mantras about the so called ‘benign
nature’ of this plant that buries evidence-based data with emotionalism and
‘big dollar’ revenue rhetoric.

_“If one was to read at least three academically sourced evidence-based
articles/resources on the inherent_ _physical, psychological, environmental,
genetic, social, productivity, familial  & community Harms of this drug, every
single day of the year for 10 years, you will still not have read half the
current data on the dangers/risks of Cannabis.” _D.I  
Submission to the Canadian Senate Standing Committee on Health – for their
consideration and review of Bill C.45.2017

_The following is but a snapshot of those harms:_

  * Both cannabis intoxication and withdrawal have been linked with violence and homicide including mass shootings.
  * Effect on developing brains 1-15
  * Effect on driving 16-26
  * Effect on developmental trajectory and failure to attain normal adult goals (stable relationship, work, education) 17,31-43
  * Effect on IQ and IQ regression 13,44-48
  * Effect to increase numerous psychiatric and psychological disorders 49-62
  * Effect on respiratory system 63-85
  * Effect on reproductive system 7,86-91
  * Effect in relation to immunity and immunosuppression 92-108
  * Effect of now very concentrated forms of cannabis, THC and CBD which are widely available 109,110
  * Outdated epidemiological studies which apply only to the era before cannabis became so potent and so concentrated 110.
  * At the cellular level cannabis and cannabinoids have been linked with decreased energy production from mitochondria 13-18,
  * Increased production of inflammation and reduced anti-oxidant defence 16,18,19;
  * Reduced enzymes involved in DNA repair 16; and increased errors of mitosis which occur due to disruption of the tubulin “rails” of the mitotic spindle 16,19-21 in such a way that chromosomes become left behind and eventually shatter under cellular stress 21,22; 
  * Cannabis also stimulates the carcinogenic oncoproteins tumour protein isoform 2 and tumour protein D54 23,24;
  * Stimulation of lipoxygenase and thromboxane synthase can lead to clotting and coagulation 18.

Effect as a Gateway drug to other drug use including the opioid epidemic 27-30

**The Colorado Chaos!**

  * **The legalisation of Marijuana in Colorado: The Impact 2017**
    * Colorado Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area released its latest report _2017_
    * The 176-page report details the worsening impact of marijuana on Colorado, including:
    * A 66% increase in marijuana-related traffic deaths
    * A 12% increase in youth marijuana use in the past month
    * A 71% increase in adult marijuana use in the past month
    * A 72% increase in marijuana-related hospitalizations
    * A 139% increase in marijuana-related exposures
    * An 844% increase in parcels of marijuana seized in U.S. mail
    * An 11% increase in crime state-wide
    * Colorado now has more marijuana retail outlets (491) than McDonald's (208) or Starbucks (392)
  * **Colorado Governor:** _ **Cannabis legalisation was 'reckless'** _ **(** Business Insider, 2014)

  * Crime rates have gone up, not down in Colorado – arrests of minorities in particular, are increasing.*

  * Black-market is flourishing – (people don’t want to pay tax under the ‘regulated’ system, so they chose the non-taxed black market product over the government endorsed product – now giving us at least two markets for supply.)*
  * Cartels now use shop fronts to peddle their product and their presence is growing.*
  * Youth use is increasing – even though poor data collection in attempting to hide such. * **https://youtu.be/5mFglI7KEpI**

  * **Colorado District Attorney:** _ **' Marijuana is gateway drug to homicide’** _ **:**

_A Colorado district attorney drew attention this week after he pronounced
marijuana to be a "gateway drug to homicide." District Attorney Dan May came
at a news conference Tuesday about a large black-market marijuana bust in the
state. Thirteen people have been indicted_

  * **Marijuana X** **– The Documentary the ‘Industry’ doesn’t want you to see!**
  * **Cannabis Conundrum** **100’s of articles on the inherent harms of Cannabis.**

_“It is estimated that there are at least 200,000 people dependent on cannabis
in Australia, with one in ten people who try the drug at least once in their
lifetime having problems ceasing use!_ (2012)
https://ndarc.med.unsw.edu.au/news/world-first-study-cannabis-withdrawal-
management-drug

  * This number has only increased, and this is all while the drug is still in its prohibition category. Permission models only increase access and use.

**Call for greater accountability from proponents of Cannabis Legalisation -
Time to put up or shut up!**  
How easy has it been in the past for legislators to present such incredibly
irresponsible policy measures to unleash (via government approval) the use of
Cannabis as a ‘recreational’ substance. It’s time to put your money where your
mouth is.  
We propose that those sponsoring/voting for such a change to our laws need to
be held fiscally accountable for the costs of the harms done by their
policies. As architects of a dangerous harm creating social experiment, who
believe it to be in best interest of the entire community to, legalize,
decriminalise, regulate or otherwise promote access/ entitlement to this drug,
will then be fiscally accountable for the significant and broad ranging harms
that will be incurred by our society as a result.

Any legislation passing that enables further entitlement to cannabis/marijuana
should include the names and political parties who sponsor these drug use
liberalisation groups. The legislation must include that all costs of harms
for said legislation must pay for the negative outcomes – all health, social
and welfare costs incurred. The monitoring and measuring of all aforementioned
harms due to the liberalization of cannabis will be tallied and annual
invoices to levied to Political Parties and individuals promoting such
measures, for their remittance. If such accountabilities were in place,
proponents would definitely think twice before being so outrageous in their
claim.  
It’s time to get serious about the drug issue as we did with the Tobacco
scourge. The War on Tobacco was long, but effective. It’s time we had a
serious campaign _(for the first time in 30 years)_ on illicit drugs.

We need, as with the _QUIT Tobacco Campaign_ , **One Focus – Once Message –
One Voice** in every key sector in the culture; Government – Education – Media
– Policing – Community!  
So, who is driving drug policy now – Drug users, or law abiding, best health
practice and responsible citizens?  
It’s time our legislators and policy makers cared more for the clear majority
of families, children and the community who do not _use_ , or want drug use in
their community. Legislators risk looking as though they have succumbed to the
highly manipulative, drug-affected minority to further harm the community.
These manipulators attempt to assail the law, assault families and damage
public health all with the cleverly crafted, weaponised activities of the
local ‘pot-head’ or desperado, currently being given too much ‘oxygen’ in the
public domain.

**Communications Liaison**

**_*_ *E:**admin@drugfree.org.au **E:** drug-advice@daca.org.au  
**P:** 1300 975 002 **M:** 0403 334 002  
**https://learnaboutsam.org/**  
\---

Source: Email from The Dalgarno Institute operations@dalgarnoinstitute.org.au

April 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health :

(Alexandria, VA) - Marijuana legalization has led to massive increases in
youth exposure to the substance, according the 2017 Annual Toxic Trend Report
compiled by the Washington Poison Center.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/pic1.png)

In 2017, there were 378 total marijuana exposures reported to the Washington
State Poison Center. This number is an all-time high for reported marijuana
exposures and is an increase of 87 incidents from the previous year.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/pic2.png)

Almost a third of the reported instances of marijuana exposure in the last
year occur within the age group of children up to 5 years old. **The rate of
exposure among this age group has seen an explosive increase of almost 58%
compared to the previous year**.

Of the reported 378 instances of marijuana exposure in 2017, nearly half
occurred as a result of eating marijuana edibles. Following legalization and
commercialization, the marijuana industry has flooded the market with high-
potency THC infused cookies, gummies, sodas, and other edibles that are highly
appealing children.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/pic3.png)  
Of note: the reporting of exposures to the Poison Center is completely
voluntary and is most likely an underrepresentation to the true amounts of
marijuana exposure occurring in the state of Washington.

"This report is extremely troubling," said Dr. Kevin Sabet, president and
founder of Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM). "As Big Marijuana continues to
churn out kid-friendly edibles, more and more young children are ending up in
emergency rooms. The preponderance of data show that marijuana has a damaging
effect on developing brains but reports such as this get swept under the rug
as lawmakers rush to liberalize drug laws."

###

**About SAM Action**

SAM Action is a non-profit, 501(c)(4) social welfare organization dedicated to
promoting healthy marijuana policies that do not involve legalizing drugs.
Learn more about SAM Action and its work visit www.samaction.net.

Source: Email from SAM Action reply@learnaboutsam.org, July 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Youth :

RUCKERSVILLE, Va.,Oct. 24, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -Crashes are up by as much as 6
percent in Colorado,Nevada, Oregon and Washington, compared with neighboring
states that haven't legalized marijuana for recreational use, new research
from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) and Highway Loss Data
Institute (HLDI) shows. The findings come as campaigns to decriminalize
marijuana gain traction with voters and legislators in the U.S., and Canada
begins allowing recreational use of marijuana this month.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/cannabisdispensarycolorado-300x225.jpg)

A cannabis dispensary in Colorado.

Colorado and Washington were the first states to legalize recreational
marijuana for adults 21 and older with voter approval in November 2012. Retail
sales began in January 2014 in Colorado and in July 2014 in Washington. Oregon
voters approved legalized recreational marijuana in November 2014, and sales
started in October 2015. Nevada voters approved recreational marijuana in
November 2016, and retail sales began in July 2017.

HLDI analysts estimate that the frequency of collision claims per insured
vehicle year rose a combined 6 percent following the start of retail sales of
recreational marijuana in Colorado, Nevada, Oregon and Washington, compared
with the control states of Idaho, Montana, Utah and Wyoming. The combined-
state analysis is based on collision loss data from January 2012 through
October 2017.

Analysts controlled for differences in the rated driver population, insured
vehicle fleet, the mix of urban versus rural exposure, unemployment, weather
and seasonality.

Collision claims are the most frequent kind of claims insurers receive.
Collision coverage insures against physical damage to a driver's vehicle in a
crash with an object or other vehicle, generally when the driver is at fault.
Claim frequencies are expressed as the number of claims per 100 insured
vehicle years. An insured vehicle year is one vehicle insured for one year or
two vehicles insured for six months each.

A separate IIHS study examined 2012–16 police-reported crashes before and
after retail sales began in Colorado, Oregon and Washington. IIHS estimates
that the three states combined saw a 5.2 percent increase in the rate of
crashes per million vehicle registrations, compared with neighboring states
that didn't legalize marijuana sales.

IIHS researchers compared the change in crash rate in Colorado,Oregon and
Washington with the change in crash rates in the neighboring states that
didn't enact recreational marijuana laws. Researchers compared Colorado with
Nebraska, Wyoming and Utah, and they compared Oregonand Washington with Idaho
and Montana. The study controlled for differences in demographics,
unemployment and weather in each state.

The size of the effect varied by state. Although the study controlled for
several differences among the states, the models can't capture every single
difference. For example, marijuana laws in Colorado, Oregon and Washington
differ in terms of daily purchase limits, sales taxes and available options
for home growers. These differences can influence how often consumers buy
marijuana, where they buy it and where they consume it.

The 5.2 percent increase in police-reported crash rates following legalization
of recreational marijuana use is consistent with the 6 percent increase in
insurance claim rates estimated by HLDI.

"The new IIHS-HLDI research on marijuana and crashes indicates that legalizing
marijuana for all uses is having a negative impact on the safety of our
roads," says IIHS-HLDI President David Harkey. "States exploring legalizing
marijuana should consider this effect on highway safety."

Marijuana is still an illegal controlled substance under federal law.

In addition to the study states, Alaska, California, Maine, Massachusetts,
Vermont and the District of Columbia also allow recreational use of marijuana
for adults 21 and older and medical use of marijuana. Another 22 states allow
medical marijuana, while 15 more states permit the use of specific cannabis
products for designated medical conditions.

Legalization of recreational use is pending in New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
York and Pennsylvania. In November, Michigan and North Dakota will hold
referendums on marijuana, and Missouri and Utah voters will decide whether to
expand medical marijuana laws in their states.

Driving under the influence of marijuana is illegal in all 50 states and D.C.,
but determining impairment is challenging. Unlike alcohol, the amount of
marijuana present in a person's body doesn't consistently relate to
impairment. THC, or Tetrahydrocannabinol, is the primary psychoactive
component of cannabis. A positive test for THC and its active metabolite
doesn't mean the driver was impaired at the time of the crash. Habitual users
of marijuana may have positive blood tests for THC days or weeks after using
the drug.

Marijuana's role in crashes isn't as clear as the link between alcohol and
crashes. Many states don't include consistent information on driver drug use
in crash reports, and policies and procedures for drug testing are
inconsistent. More drivers in crashes are tested for alcohol than for drugs.
When drivers are tested, other drugs are often found in combination with
alcohol, which makes it difficult to isolate their separate effects.

"Despite the difficulty of isolating the specific effects of marijuana
impairment on crash risk, the evidence is growing that legalizing its use
increases crashes," Harkey says.

SOURCE Insurance Institute for Highway Safety

Related Links

http://www.iihs.org

Source: https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/crashes-rise-in-first-states-
to-begin-legalized-retail-sales-of-recreational-marijuana-300736512.html

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drugs and Accidents,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts :

Sydney Parliament House, 09.07.2018

Cannabis has been greatly oversold by a left leaning press controlled by
globalist and centralist forces while its real and known dangers have not been
given appropriate weight in the popular press. In particular its genotoxic and
teratogenic potential on an unborn generation for the next hundred years has
not been aired or properly weighed in popular forums.

These weighty considerations clearly take cannabis out of the realm of
personal choice or individual freedoms and place it squarely in the realm of
the public good and a matter with which the whole community is rightly
concerned and properly involved.

Cannabinoids are a group of 400 substances which occur only in the leaves of
the Cannabis sativa plant where they are used by the plants as toxins and
poisons in natural defence against other plants and against herbivores.

Major leading world experts such as Dr Nora Volkow, Director of the National
Institute of Drug Abuse at NIH 1, Professor Wayne Hall, Previous Director of
the Sydney Based National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre at UNSW 2, and
Health Canada 3 – amongst many others - are agreed that cannabis is linked
with the following impressive lists of toxicities:

1) Cannabis is addictive, particularly when used by teenagers

2) Cannabis affects brain development

3) Cannabis is a gateway to other harder drug use

4) Cannabis is linked with many mental health disorders including anxiety,
depression,

psychosis, schizophrenia and bipolar disorder

5) Cannabis alters and greatly impairs the normal developmental trajectory –
getting a

job, finishing a course and forming a long term stable relationship 4-11

6) Cannabis impairs driving ability 12

7) Cannabis damages the lungs

8) Cannabis is immunosuppressive

9) Cannabis is linked with heart attack, stroke and cardiovascular disease

10) Cannabis is commonly more potent in recent years, with forms up to 30%
being widely available in many parts of USA, and oils up to 100% THC also
widely available.

Serious questions have also been raised about its involvement in 12 different
cancers, increased Emergency Room presentations and exposures of developing
babies during pregnancy. It is with this latter group that the present address
is mainly concerned.

Basic Physiology and Embryology Cells make energy in dedicated organelles
called mitochondria. Mitochondrial energy, in the form of ATP, is known to be
involved in both DNA protection and control of the immune system. This means
that when the cell’s ATP is high DNA maintenance is good and the genome is
intact. When cellular ATP drops DNA maintenance is impaired, DNA breaks remain
unsealed, and cancers can form. Also immunity is triggered by low ATP.

As organisms age ATP falls by half each 20 years after the age of 20.
Mitochondria signal and shuttle to the cell nucleus via several pathways. Not
only do cells carry cannabinoid receptors on their surface, but they also
exist, along with their signalling machinery, at high density on mitochondria
themselves 13-19. Cannabis, and indeed all addictive drugs, are known to
impair this cellular energy generation and thus promote the biochemical aging
process 14-16,19,20. Most addictions are associated with increased cancers,
increased infections and increased clinical signs of ageing 21-34.

The foetal heart forms very early inside the mother with a heartbeat present
from day 21 of human gestation. The heart forms by complicated pathways, and
arises from more than six groups of cells inside the embryo 35,36. First two
arteries come together, they fold, then flex and twist to give the final shape
of the adult heart. Structures in the centre of the heart mass called
endocardial cushions grow out to form the heart valves between the atria and
ventricles and parts of the septum which grows between the two atria and
ventricles. These cardiac cushions, and their associated conoventricular
ridges which grow into and divide the cardiac outflow tract into left and
right halves, all carry high density cannabinoid type 1 receptors (CB1R’s) and
cannabis is known to be able to interfere with their growth and
development.CB1R’s appear on foetal arteries from week nine of human gestation
37.

The developing brain grows out in a complex way in the head section 35,36.
Newborn brain cells are born centrally in the area adjacent to the central
ventricles of the brain and then migrate along pathways into the remainder of
the brain, and grow to populate the cortex, parietal lobes, olfactory lobes,
limbic system, hypothalamus and hippocampus which is an important area deep in
the centre of the temporal lobes where memories first form.

Developing bipolar neuroblasts migrate along pathways and then climb out along
200 million guide cells, called radial glia cells, to the cortex of the brain
where they sprout dendrites and a major central axon which are then wired in
to the electrical network in a “use it or lose it”, “cells that fire together
wire together” manner.

The brain continues to grow and mature into the 20’s as new neurons are born
and surplus dendrites are pruned by the immune system. Cannabinoids interfere
with cellular migration, cellular division, the generation of newborn neurons
and all the classes of glia, axonal pathfinding, dendrite sprouting, myelin
formation around axons and axon tracts and the firing of both inhibitory and
stimulatory synapses 14-16,19,20,38-40. Cannabinoids interfere with gene
expression directly, via numerous epigenetic means, and via immune
perturbation.

Cannabinoids also disrupt the mechanics of cell division by disrupting the
mitotic spindle on which chromosomal separation occurs, causing severe genetic
damage and frank chromosomal mis-segregation, disruption, rupture and
pulverization 41-43.

Cannabis was found to be a human carcinogen by the California Environmental
Protection agency in 2009 44. This makes it a likely human teratogen (deforms
babies). Importantly, while discussion continues over some cancers, it bears
repeating that a positive association between cannabis and testicular cancer
was found in all four studies which investigated this question 45-49.

Cannabis Teratogenesis

The best animal models for human malformations are hamsters and rabbits. In
rabbits cannabis exhibits a severe spectrum of foetal abnormalities when
applied at high dose including shortened limbs, bowels hanging out, spina
bifida and exencephaly (brain hanging out). There is also impaired foetal
growth and increased foetal loss and resorption 50,51.

Many of these features have been noted in human studies 52. In 2014 Centres
for Disease Control Atlanta Georgia reported increased rates of anencephaly
(no brain, usually rapid death) gastroschisis (bowels hanging out),
diaphragmatic hernia, and oesophageal narrowing 53,54. The American Heart
Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics reported in 2007 an
increased rate of ventricular septal defect and an abnormality of the
tricuspid valve (Ebstein’s anomaly) 55. Strikingly, a number of studies have
shown that cannabis exposure of the father is worse than that of the mother
56\. In Colorado atrial septal defect is noted to have risen by over 260% from
2000-2013 (see Figure 1; note close correlation (correlation coefficient R =
0.95, P value = 0.000066) between teenage cannabis use and rising rate of
major congenital anomalies in Colorado to 12.7%, or 1 in 8 live births, a rate
four times higher than the USA national average !) 57.

And three longitudinal studies following children exposed to cannabis in utero
have consistently noted abnormalities of brain growth with smaller brains and
heads – persisting into adult life - and deficits of cortical and executive
functioning persistent throughout primary, middle and high schools and into
young adult life in the early 20’s 58-63. An Australian MRI neuroimaging study
noted 88% disconnection of cortical wiring from the splenium to precuneus
which are key integrating and computing centres in the cerebral cortex
38,39,64. Chromosomal defects were also found to be elevated in Colorado (rose
30%) 57, in Hawaii 52 in our recent analysis of cannabis use and congenital
anomalies across USA, and in infants presenting from Northern New South Wales
to Queensland hospitals 65. And gastroschisis shows a uniform pattern of
elevation in all recent studies which have examined it (our univariate meta-
analysis) 52,54,66-71.

Interestingly the gastroschisis rate doubled in North Carolina in just three
years 1997-2001 72, but rose 24 times in Mexico 73 which for a long time
formed a principal supply source for Southern USA 74. Within North Carolina
gastroschisis and congenital heart defects closely followed cannabis
distribution routes 74-76. In Canada a remarkable geographical analysis by the
Canadian Government has shown repeatedly that the highest incidence of all
anomalies – including chromosomal anomalies - occurs in those northern parts
where most cannabis is smoked 77,78.

Congenital anomalies forms the largest cause of death of babies in the first
year of life. The biggest group of them is cardiovascular defects. Since
cannabis affects several major classes  
of congenital defects it is obviously a major human teratogen. Its heavy
epigenetic footprint,  
by which it controls gene expression by controlling DNA methylation and
histone modifications 79-81, imply that its effects will be felt for the next
three to four generations – that is the next 100 years 82,83. Equally
obviously it is presently being marketed globally as a major commodity
apparently for commercial – or ideological - reasons. Since cannabis is
clearly contraindicated in several groups of people including:

1) Babies

2) Children

3) Adolescents

4) Car drivers

5) Commercial Drivers - Taxis, Buses, Trains,

6) Pilots of Aeroplanes

7) Workers – Manual Tools, Construction, Concentration Jobs

8) Children

9) Adolescents

10) Males of Reproductive age

11) Females of Reproductive age

12) Pregnancy

13) Lactation

14) Workers

15) Older People – Mental Illness

16) Immunosuppressed

17) Asthmatics – 80% Population after severe chest infection

18) People with Personal History of Cancer

19) People with Family History of Cancer

20) People with Personal History of Mental Illness

21) People with Family History of Mental Illness

22) Anyone or any population concerned about ageing effects 34

… cannabis legalization is not likely to be in the best interests of public
health.

Concluding Remarks

In 1854 Dr John Snow achieved lasting public health fame by taking the handle
off the Broad Street pump and saving east London from its cholera epidemic,
based upon the maps he drew of where the cholera cases were occurring – in the
local vicinity of the Broad Street pump.

Looking across the broad spectrum of the above evidence one notices a
trulyremarkable concordance of the evidence between:

1) Preclinical studies in

i) Rabbits and

ii) Hamsters

2) Cellular and biological mechanisms, particularly relating to:

i) Brain development

ii) Heart development

iii) Blood vessel development

iv) Genetic development

v) Abnormalities of chromosomal segregation

i. Downs syndrome

ii. Turners syndrome

iii. Trisomy 18

iv. Trisomy 13

vi) Cell division / mitotic poison / micronucleus formation

vii) Epigenetic change

viii) Growth inhibition

3) 84Cross-sectional Epidemiological studies, especially from:

i) Canada 77,85

ii) USA 86,87

iii) Northern New South Wales 65,88 4) Longitudinal studies from 58:

i) Ottawa 59-63

ii) Pittsburgh

iii) Netherlands

Our studies of congenital defects in USA have also shown a close concordance
of congenital anomaly rates for 23 defects with the cannabis use rate indexed
for the rising cannabis concentration in USA, and mostly in the three major
classes of brain defects, cardiovascular defects and chromosomal defects, just
as found by previous investigators in Hawaii 52.

Of no other toxin to our knowledge can it be said that it interferes with
brain growth and development to the point where the brain is permanently
shrunken in size or does not form at all. The demonstration by CDC twice that
the incidence of anencephaly (no brain) is doubled by cannabis 53,54 implies
that anencephaly is the most severe end of the neurobehavioural teratogenicity
of cannabis and forms one end of a continuum with all the other impairments
which are implied by the above commentary.

(Actually when blighted ova, foetal resorptions and spontaneous abortion are
included in the teratological profile anencephaly is not the most severe end
of the teratological spectrum – that is foetal death). It is our view that
with the recent advent of high dose potent forms of cannabis reaching the
foetus through both maternal and paternal lines major and clinically
significant neurobehavioural teratological presentations will become
commonplace, and might well become all but universal in infants experiencing
significant gestational exposure.

One can only wonder if the community has been prepared for such a holocaust
and tsunami amongst its children?

It is the view of myself and my collaborators that these matters are
significant and salient and should be achieving greater airplay in the public
discussion proceeding around the world at this time on this subject.

Whilst cannabis legalization may line the pockets of the few it will clearly
not be in the public interest in any sense; and indeed the public will be
picking up the bill for this unpremeditated move for generations to come.
Oddly - financial gain seems to be one of the primary drivers of the present
transnational push. When the above described public health message gets out
amongst ambitious legal fraternities, financial gain and the threat of major
medico-legal settlements for congenital defects - will quickly become be the
worst reason for cannabis legalization.

Indeed it can be argued that the legalization lobby is well aware of all of
the above concerns – and their controlled media pretend debate does not allow
such issues to air in the public forum. The awareness of these concerns is
then the likely direct reason that cannabis requires its own legislation. As
noted in the patient information leaflet for the recently approved Epidiolex
(cannabidiol oil for paediatric fits) the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) is well aware of the genotoxicity of cannabinoids.

The only possible conclusion therefore is that the public is deliberately
being duped. To which our only defence will be to publicize the truth.

_Source: Summary of Address to Sydney Parliament House, 09.07.2018 by
Professor Dr. Stuart Reece, Clinical Associate Professor, UWA Medical School.
University of Western Australia  
_

References

1 Volkow, N. D., Baler, R. D., Compton, W. M. & Weiss, S. R. B. Adverse Health
Effects of Marijuana Use. New England Journal of Medicine 370, 2219-2227,
doi:doi:10.1056/NEJMra1402309 (2014).

2 Hall, W. & Degenhardt, L. Adverse health effects of non-medical cannabis
use. Lancet 374, 1383-1391, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61037-0 (2009).

3 Heath Canada. Health Effects of Cannabis, (2018).

4 Meier, M. H. et al. Associations Between Cannabis Use and Physical Health
Problems in Early Midlife: A Longitudinal Comparison of Persistent Cannabis vs
Tobacco Users. JAMA Psychiatry 73, 731-740,  
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.0637 (2016).

5 Fergusson, D. M., Boden, J. M. & Horwood, L. J. Cannabis use and other
illicit drug use: testing the cannabis gateway hypothesis. Addiction 101,
556-569, doi:ADD1322 [pii] 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2005.01322.x (2006).

6 Fergusson, D. M. & Horwood, L. J. Early onset cannabis use and psychosocial
adjustment in young adults. Addiction 92, 279-296 (1997).

7 Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J. & Beautrais, A. L. Cannabis and educational
achievement. Addiction 98, 1681-1692, doi:573 [pii] (2003).

8 Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J. & Swain-Campbell, N. Cannabis use and
psychosocial adjustment in adolescence and young adulthood. Addiction 97,
1123- 1135, doi:103 [pii] (2002).

9 Fergusson, D. M., Lynskey, M. T. & Horwood, L. J. Conduct problems and
attention deficit behaviour in middle childhood and cannabis use by age 15.
The Australian and New Zealand journal of psychiatry 27, 673-682 (1993).

10 Lynskey, M. T., Fergusson, D. M. & Horwood, L. J. The origins of the
correlations between tobacco, alcohol, and cannabis use during adolescence.
Journal of child psychology and psychiatry, and allied disciplines 39,
995-1005 (1998).

11 Marie, D., Fergusson, D. M. & Boden, J. M. Links between ethnic
identification, cannabis use and dependence, and life outcomes in a New
Zealand birth cohort. The Australian and New Zealand journal of psychiatry 42,
780-788, doi:901464301 [pii] 10.1080/00048670802277289 (2008).

12 Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J. & Boden, J. M. Is driving under the
influence of cannabis becoming a greater risk to driver safety than drink
driving? Findings from a longitudinal study. Accident; analysis and prevention
40, 1345-1350, doi:S0001- 4575(08)00026-2 [pii] 10.1016/j.aap.2008.02.005
(2008).

13 Bartova, A. & Birmingham, M. K. Effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on
mitochondrial NADH-oxidase activity. J Biol Chem 251, 5002-5006 (1976).

14 Benard, G. et al. Mitochondrial CB(1) receptors regulate neuronal energy
metabolism. Nat Neurosci 15, 558-564, doi:10.1038/nn.3053 (2012).

15 Hebert-Chatelain, E. et al. A cannabinoid link between mitochondria and
memory. Nature 539, 555-559, doi:10.1038/nature20127 (2016).

16 Hebert-Chatelain, E. et al. Cannabinoid control of brain bioenergetics:
Exploring the subcellular localization of the CB1 receptor. Mol Metab 3,
495-504, doi:10.1016/j.molmet.2014.03.007 (2014).

17 Koch, M. et al. Hypothalamic POMC neurons promote cannabinoid-induced
feeding. Nature 519, 45-50, doi:10.1038/nature14260 (2015).

18 Mahoney, J. M. & Harris, R. A. Effect of 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol on
mitochondrial precesses. Biochemical pharmacology 21, 1217-1226 (1972).

19 Wolff, V. et al. Tetrahydrocannabinol induces brain mitochondrial
respiratory chain dysfunction and increases oxidative stress: a potential
mechanism involved in cannabis-related stroke. Biomed Res Int 2015, 323706,
doi:10.1155/2015/323706 (2015).

20 Chari-Briton, A. Proceedings: Swelling of rat liver mitochondria induced by
delta1-tetrahydrocannabinol. Isr J Med Sci 11, 1189 (1975).

21 Reece, A. S. Chronic toxicology of cannabis. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 47,
517-524, doi:10.1080/15563650903074507 (2009).

22 Reece, A. S. Clinical implications of addiction related immunosuppression.
J Infect 56, 437-445, doi:S0163-4453(08)00123-0 [pii]
10.1016/j.jinf.2008.03.003 (2008).

23 Reece A. S., Norman, A. & Hulse G.K. Acceleration of Cardiovascular -
Biological Age by Amphetamine Exposure is a Power Function of Chronological
Age. British Medical Journal Open (2017).

24 Reece A.S., Norman, A. & Hulse G.K. Cannabis Exposure as an Interactive
Cardiovascular Risk Factor and Accelerant of Organismal Ageing – A
Longitudinal Study. BMJ - Open 6(11) :e077891;
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016- 011891 (2016).

25 Reece A.S. & G.K., H. Impact of Lifetime Opioid Exposure on Arterial
Stiffness and Vascular Age: Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Studies in Men
and Women. BMJ Open 4, 1-19, doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-004521 (2014).

26 Reece A.S. & Hulse G.K. Impact of Opioid Pharmacotherapy on Arterial
stiffness and Vascular Ageing: Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Studies.
Cardiovascular Toxicology 13, 254-266, doi:10.1007/s12012-013-9204-4 (2013).

27 Reece A. S. Relative and Age Dependent Stimulation of Soluble and Cellular
Immunity in Opiate Dependence. Journal of Addiction Medicine 6, 10-17,
doi:10.1097/ADM.0b013e31822c3bf4 (2012).

28 Reece A. S. Chronic Immune Stimulation as a Contributing Cause of Chronic
Disease in Opiate Addiction Including Multi-System Ageing Medical hypotheses
75, 613-619, doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2010.07.047. Epub 2010 Aug 25. (2010).

29 Reece A.S. Improved Parameters of Metabolic Glycaemic and Immune Function
and Arterial Stiffness with Naltrexone Implant Therapy. British Medical
Journal, Case Reports (2008 ).

30 Reece A.S. & Hulse G. K.. Hypothalamic Pathophysiology in the Neuroimmune,
Dysmetabolic and Longevity Complications of Chronic Opiate Dependency. J.
Forensic Toxicology and Pharmacology 3, 3-46, doi:10.4172/2325-9841.1000126
(2014).

31 Reece, A. S. Evidence of Accelerated Ageing in Clinical Drug Addiction from
Immune, Hepatic and Metabolic Biomarkers. Immun Ageing 4, 6-15,
doi:10.1186/1742-4933-4-6. (2007).

32 Reece, A. S. Improved parameters of metabolic glycaemic and immune function
and arterial stiffness with naltrexone implant therapy. BMJ Case Rep 2009,
bcr0820080799, doi:10.1136/bcr.08.2008.0799 bcr08.2008.0799 [pii] (2009).

33 Reece, A. S. & Hulse, G. K. Elevation of the ACTH/cortisol ratio in female
opioid dependent patients: A biomarker of aging and correlate of metabolic and
immune activation. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 37, 325-336 (2016).

34 Reece A.S., Norman, A. & Hulse G.K. Cannabis Exposure as an Interactive
Cardiovascular Risk Factor and Accelerant of Organismal Ageing – A
Longitudinal Study. BMJ - Open 6, e011891-e011900,
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen- 2016-011891 (2016).

35 Sadler, T. W. Medical Embryology. 13th Edition edn, Vol. 1 1-406 (Wolters
Kluwer, 2015).

36 Carlson, B. M. Human Embryology and Developmental Biology. Vol. 1 1-506
(Elsevier, 2014).

37 Pacher, P., Steffens, S., Hasko, G., Schindler, T. H. & Kunos, G.
Cardiovascular effects of marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids: the good, the
bad, and the ugly. Nat Rev Cardiol 15, 151-166, doi:10.1038/nrcardio.2017.130
(2018).

38 Lorenzetti, V. et al. Gross morphological brain changes with chronic, heavy
cannabis use. Br J Psychiatry 206, 77-78, doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.114.151407
(2015).

39 Solowij, N. et al. Alteration to hippocampal shape in cannabis users with
and without schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research 143, 179-184,
doi:S0920-9964(12)00614-7 [pii] 10.1016/j.schres.2012.10.040 (2013).

40 Yates, D. Learning and memory: The cannabinoid connection. Nat Rev Neurosci
18, 4, doi:10.1038/nrn.2016.171 (2016).

41 Reece, A. S. & Hulse, G. K. Chromothripsis and epigenomics complete
causality criteria for cannabis- and addiction-connected carcinogenicity,
congenital toxicity and heritable genotoxicity. Mutat Res 789, 15-25,
doi:10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2016.05.002 (2016).

42 Van Went, G. F. Mutagenicity testing of 3 hallucinogens: LSD, psilocybin
and delta 9-THC, using the micronucleus test. Experientia 34, 324-325 (1978).

43 Zhang, C. Z. et al. Chromothripsis from DNA damage in micronuclei. Nature
522, 179-184, doi:10.1038/nature14493 (2015).

44 Tomar R.S. et al. Evidence on the Carcinogenicity of Marijuana Smoke.
California Health Department 1, 1-150 (August 2009).

45 Callaghan, R. C., Allebeck, P., Akre, O., McGlynn, K. A. & Sidorchuk, A.
Cannabis Use and Incidence of Testicular Cancer: A 42-Year Follow-up of
Swedish Men between 1970 and 2011. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 26,
1644-1652,

doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-17-0428 (2017).

46 Daling, J. R. et al. Association of marijuana use and the incidence of
testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer 115, 1215-1223, doi:10.1002/cncr.24159
(2009).

47 Gurney, J., Shaw, C., Stanley, J., Signal, V. & Sarfati, D. Cannabis
exposure and risk of testicular cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMC Cancer 15, 897, doi:10.1186/s12885-015-1905-6 (2015).

48 Lacson, J. C. et al. Population-based case-control study of recreational
drug use and testis cancer risk confirms an association between marijuana use
and nonseminoma risk. Cancer 118, 5374-5383, doi:10.1002/cncr.27554 (2012).

49 Trabert, B., Sigurdson, A. J., Sweeney, A. M., Strom, S. S. & McGlynn, K.
A. Marijuana use and testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer 117, 848-853,
doi:10.1002/cncr.25499 (2011).

50 Graham, J. D. P. in Cannabis and Health Vol. 1 (ed J.D.P. Graham) Ch. 8,
271-320 (Academic Press, 1976).

51 Geber, W. F. & Schramm, L. C. Effect of marihuana extract on fetal hamsters
and rabbits. Toxicology and applied pharmacology 14, 276-282 (1969).

52 Forrester, M. B. & Merz, R. D. Risk of selected birth defects with prenatal
illicit drug use, Hawaii, 1986-2002. Journal of toxicology and environmental
health 70, 7-18 (2007).

53 van Gelder, M. M. et al. Maternal periconceptional illicit drug use and the
risk of congenital malformations. Epidemiology 20, 60-66,
doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e31818e5930 (2009).

54 Van Gelder, M. M. H. J., Donders, A. R. T., Devine, O., Roeleveld, N. &
Reefhuis, J. Using bayesian models to assess the effects of under-reporting of
cannabis use on the association with birth defects, national birth defects
prevention study, 1997-2005.  
Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology 28, 424-433, doi:10.1111/ppe.12140
(2014).

55 Jenkins, K. J. et al. Noninherited risk factors and congenital
cardiovascular defects: current knowledge: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young:
endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Circulation 115, 2995-3014,  
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.183216 (2007).

56 Wilson, P. D., Loffredo, C. A., Correa-Villasenor, A. & Ferencz, C.
Attributable fraction for cardiac malformations. Am J Epidemiol 148, 414-423
(1998).

57 Colorado: Department of Public Health and the Environment. Vol. 1 Birth
Defect Data - Colorado Register of Congenital Surveillance Network 1 (ed
Colorado: Department of Public Health and the Environment)
http://www.chd.dphe.state.co.us/cohid/ (Colorado: Department of Public Health
and the Environment, Denver Colorado, USA, 2018).

58 Brents L. in Handbook of Cannabis and Related Pathologies: Biology,
Pharmacology, Diagnosis and Treatment Vol. 1 (ed Preedy V.R.) Ch. 17, 160-170
(Academic Press, 2017).

59 Fried, P. A. & Smith, A. M. A literature review of the consequences of
prenatal marihuana exposure. An emerging theme of a deficiency in aspects of
executive function. Neurotoxicol Teratol 23, 1-11 (2001).

60 Smith, A., Fried, P., Hogan, M. & Cameron, I. The effects of prenatal and
current marijuana exposure on response inhibition: a functional magnetic
resonance imaging study. Brain Cogn 54, 147-149 (2004).

61 Smith, A. M., Fried, P. A., Hogan, M. J. & Cameron, I. Effects of prenatal
marijuana on response inhibition: an fMRI study of young adults. Neurotoxicol
Teratol 26, 533-542, doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2004.04.004 (2004).

62 Smith, A. M., Longo, C. A., Fried, P. A., Hogan, M. J. & Cameron, I.
Effects of marijuana on visuospatial working memory: an fMRI study in young
adults. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 210, 429-438, doi:10.1007/s00213-010-1841-8
(2010).

63 Smith, A. M. et al. Prenatal marijuana exposure impacts executive
functioning into young adulthood: An fMRI study. Neurotoxicol Teratol 58,
53-59, doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2016.05.010 (2016).

64 Zalesky, A. et al. Effect of long-term cannabis use on axonal fibre
connectivity. Brain 135, 2245-2255, doi:aws136 [pii] 10.1093/brain/aws136
(2012).

65 Report of the Queensland Perinatal Maternal and Perinatal Quality Council &
Queensland Health. Vol. 1 (ed Queensland Health) 5 (Queensland Health,
Brisbane, 2018).

66 Werler, M. M., Sheehan, J. E. & Mitchell, A. A. Association of
vasoconstrictive exposures with risks of gastroschisis and small intestinal
atresia. Epidemiology 14, 349-354 (2003).

67 David, A. L. et al. A case-control study of maternal periconceptual and
pregnancy recreational drug use and fetal malformation using hair analysis.
PLoS One 9, e111038, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0111038 (2014).

68 van Gelder, M. M. et al. Maternal periconceptional illicit drug use and the
risk of congenital malformations. Epidemiology 20, 60-66,
doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e31818e5930 (2009).

69 Skarsgard, E. D. et al. Maternal risk factors for gastroschisis in Canada.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103, 111-118, doi:10.1002/bdra.23349
(2015).

70 Torfs, C. P., Velie, E. M., Oechsli, F. W., Bateson, T. F. & Curry, C. J. A
population-based study of gastroschisis: demographic, pregnancy, and lifestyle
risk factors. Teratology 50, 44-53, doi:10.1002/tera.1420500107 (1994).

71 Draper, E. S. et al. Recreational drug use: a major risk factor for
gastroschisis? Am J Epidemiol 167, 485-491, doi:10.1093/aje/kwm335 (2008).

72 Laughon, M. et al. Rising birth prevalence of gastroschisis. J Perinatol
23, 291-293, doi:10.1038/sj.jp.7210896 (2003).

73 Di Tanna, G. L., Rosano, A. & Mastroiacovo, P. Prevalence of gastroschisis
at birth: retrospective study. BMJ (Clinical research ed 325, 1389-1390
(2002).

74 Centre, N. D. i. North Carolina Drug Threat Assessment, April 2003:
Marijuana, (2003).

75 Nelson, J. S., Stebbins, R. C., Strassle, P. D. & Meyer, R. E. Geographic
distribution of live births with tetralogy of Fallot in North Carolina 2003 to
2012\. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106, 881-887,
doi:10.1002/bdra.23566 (2016).

76 Root, E. D., Meyer, R. E. & Emch, M. E. Evidence of localized clustering of
gastroschisis births in North Carolina, 1999-2004. Social science & medicine
(1982) 68, 1361-1367, doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.01.034 (2009).

77 Leos-Toro C. et al. in Cannabis in Canada: Patterns and Trends, 2017 Vol. 1
(eds PROPEL, Centre for Population Health Impact, & University of Waterloo)
1-23 (University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 2017).

78 Moore A., Roulean J. & Skarsgard E. Vol. 1 (ed Health Canada Public Health
Agency of Canada) 57-63 (Health Canada, Ottawa, 2013).

79 DiNieri, J. A. et al. Maternal cannabis use alters ventral striatal
dopamine D2 gene regulation in the offspring. Biol Psychiatry 70, 763-769,
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.06.027 (2011).

80 Szutorisz, H. et al. Parental THC exposure leads to compulsive heroin-
seeking and altered striatal synaptic plasticity in the subsequent generation.
Neuropsychopharmacology 39, 1315-1323, doi:10.1038/npp.2013.352 (2014).

81 Watson, C. T. et al. Genome-Wide DNA Methylation Profiling Reveals
Epigenetic Changes in the Rat Nucleus Accumbens Associated With Cross-
Generational Effects of Adolescent THC Exposure. Neuropsychopharmacology,
doi:10.1038/npp.2015.155 (2015).

82 Manikkam, M., Guerrero-Bosagna, C., Tracey, R., Haque, M. M. & Skinner, M.
K. Transgenerational actions of environmental compounds on reproductive
disease and identification of epigenetic biomarkers of ancestral exposures.
PLoS One 7, e31901, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031901 (2012).

83 Manikkam, M., Tracey, R., Guerrero-Bosagna, C. & Skinner, M. K. Dioxin
(TCDD) induces epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of adult onset disease
and sperm epimutations. PLoS One 7, e46249, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0046249
(2012).

84 Yang, X. et al. Histone modifications are associated with
Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-mediated alterations in antigen-specific T cell
responses. J Biol Chem 289, 18707-18718, doi:10.1074/jbc.M113.545210 (2014).

85 Public Health Agency of Canada. Vol. 1 (ed Health Canada Public Health
Agency of Canada) 1-115 (Health Canada, Ottawa, 2013).

86 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) & United States of America.
National Survey on Drug Use and Health, (2018).

87 National Birth Defects Prevention Network. National Birth Defects
Prevention Network, (2018).

88 Queensland Maternal and Perinatal Quality Council 2017. Vol. 1 1 (ed
Queensland Health) 1-70 (Queensland Health, Brisbane, 2018).

Filed under: Australia,Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies, children and youth,Effects
of Drugs (Papers),Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health :

Tens of thousands of people are ending up in hospital with cannabis-related
health problems, official figures have revealed.

There were 27,501 admissions linked to cannabis in England in 2016/17, a 15
per cent rise in just two years from 23,866 in 2014/15.

Labour MP Jeff Smith, who requested the figures on cannabis-related
hospitalisations, said the large increase was ‘a concern’.

The influential medical journal The Lancet has just taken the unprecedented
step of branding cannabis a ‘huge risk to health’.

Mr Smith, an ex-DJ who has admitted taking drugs, said: ‘It could be that the
rise in hospital admissions is associated with rises in particular types of
cannabis being used – street cannabis now tends to be more “skunk”.’

‘Skunk’ has a high concentration of the main psychoactive compound THC, which
is strongly linked to increased risk of psychosis.

A recent study based on drugs seized by police found that 94 per cent of
cannabis now sold on UK streets is ‘skunk’. Academics say this super-strength
cannabis could be behind the rise in mental health problems linked to the
drug.

Now,The Lancet has warned in a hard-hitting editorial that with the
‘increasing liberalisation of laws’, users need to be made ‘aware of risks to
their health and wellbeing.

The journal was reflecting on results from the 2018 Global Drug Survey, which
asked 130,000 people in 44 nations about their use of drugs. The Lancet said:
‘Globally, cannabis is still the top illicit drug used and, with the
concurrent use of tobacco, remains a huge health risk.’

Its position is in marked contrast to 1995 when it stated: ‘The smoking of
cannabis, even long-term, is not harmful to health.’

Mr Smith claimed: ‘Legalisation and regulation is a better way of reducing
harm than leaving the trade in the hands of criminals.’

_Source: Mail Online July 11th 2018_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Effects of
Drugs,Health,Social Affairs :

SUMMARY

**Background**

Interest in the use of cannabis and cannabinoids to treat chronic non-cancer
pain is increasing, because of their potential to reduce opioid dose
requirements. We aimed to investigate cannabis use in people living with
chronic non-cancer pain who had been prescribed opioids, including their
reasons for use and perceived effectiveness of cannabis; associations between
amount of cannabis use and pain, mental health, and opioid use; the effect of
cannabis use on pain severity and interference over time; and potential
opioid-sparing effects of cannabis.

**Methods**

The Pain and Opioids IN Treatment study is a prospective, national,
observational cohort of people with chronic non-cancer pain prescribed
opioids. Participants were recruited through community pharmacies across
Australia, completed baseline interviews, and were followed up with phone
interviews or self-complete questionnaires yearly for 4 years.

Recruitment took place from August 13, 2012, to April 8, 2014. Participants
were asked about lifetime and past year chronic pain conditions, duration of
chronic non-cancer pain, pain self-efficacy, whether pain was neuropathic,
lifetime and past 12-month cannabis use, number of days cannabis was used in
the past month, and current depression and generalised anxiety disorder. We
also estimated daily oral morphine equivalent doses of opioids.

We used logistic regression to investigate cross-sectional associations with
frequency of cannabis use, and lagged mixed-effects models to examine temporal
associations between cannabis use and outcomes.

**Findings**

1514 participants completed the baseline interview and were included in the
study from Aug 20, 2012, to April 14, 2014. Cannabis use was common, and by
4-year follow-up, 295 (24%) participants had used cannabis for pain. Interest
in using cannabis for pain increased from 364 (33%) participants (at baseline)
to 723 (60%) participants (at 4 years). At 4-year follow-up, compared with
people with no cannabis use, we found that participants who used cannabis had
a greater pain severity score (risk ratio 1·14, 95% CI 1·01–1·29, for less
frequent cannabis use; and 1·17, 1·03–1·32, for daily or near-daily cannabis
use), greater pain interference score (1·21, 1·09–1·35; and 1·14, 1·03–1·26),
lower pain self-efficacy scores (0·97, 0·96–1·00; and 0·98, 0·96–1·00), and
greater generalised anxiety disorder severity scores (1·07, 1·03–1·12; and
1·10, 1·06–1·15).

We found no evidence of a temporal relationship between cannabis use and pain
severity or pain interference, and no evidence that cannabis use reduced
prescribed opioid use or increased rates of opioid discontinuation.

**Interpretation**

Cannabis use was common in people with chronic non-cancer pain who had been
prescribed opioids, but we found no evidence that cannabis use improved
patient outcomes. People who used cannabis had greater pain and lower self-
efficacy in managing pain, and there was no evidence that cannabis use reduced
pain severity or interference or exerted an opioid-sparing effect. As cannabis
use for medicinal purposes increases globally, it is important that large well
designed clinical trials, which include people with complex comorbidities, are
conducted to determine the efficacy of cannabis for chronic non-cancer pain.
Funding National Health and Medical Research Council and the Australian
Government.

_Source:https://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lanpub/PIIS2468-2667(18)30110-5.pdf
July 2018_

Filed under: Australia,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Health,Marijuana and Medicine,Social Affairs :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/rexfeatures_9353696c-1-1024x683.jpg)

By Alison George

Cannabis is in the headlines for its potential medical benefits after the
recent confiscation of cannabis oil medication from the mother of a 12-year-
old British boy with severe epilepsy. The furore that ensued is shining a
light on campaigns for cannabis oils to be made legal for medical reasons, and
the UK government has now announced a review into the use of medicinal
cannabis. Here’s what you need to know.

**What is cannabis oil?**

Cannabis oil is extracted from the cannabis plant _Cannabis sativa_. The
plants medicinal properties have been touted for more than 3,000 years. It was
described in the ancient Eygyptian Ebers papyrus around 1550BC, and it was
likely used as a medicine in China before that. Some varieties of the plant
contain high levels of the psychoactive substance tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
which is responsible for the “high” that comes from smoking or eating cannabis
leaves or resin. The plant’s other major chemical component is cannabidiol,
which has no psychoactive effect. Both act on the body’s natural cannabinoid
receptors which are involved in many processes such as memory, pain and
appetite. The cannabis plant also contains more than 100 other different
cannabinoid compounds at lower concentrations.

**So can cannabis oil make you high?**

It depends on the THC content. Some types of _Cannabis sativa_ plant, known as
hemp, contain very little THC. The extracts from these plants contain mainly
cannabidiol, so will not get anyone stoned.

**Is it legal?**

That’s a complicated question. In the UK cannabidiol is legal. Cannabis plant
extracts (known as hemp or CBD oils) are available in high-street stores but
the THC content must be below 0.2 per cent. “THC is not psychoactive at this
level,” says David Nutt, a neuropsychopharmacologist at Imperial College
London. But cannabidiol is illegal in many other countries.

In the USA for example, cannabidiol is classed as a schedule 1 controlled
substance, and can only be sold in states where cannabis use is legal.

However, the tide may turn in favour of cannabidiol after a recent World
Health Organisation review. This concluded that cannabidiol “exhibits no
effects indicative of any abuse or dependence potential” but “has been
demonstrated as an effective treatment of epilepsy … and may be a useful
treatment for a number of other medical conditions.”

**What is the evidence that cannabis oils can help treat epilepsy?**

Although there is some scientific evidence that THC has potential to control
convulsions, its mind-altering effects mean that much of the focus has turned
to cannabidiol – particularly for childhood epilepsies that conventional drugs
fail to control.

Two recent high quality randomised and placebo controlled trials showed that
cannabidiol is an effective treatment for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet
syndrome, severe forms of epilepsy. The mechanism of action is unknown, but it
may be due to a combination of effects, such as inhibiting the activity of
neurons and dampening inflammation in the brain.

The situation is less clear when it comes to the use of commercial cannabis
oils to control seizures, where the evidence is mainly anecdotal, and the oils
can contain differing concentrations of cannabidiol and THC.

The UK government announced on 19 June that it would review the use of medical
cannabis.

**Are there any cannabis-based epilepsy drugs on the market?**

Not yet. In April the US Food and Drug Administration recommended the approval
of a drug called Epidiolex for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome.
Its active ingredient is cannabidiol, and final approval is due at the end of
this month.

However, it is possible the drug is not as effective as cannabis oil
containing THC, says Nutt. For example, the cannabis oil used to treat Billy
Caldwell, the boy at the centre of the recent cannabis oil confiscation
furore, contained cannabidiol and a low dose of THC, because cannabidiol alone
did not stop all his seizures.

This is one of the big unknowns. “It is important to remember that there is
currently very little scientific evidence to support cannabis oil containing
both THC and cannabidiol as a treatment for epilepsy,” said the charity
Epilepsy Action, in a statement issued this month.

**Are cannabis-based medications available for other conditions?**

Yes. A synthetic version of THC called Nabilone has been used since the 1980s
to treat nausea after chemotherapy and to help people put on weight. A drug
called Sativex is also approved for the treatment of pain and spasms
associated with multiple sclerosis. It contains an equal mix of THC and
cannabidiol, but would not be suitable for the treatment of children with
epilepsy such as Billy. “If you used that to treat epilepsy, the kids would be
stoned off their heads,” says Nutt.

**What is the aim of the UK government’s review of medical cannabis?**

The first part of the review will look at the evidence for the therapeutic
value of cannabis-based products. It can recommend any promising ones for the
second part of the review. This will be carried out by the government’s
Advisory Council for the Misuse of Drugs, which can recommend a change to the
legal medical status of cannabis and cannabinoids.

This will hopefully lead to a relaxation of the rules surrounding research
into cannabis-based medicines says Tom Freeman, a clinical
psychopharmacologist at King’s College London.

In the UK cannabis currently has Schedule 1 status, the most restrictive
category, which is for drugs which are not used medicinally such as LSD. “This
creates a Catch 22 situation,” says Freeman. “You can’t show that cannabis and
cannabis-based products have medicinal value because of restrictions on
medical research.” If cannabis is moved to the Schedule 2 category, it will
join substances such as morphine and diamorphine (heroin) which can be
prescribed by doctors if there is a clinical need.

Source: https://www.newscientist.com/article/2172415-cannabis-oil-what-is-it-
and-does-it-really-work-as-medicine/ June 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Marijuana and Medicine :

_Interviewed by Mark Gold, MD_

## FEATURED ADDICTION EXPERT:

Daniel M. Blumenthal, MD, MBA  
Attending Physician, Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital  
Instructor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School  
Associate Chief Medical Officer at Devoted Health

**Do FDA-approved psychostimulants increase the risk of cardiovascular
events?**

There is no convincing evidence that FDA-approved psychostimulants (e.g.
methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, amphetamine salts, and atomoxatine)
increase the risk for cardiovascular events among patients without pre-
existing cardiovascular disease (CVD). However, among those with pre-existing
heart disease, including arrhythmias, coronary artery disease, heart failure,
or in patients for whom an increase in heart rate or blood pressure could be
harmful, psychostimulants may increase the risk for cardiovascular events.

**How does cocaine end up as the number two cause of drug deaths, just behind
opioids? Excluding adulteration with opioids, how does cocaine kill you?**  
The effects of cocaine on the cardiovascular system can be grouped into acute
and chronic processes. Cocaine use can cause one or more of several acute,
life-threatening cardiovascular effects. The most common is myocardial
ischemia or infarction (e.g. a heart attack). Cocaine can induce a heart
attack through one of several mechanisms. First, cocaine causes arterial
(including coronary artery) vasoconstriction, which can lead to coronary
vasospasm. Second, cocaine activates platelets, which increases the risk of
thrombosis (including coronary thrombosis). Third, cocaine use produces an
adrenergic surge which induces tachycardia (high heart rate) and hypertension.
High heart rate and hypertension both increase myocardial oxygen demand, which
can cause supply-demand mismatch and precipitate myocardial ischemia or
infarction. Fourth, vasospasm or stress associated with cocaine use can also
precipitate coronary artery plaque rupture (the mechanism underlying most
classic heart attacks).

Two thirds of heart attacks due to cocaine occur within three hours of cocaine
use; the risk of a heart attack is 24-fold higher than normal in the first
sixty minutes after using cocaine. Cocaine has several other potentially
devastating acute effects, including stroke, aortic dissection (e.g.
dissection of the major artery connecting the heart to the rest of the body),
life threatening heart arrhythmias, and myocarditis which can also occur with
chronic use. Chronic cocaine can result in accelerated atherogenesis (i.e.
accelerated plaque buildup in the coronary arteries), hypertrophy of the left
ventricle, dilated cardiomyopathy, aortic aneurysms, and coronary aneurysms.

Patients who are acutely intoxicated with cocaine and present with chest
discomfort should be referred to an emergency room immediately for evaluation.
They should undergo a chest-x-ray, an electrocardiogram, blood work to
evaluate for evidence of a heart attack and non-myocardial muscle breakdown
(e.g. rhabdomyolysis), and to assess kidney function, white and red blood cell
counts, and liver function.

Cocaine intoxication is diagnosed if and when patients report recent cocaine
use and through serum and urine toxicology screens (which should be performed
immediately as well). If a clinician suspects that a patient is acutely
intoxicated with cocaine, treatment should not be withheld while waiting for
the results of the toxicology screen. Patients with acute cocaine intoxication
and symptoms concerning for cerebrovascular or other cardiovascular sequelae
of cocaine intoxication may also need additional imaging to assess for
evidence of damage to the heart, aorta, or other blood vessels.

In terms of treatment, these patients should receive benzodiazepines to help
mitigate the adrenergic surge. If chest pain due to myocardial ischemia is
suspected, sublingual nitroglycerin should be administered. Ongoing ischemic
symptoms, as well as hypertension and tachycardia (drivers of myocardial
oxygen demand) should be treated with calcium channel blockers (i.e. diltiazem
or verapamil). Beta blockers should ideally be avoided until there is no
cocaine remaining in the patient’s system. If beta blockers must be used, we
recommend using either labetalol or carvedilol, which are non-selective
inhibitors of both alpha and beta receptors (note: other beta blockers that
are selective for beta receptors are contraindicated due to a theoretical risk
that selective beta blockade could lead to unopposed alpha-mediated arterial
vasoconstriction, which could precipitate marked hypertension and even
peripheral and splanchnic ischemia).

Alternative, and highly effective, agents for treatment of hypertension
include IV nitroglycerin (which should also be used if the patient has chest
pain) and IV nitroprusside. Phentolamine, an alpha blocker, can be used for
refractory hypertension. Patients presenting with chest pain should also
receive a full dose chewable aspirin (325 mg) and 80 mg of atorvastatin (if
available). Patients with ECG changes consistent with myocardial ischemia or
infarction and/or elevated blood levels of cardiac biomarkers should be
managed identically to patients with non-cocaine induced myocardial ischemia
and infarction.

**Cocaine and methamphetamine addicts often have heart disease. Why? How is a
diagnosis made?**  
Cardiac sequelae are the second most common cause of death (behind overdose)
in patients who use methamphetamines (“meth”). Like cocaine use, use of
methamphetamines can produce both acute and chronic cardiovascular disease.
Acute intoxication with methamphetamines produces a hyperadrenergic state, not
unlike having a pheochromocytoma. The hypertension and tachycardia that result
can lead to myocardial ischemia and infarction, aortic dissection, malignant
arrhythmias, Takotsubo’s (stressinduced) cardiomyopathy, and cardiac arrest.

Chronic methamphetamine use can lead to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (due to
persistent severe hypertension) or dilated cardiomyopathy (due to the drug’s
toxic effects on myocardium), and the clinical syndrome of heart failure. In
addition, chronic meth use can also cause pulmonary arterial hypertension
(PAH). Meth-associated PAH is a devastating disease, with five year mortality
rates above 50%.

Diagnosing and managing acute methamphetamine intoxication:

Patients who present with suspected acute methamphetamine intoxication should
undergo a full physical exam, electrocardiogram, and basic lab work (including
basic metabolic panel, blood counts, clotting times (prothrombin time and
international normalized ratio), liver function tests, creatine phosphokinase
(CPK), urinalysis, and urine and serum toxicology screens). Amphetamine
intoxication or toxicity is ultimately diagnosed by confirming the presence of
amphetamines in urine or serum. However, if patients present with signs and
symptoms which raise concern for amphetamine intoxication—including
hyperthermia, agitation, hypertension, and tachycardia—treatment should not be
delayed while waiting for these test results to return.

If there is concern for myocardial ischemia or infarction (for example, if the
patient complains of chest discomfort or shortness of breath or the ECG shows
ischemic changes), then cardiac biomarkers should be checked as well (i.e.
troponin I or T). Acute methamphetamine intoxication with secondary sequelae
(i.e. agitation, hypertension, tachycardia) should be managed initially with
sedatives (benzodiazepines and 2nd generation atypical antipsychotics).

Hyperthermia should be managed aggressively by controlling core body
temperature with sedatives and, if necessary, with paralysis and intubation
(but antipyretics should not be used).

Rhabdomyolysis is common, and a CPK level should always be checked in patients
who are acutely intoxicated with meth. If the hypertension is refractory to
treatment with an adequate trial of sedation, then nitrates and/or
phentolamine should be used. Calcium channel blockers can also be used, and
are effective agents for managing tachycardia that persists despite sedation.
Beta-blockers should be avoided in the acute setting to avoid precipitating
unopposed alpha-mediated vasoconstriction (via identical mechanisms to those
described above).

If beta blockers are necessary for chronic management of a different disease
process (e.g. cardiomyopathy or coronary artery disease), then labetalol or
carvedilol are the preferred agents due to their partial alphaantagonism.
Myocardial infarction in the setting of methamphetamine intoxication should be
managed per evidence-based guidelines for the management of heart attacks, and
as described above (for cocaine). The one exception is that, if heart rate
control is needed, calcium channel blockers, not beta blockers, should be
used. Interestingly, monoclonal antibodies against methamphetamine have been
developed and are currently in clinical trials.

Chest pain in the setting of acute methamphetamine intoxication should raise
concern not only for myocardial infarction, but also for acute aortic
dissection. Methamphetamine abuse is the second most common cause of acute
fatal aortic dissection in the US, after hypertension. Unlike chest discomfort
due to myocardial ischemia, which often starts as mild or moderate discomfort
and worsens progressively over minutes-hours, chest discomfort due to aortic
dissection is typically extreme from the outset.

**What does the patient PE and EKG look like if a patient has overdosed on
opioids? What about when injected with Narcan and reversed? Does Methadone,
when given as a MAT, have QT and other effects on the heart? What about
Suboxone and the heart?**  
Opiate overdose can precipitate respiratory depression and coma. The pupils
will be mioitic, or “pinpoint.” Patients commonly experience mild hypotension
as well. The electrocardiogram classically shows sinus bradycardia with
nonspecific changes. Approximately 20% of patients will have prolongation of
the QT interval. Administration of an adequate dose of Narcan rapidly reverses
the respiratory depression, miosis, and coma, and can also lead to
improvements in blood pressure and an increase in heart rate.

However, Narcan is short acting and the reversal is temporary. Thus, patients
must be monitored following Narcan administration to determine if they need
subsequent doses, or even initiation of an IV naloxone drip. Methadone may
also cause QT prolongation but is an uncommon cause of Torsades Des Pointes,
the potentially fatal arrhythmia that can result from QT prolongation.
Suboxone can also cause hypotension, including orthostatic hypotension, and
should be used with caution in patients with established cardiovascular
disease (e.g. coronary artery disease). However, I am unaware of any unique
cardiovascular side effects associated with suboxone use.

**Does smoking have effects on the heart?**  
Smoking is an extremely strong and independent risk factor for heart disease,
stroke, and peripheral artery disease. Smoking increases the risk of these
conditions in a dose dependent fashion, and no amount of smoking is safe.
People who smoke less than five cigarettes per day are at increased risk for
myocardial infarction relative to non-smokers. The incidence of myocardial
infarction among men and women who have smoked at least twenty cigarettes per
day for any period of time is three fold and six fold higher, respectively,
than the incidence of myocardial infarction in never smokers.

More generally, smoking increases the risk of coronary artery disease, heart
attack, arterial aneurysms, aortic dissection, blood clots, carotid artery
stenosis, upper and lower extremity ischemic claudication, and death.
Smoking’s deleterious cardiac, cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular
effects are the result of a variety of mechanisms that contribute to
atherogenesis. Smoking is associated with insulin resistance and oxidization
of low-density lipoprotein (LDL-c, or bad cholesterol). Oxidization of LDL-c
makes it more proatherogenic. Smoking also activates the sympathetic nervous
system which increases heart rate and blood pressure and leads to peripheral
vasoconstriction.

Moreover, smoking increases inflammation, which activates platelets and
creates a prothrombotic milieu. Furthermore, smoking damages blood vessel
walls, rendering them less elastic and promoting premature arterial
stiffening; in addition, smoking promotes endothelial dysfunction, which
impairs the ability of coronary arteries to vasodilate. The risks of
cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and peripheral artery disease and associated
events decrease significantly and relatively rapidly with smoking cessation.

**What about cannabis addicts or chronic smokers and the cardiologist?**  
While we know relatively less about the effects of marijuana on the
cardiovascular system, there is significant and growing interest in
understanding how marijuana use impacts heart and blood vessel function. We do
know that smoking marijuana leads to an acute, four- to five-fold increase in
the risk of myocardial infarction in young men. This risk persists for
approximately 60 minutes following inhalation. Daily cannabis use is
associated with a 1.5%-3% annual increase in the risk of myocardial
infarction. There is some evidence that the mechanism underlying this
increased risk is a higher likelihood of experiencing coronary artery
vasospasm (as opposed to accelerated atherogenesis).

The physiologic effects of marijuana may surprise some people. Marijuana
intoxication typically leads to a slowing of the reflexes, and the appearance
of a relaxed state. However, marijuana use actually stimulates the sympathetic
nervous system, which leads to tachycardia, the release of systemic
catecholamines, and increased myocardial oxygen demand. At the same time,
marijuana use increases supine systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and
increases the likelihood of experiencing orthostatic hypotension.

There is also some evidence that marijuana use activates platelets by
modulating the endocannabinoid system. Longitudinal prospective studies of
cannabis users have failed to reveal evidence that chronic cannabis use leads
to significant alterations body mass index, blood pressure, total cholesterol,
high density lipoprotein, triglycerides, or blood glucose levels. There is no
consistent evidence that marijuana use increases cardiovascular mortality. We
know relatively little about whether the mode of use (i.e. smoking vs.
ingestion) modifies the effects of marijuana on the cardiovascular system.

**Ketamine is being used off label for depression. What are the cardiovascular
risks and concern when this is done?**  
This is an extremely interesting question. Ketamine is a sympathomimetic.
Studies of the cardiovascular effects of Ketamine have found that the drug
increases cardiac output by up to 50% in healthy subjects. However, among
sicker patients, the drug’s effects appear to be more variable, with some
patients experiencing augmented ventricular performance, and others
demonstrating some impairment in left ventricular function due to Ketamine use
(among coronary artery bypass graft patients, for example, induction of
anesthesia with Ketamine has been shown to significantly reduce left
ventricular stroke volume).

Ketamine does consistently produce tachycardia and this simple fact should
lead us to be cautious about using it to treat depression in patients with
obstructive coronary artery disease or congestive heart failure. The
cardiovascular effects of Ketamine remain incompletely characterized, and the
prospect of widespread use to treat chronic illnesses like depression
heightens the need to more clearly elucidate how Ketamine effects the
cardiovascular system.

**Withdrawal from opioids is associated with hypertension and tachycardia. Is
this a concern?**  
Yes—the hypertension and tachycardia which occur during opioid withdrawal can
undoubtedly stress the cardiovascular system. Patients with a history of
coronary artery disease (particularly those with a history of angina),
patients with congestive heart failure, and those with aortic aneurysms should
be monitored closely during the withdrawal period for new or worsening
cardiovascular symptoms. In addition, patients’ home cardiovascular medication
regimens, including beta blockers, antihypertensives, and anti-anginals (i.e.
nitrates) should ideally be continued during the withdrawal period if possible
in order to blunt the physiologic effects of opioid withdrawal.

**Are any drug withdrawal syndromes a concern to a cardiologist?**  
In general, most withdrawal syndromes result in some degree of heightened
sympathetic tone, which can produce hypertension and tachycardia. In patients
with serious chronic cardiovascular illness, including coronary artery
disease, congestive heart failure, valvular disease (i.e. aortic stenosis,
mitral stenosis, or mitral regurgitation), or arrhythmias, including atrial
fibrillation or paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, this sympathetic
surge can precipitate symptoms or even acute decompensations. So, and this is
a key point, it is the patient substrate which matters more than the specific
withdrawal syndrome. Put another way, if the patient has significant
cardiovascular comorbidities, any withdrawal syndrome may be dangerous.

In general, I worry most about alcohol withdrawal for a few reasons. First,
alcoholics regularly live with multiple comorbidities, including
cardiovascular comorbidities like atrial fibrillation and heart failure (which
may be due to an alcoholic cardiomyopathy). I have seen alcohol withdrawal
precipitate new or recurrent atrial fibrillation, and lead to acute heart
failure decompensations in patients with underlying alcoholic
cardiomyopathies.

Second, alcohol withdrawal is by far the most mortal withdrawal syndrome;
seizures due to withdrawal, or delirium tremens, carry a significant risk of
mortality in patients without underlying cardiovascular illness, and may be
even more dangerous in patients who are suffering from concomitant
cardiovascular disease. Third, many alcoholics are poorly nourished, and have
significant electrolyte disturbances, including hypokalemia (which is a risk
factor for ventricular arrhythmias).

The wasting of magnesium that occurs in alcoholics is particularly concerning,
because potassium repletion is ineffective in the absence of adequate serum
magnesium levels. Thus, when checking basic electrolytes in an alcoholic (e.g.
sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, chloride, etc.), be sure to also check
magnesium levels. And, if an alcoholic is hypokalemic and you don’t have a
serum magnesium level, replete the magnesium before giving potassium (or
alongside the potassium). A little extra magnesium won’t have any adverse
consequences, but failing to replete magnesium could result in failure to
correct the low potassium level, which could have serious consequences.

**Which patients should an addiction rehab send to a cardiologist for
evaluation?  
** This is a difficult question to answer with high specificity. First, any
patient with new or concerning cardiovascular symptoms or confirmed
cardiovascular disease, including 1) exertional chest discomfort; 2)
documentation of a new or recurrent arrhythmia; 3) new exertional shortness of
breath; and/or 4) new signs or symptoms of congestive heart failure, including
exertional shortness of breath, new or progressive lower extremity edema,
and/or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea or orthopnea, should be evaluated by a
cardiologist. In addition, anyone with a syncopal event without a prodrome
(i.e. sudden, unexplained, and unheralded syncope) or with a history of
complex congenital heart disease should be referred to see a cardiologist.

Patients with chronic, stable cardiovascular comorbidities, including coronary
artery disease (with or without angina), congestive heart failure, peripheral
artery disease (with or without claudication), valvular disease (i.e. aortic
stenosis or mitral regurgitation), and/or cerebrovascular disease do not
necessarily need to be seen by a cardiologist while they are in Rehab, and
provided they remain stable and are able to continue their long term
outpatient treatment regimens for these conditions. However, a rehab should
generally have a low threshold to engage a cardiologist in the management of
any patient with complex, chronic cardiovascular disease.

**What are the CVD effects of alcohol use, abuse, and addiction? Alcohol users
have a variety of CV effects including noticing that their heart skips a beat
or so…is this related to alcohol abusers or alcoholics heart blocks?  
** Modest alcohol consumption—two or fewer drinks per night for a man, and one
drink per night for a woman— has been shown to be healthy, and may even reduce
all-cause mortality and mortality due to cardiovascular disease. However, when
consumed in greater quantities, alcohol is a cardiotoxin. People who abuse or
are dependent on alcohol have a heightened risk of arrhythmias—including
atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and ventricular arrhythmias (due to
electrolyte abnormalities or an alcoholic cardiomyopathy)—and alcoholic
cardiomyopathy.

Alcoholic cardiomyopathies can be profound; I have taken care of daily
drinkers who present with severe, bi-ventricular dysfunction and left
ventricular ejection fractions (LVEF) of 10%-15% (normal is 52- 70%).
Importantly, alcoholic cardiomyopathy is usually not this fulminant. Many
daily drinkers may suffer from very mild, and even subclinical, forms of this
cardiomyopathy, and their LVEF may be normal.

However, in these patients the cardiotoxic effects of alcohol may still
predispose to premature atrial and ventricular beats—which they may
experience, and describe, as “skipped beats.” As noted above, alcoholic
cardiomyopathy increases the risk of both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias,
and prior work shows that the risk of ventricular tachycardia in alcoholic
cardiomyopathy is comparable to that seen in patients with idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathies. The electrolyte abnormalities commonly found in
alcoholics—most notably hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia— further compound the
risk for these arrhythmias.

Fortunately, alcoholic cardiomyopathy is usually a reversible process; I have
multiple patients whose LVEF has improved from this 10%-15% range (while
drinking daily) to 50% or more (essentially normal) after one-two years of
abstinence from alcohol and adherence with traditional heart failure
therapies. Alcoholic cardiomyopathy may at times reach a point of
irreversibility, of course, but, broadly speaking, it has a very favorable
prognosis if long term abstinence can be achieved.

Alcoholic abuse/dependence is also associated with a modestly increased risk
for myocardial infarction, particularly in patients with pre-existing
cardiovascular disease.

Source:

https://www.rivermendhealth.com/resources/qa-daniel-blumenthal-abuse-
cardiovascular-disease May 2018

Filed under:
Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Cocaine,Health,Heroin/Methadone,Ketamine,Nicotine :

_Group formally submits Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) request to obtain
sources that contributed to the creation of the New York State report released
by the Department of Health endorsing legalization_

(New York, New York) - Today, Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM), in
coordination with its award-winning science advisory board and its New York
State Affiliate, SAM-NY, released a comprehensive rebuttal to the report
released by the New York Department of Health recommending the legalization of
marijuana for recreational sales. SAM's analysis - reviewed by top scientists
from Harvard to Johns Hopkins - found several major flaws in the NYS-issued
report and calls into question its bases and conclusions.

**Click here to read the comprehensive, peer-reviewed rebuttal**.

"Why weren't addiction medicine doctors or the state's medical association
consulted with on this so-called scientific report?" said Dr. Kevin Sabet,
founder and president of SAM, and a former Obama administration advisor. "The
NYS report reads more like a marijuana industry lobbyist's manifesto than a
research-based document. This manifesto is so one-sided that SAM today
formally submitted a **FOIL** request asking the state to disclose all its
sources and any ties to the Big Marijuana industry."

The report claims that marijuana reduces pain and opioid dependence. In
reality, multiple studies have found that marijuana is not an effective
treatment for chronic pain. Actually, use of the drug has in some cases made
the pain worse.

Additionally, the report claims that marijuana legalization is not increasing
crime around marijuana facilities. To the contrary, studies have shown that
increased gang violence and other indicators of crime are on the rise in
communities near dispensaries.

The report also glosses over major public health and safety data showing
increased use among some teens in Colorado, increased risk of DUI in legalized
states, increased minority arrests for marijuana in Colorado, and other key
data.

Earlier this year, SAM's advisory board released a comprehensive report
analyzing early data from Colorado and several other legalized states.

Source: Email from SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana) reply@learnaboutsam.org
August 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Political
Sector :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/ao201701130a_00019324890681.jpeg)

As the legalization of marijuana continues to spread among various states
within the U.S., researchers, and physicians are trying to fully grasp the
potential health hazards of the recreational use of the drug. Since marijuana
can be consumed through a variety of methods—e.g. _,_ eating, smoking, or
vaporizing—it is important to understand if and how drug delivery methods
affect users. With that in mind, a recent study from investigators at Portland
State University found benzene and other potentially cancer-causing chemicals
in the vapor produced by butane hash oil, a cannabis extract.

Findings from the new study—published recently in _ACS Omega_ in an article
entitled “Toxicant Formation in Dabbing: The Terpene Story”—raises health
concerns about dabbing, or vaporizing hash oil—a practice that is growing in
popularity, especially in states that have legalized medical or recreational
marijuana. Dabbing is already controversial. The practice consists of placing
a small amount of cannabis extract (a dab) on a heated surface and inhaling
the resulting vapor. The practice has raised concerns because it produces
extremely elevated levels of cannabinoids—the active ingredients in marijuana.

"Given the widespread legalization of marijuana in the U.S., it is imperative
to study the full toxicology of its consumption to guide future policy," noted
senior study author Robert Strongin, Ph.D., professor of organic chemistry at
Portland State University. "The results of these studies clearly indicate that
dabbing, while considered a form of vaporization, may, in fact, deliver
significant amounts of toxins."

Dr. Strongin and his colleagues analyzed the chemical profile of terpenes—the
fragrant oils in marijuana and other plants—by vaporizing them in much the
same way as a user would vaporize hash oil.

“The practice of 'dabbing' with butane hash oil has emerged with great
popularity in states that have legalized cannabis,” the authors wrote.
“Despite their growing popularity, the degradation product profiles of these
new products have not been extensively investigated.”

The authors continued, stating that the current study focused on the
“chemistry of myrcene and other common terpenes found in cannabis extracts.
Methacrolein, benzene, and several other products of concern to human health
were formed under the conditions that simulated real-world dabbing. The
terpene degradation products observed are consistent with those reported in
the atmospheric chemistry literature.”

Many of the terpenes that the researchers discovered in the vaporized hash oil
are also used in e-cigarette liquids. Moreover, previous experiments by Dr.
Strongin and his colleagues found similar toxic chemicals in e-cigarette vapor
when the devices were used at high-temperature settings. The dabbing
experiments in the current study produced benzene—a known carcinogen—at levels
many times higher than the ambient air, the researchers noted. It also
produced high levels of methacrolein, a chemical similar to acrolein, another
carcinogen.

“The results of these studies clearly indicate that dabbing, although
considered a form of vaporization, may, in fact, deliver significant amounts
of toxic degradation products,” the authors concluded. “The difficulty users
find in controlling the nail temperature put[s] users at risk of exposing
themselves to not only methacrolein but also benzene. Additionally, the heavy
focus on terpenes as additives seen as of late in the cannabis industry is of
great concern due to the oxidative liability of these compounds when heated.
This research also has significant implications for flavored e-cigarette
products due to the extensive use of terpenes as flavorings.”

Source: https://www.genengnews.com/gen-news-highlights/cancer-causing-
compounds-found-in-cannabis-oil/81254980 September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health :

  * **Trials on mice showed those exposed to cannabinoids had memory impairments**
  * **Brain scans by British and Portuguese researchers then confirmed the finding**
  * **The new experiment shines a light on the little-known dangers of cannabinoids**

Smoking cannabis or taking medication based on the drug can harm the brain and
damage memory, research has found. Trials on mice showed those exposed long-
term to cannabinoids - compounds found in the marijuana plant - suffered
'significant' memory impairments.

Brain scans confirmed the finding, and showed cannabis can stop vital memory-
controlling regions of the organ communicating with each other. Experts fear
both recreational users and those who rely on it to combat their health
conditions may be at risk of memory problems.

The study comes after Government advisers yesterday declared doctors should be
able to prescribe medicinal cannabis, which contains the potentially harmful
cannabinoids.

The Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs (ACMD) agreed cannabis does
possess a medicinal benefit, in a review sent to to Home Secretary Sajid
Javid.

He commissioned the review after two high profile cases, including that of
epileptic 12-year-old Billy Caldwell, whose mother had seven bottles of
cannabis oil that helped combat his seizures confiscated at Heathrow Airport.

For years scientists have warned smoking cannabis can lead to mental health
problems, such as schizophrenia. Studies have shown cannabis can also shrink
memory-related structures in the brain, most notably the hippocampus. But
there is little understanding of the potential negative side effects of
cannabinoids, such as CBD.

The new experiment, led by scientists at the universities of Lancaster and
Lisbon, shines a light on the dangers.

They studied the effects of cannabinoid drug WIN 55,212-2 in mice. It is
similar to THC, the compound that causes a high in cannabis.

Researchers discovered long-term exposure to the cannabinoid impaired the
learning ability and memory of mice. Rodents who had been exposed to the drug
could not even distinguish between a familiar and novel object.

Brain scans backed up the initial finding – and showed the drug affected the
healthy function of brain regions involved in learning and memory.

It was discovered that the cannabinoid stopped the hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex from communicating with each other.

Researchers led by Lancaster’s Dr Neil Dawson suggested this was to blame for
the negative effects of cannabinoids on memory.

The findings were published in the Journal of Neurochemistry.

Dr Dawson said: ‘This work offers valuable new insight into the way in which
long-term cannabinoid exposure negatively impacts on the brain.’ He called for
further trials to confirm their finding, in order to establish exactly how
cannabinoids can damage memory.

Ian Hamilton, a drug researcher at York University, told Mail Online: ‘We know
that heavy use of cannabis impairs memory, although the good news is this can
be reversed if the person abstains.

‘But studies like this add to the need for young people to avoid daily use of
cannabis as this will hinder their ability to learn and recall information for
exams.’

The use of medicinal cannabis has been increasing worldwide over the past
decade. It is currently not legal medicinally in the UK.

Evidence published in respected journals shows the drug can help to combat
epilepsy, multiple sclerosis and chronic pain.

And in recent years, Spain, South Africa, Uruguay and several states in the US
have even made cannabis legal for recreational use.

Lisbon’s Professor Ana Sebastiao said: ‘As for all medicines, cannabinoid-
based therapies have not only beneficial disease-related actions, but also
negative side effects.

‘It is for the medical doctor to weight the advantages of the therapy… against
the potential side effects.’

### THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THC AND CBD

Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) are both derived from the
cannabis plant.

Together, they are part of the cannabinoid group of compounds found in
hashish, hash oil, and most strains of marijuana.

THC is the psychoactive compound responsible for the euphoric, 'high' feeling
often associated with marijuana.

THC interacts with CB1 receptors in the central nervous system and brain and
creates the sensations of euphoria and anxiety.

CBD does not fit these receptors well, and actually decreases the effects of
THC, and is not psychoactive.

CBD is thought to help reduce anxiety and inflammation.

Source:

https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-5975265/Long-term-use-cannabis-
impairs-memory-conclude-researchers.html July 2018

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Health :

Authors: Mücke M, Weier M, Carter C, Copeland J, Degenhardt L, Cuhls H,
Radbruch L, Häuser W, Conrad R.

### Abstract

We provide a systematic review and meta-analysis on the efficacy,
tolerability, and safety of cannabinoids in palliative medicine. The Cochrane
Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, PsycINFO, PubMed,
Scopus, and http://clinicaltrials.gov, and a selection of cancer journals were
searched up until 15th of March 2017.

Of the 108 screened studies, nine studies with a total of 1561 participants
were included. Overall, the nine studies were at moderate risk of bias. The
quality of evidence comparing cannabinoids with placebo was rated according to
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation as low or
very low because of indirectness, imprecision, and potential reporting bias.

In cancer patients, there were no significant differences between cannabinoids
and placebo for improving caloric intake (standardized mean differences [SMD]:

0.2 95% confidence interval [CI]: [-0.66, 1.06] P = 0.65),

appetite (SMD: 0.81 95% CI: [-1.14, 2.75]; P = 0.42),

nausea/vomiting (SMD: 0.21 [-0.10, 0.52] P = 0.19),

> 30% decrease in pain (risk differences [RD]: 0.07 95% CI: [-0.01, 0.16]; P =
0.07),

or sleep problems (SMD: -0.09 95% CI: [-0.62, 0.43] P = 0.72).

In human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients, cannabinoids were superior to
placebo for weight gain (SMD: 0.57 [0.22; 0.92]; P = 0.001) and appetite (SMD:
0.57 [0.11; 1.03]; P = 0.02) but not for nausea/vomiting (SMD: 0.20 [-0.15,
0.54]; P = 0.26).

Regarding side effects in cancer patients, there were no differences between
cannabinoids and placebo in symptoms of dizziness (RD: 0.03 [-0.02; 0.08]; P =
0.23) or poor mental health (RD: -0.01 [-0.04; 0.03]; P = 0.69), whereas in
HIV patients, there was a significant increase in mental health symptoms (RD:
0.05 [0.00; 0.11]; P = 0.05).

Tolerability (measured by the number of withdrawals because of adverse events)
did not differ significantly in cancer (RD: 1.15 [0.80; 1.66]; P = 0.46) and
HIV patients (RD: 1.87 [0.60; 5.84]; P = 0.28). Safety did not differ in
cancer (RD: 1.12 [0.86; 1.46]; P = 0.39) or HIV patients (4.51 [0.54; 37.45];
P = 0.32) although there was large uncertainty about the latter reflected in
the width of the CI. In one moderate quality study of 469 cancer patients with
cancer-associated anorexia, megestrol was superior to cannabinoids in
improving appetite, producing >10% weight gain and tolerability.

In another study comparing megestrol to dronabinol in HIV patients, megestrol
treatment led to higher weight gain without any differences in tolerability
and safety. We found no convincing, unbiased, high quality evidence suggesting
that cannabinoids are of value for anorexia or cachexia in cancer or HIV
patients.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29400010 February 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Effects of Drugs (Papers),Health,Medicine and
Marijuana :

**_Cannabis ' effects on diabetes unclear_** \- by Dr. Elizabeth Ko  & Dr. Eve
Glazier **\- Ask the Doctors** column, August 4, 2018 - Ask the Doctors, c/0
Media Relations, UCLA Health, 924 Westwood Blvd. Suite 350, Los Angeles, CA
90095

**Question** : I have Type 1 diabetes and have used marijuana for years to
control my blood sugar. I've seen my blood sugar drop 100 points in five
minutes with marijuana, faster than my Humalog insulin can manage. Why is
that? Will medical marijuana ever go mainstream?

**Answer** : Marijuana, or cannabis, contains more than 100 active chemical
compounds. Known as cannabinoids, each behaves differently in the body. As the
number of states that allow the use of cannabis for medical purposes continues
to grow, so does the body of evidence that many of the compounds found within
the plant have therapeutic potential.

The challenge to investigate medical claims regarding cannabis is that it
remains illegal at the federal level. Research is subject to numerous
restrictions. Even so, various studies and clinical trials are moving forward.

We found that you're not alone in noticing its effect on blood sugar. However,
much of what we found is anecdotal evidence, which lacks scientific rigor. The
study of cannabis and its potential effects on diabetes is in the early
stages, which much of the work done in mice and on donated tissue samples.

Until researchers are able to work extensively with human populations, the how
and why of the effects of cannabis on the complex physiologic processes
encompassed by diabetes will remain educated guesses.

Preliminary research suggests that certain cannabinoids may help with glucose
control. Some studies have found that cannabis can have a positive effect on
insulin resistance. A study published in 2016 in a journal of the American
Diabetes Association found that THCV, one of the cannabinoids that are not
psychoactive, improved glycemic control in some individuals with Type 2
diabetes. Another study that same year drew a link between cannabidiol, a
compound in cannabis, and a decrease in inflammation of the pancreas. In an
observational study using data from the federal Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, researchers found the incidence of diabetes among regular
cannabis users to be measurably lower than that of the population at large.

The results of several other recent studies contradict a number of these pro-
cannabis findings. So, basically, the jury is still out.

Although cannabis shows promise in the area of diabetes, science has yet to
catch up with the claims being made. In the research that has been done, the
reason for the effects of cannabis is not yet fully understood. Interest in
the subject is strong, though, and continues to grow.

From "Ask the Doctors" - typed-copied from printed Erie Times-News (Erie,
Pa.), August 4, 2018 (www.GoErie.com)

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Health,Medicine and Marijuana :

_More Than Three Quarters of African-American and Latino Respondents Did Not
Support Marijuana Legalization_

Today, Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM) and its New York Affiliate, SAM-NY,
released the results of a new Emerson College poll finding that the majority
of New Yorkers do not support the legalization of marijuana. A plurality
support either decriminalization or the current policy.

The poll, conducted by Emerson College -- the same college that recently
conducted a poll for pro-marijuana groups Marijuana Policy Project (MPP) and
the Drug Policy Alliance (DPA) -- found that 56% of respondents favored either
keeping the current policy in New York, repealing decriminalization, were
unsure, or were in favor or reinstating full criminalization.

A previous New York poll commissioned by pro-marijuana legalization groups
pushed the false dichotomy of there only being two options in marijuana policy
\-- full legalization or full prohibition. When respondents are informed of
current marijuana laws (legal for medical use and decriminalized) support for
legalization drops 27% from those polls.

The poll also found that 76% of New Yorkers did not support marijuana
advertising, 73% did not support public use of marijuana, 58% did not support
marijuana stores in their neighborhoods, and half of New Yorkers were against
marijuana candies, gummies, cookies, and other edibles.

Finally, the poll found that minority communities overwhelmingly opposed the
full legalization of marijuana. Only 22% and 24% of Latinos and African
Americans, respectively, supported legalization.

"New Yorkers do not support pot legalization. This poll shows us that elected
officials need to slow down," said Dr. Kevin Sabet, founder and president of
SAM Action. "This poll shows similar results to our poll of New York voters in
December-legalization is far from a slam dunk. One of the crucial takeaways
from this is that minority communities are firmly opposed to legalization. And
they should be -- pot arrests for African American and Latino youth have gone
up since legalization in Colorado. Pot Shops are always predominately in lower
income neighborhoods."

###

**About SAM New York**

SAM-NY, a project of SAM Action, is a nonpartisan alliance of lawmakers,
scientists and other concerned citizens of New York dedicated to responsible
marijuana policy that does not include the legalization of addictive
substances. Learn more and join us at www.sam-ny.org.

Source: Email from SAM Action reply@learnaboutsam.org, June 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA :

Response by Prof. Stuart Reece to FDA

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-01-e1541096509905-673x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-02-e1541096555535-739x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-03-e1541096595627-777x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-04.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-05.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-06-774x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-07-747x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-08-742x1024.png)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/03-FDA-Federal-

Register-Submission-for-WHO-Review-and-Consideration-Genotoxicity-

Teratogenicity-Concise-2-09.png)

Link to FDA

https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/04/09/2018-07225/international-
drug-scheduling-convention-on-psychotropic-substances-single-convention-on-
narcotic

Source: Dr Stuart Reece's original response letter to the FDA:

03 FDA Federal Register Submission for WHO Review and Consideration -
Genotoxicity Teratogenicity Concise 2 April 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Law (Papers),Political Sector :

This week’s stories inadvertently illustrate the step-by-step process
proponents employ to legalize marijuana for medical and recreational use.

**Step 1. Target states with ballot initiatives.**  
_Tell voters patients need marijuana for medical use, despite a lack of
supporting evidence. Deny evidence that the drug is addictive, harmful to the
developing brain, and is associated with increased traffic fatalities, ER
visits, hospitalizations, and mental illnesses. [Of 26 ballot initiative
states, 19 have legalized marijuana for medical use since 1996, 4 more have
initiatives pending this November, and two have legalized cannabidiol (CBD).
Only one initiative state, Nebraska, remains free of “medical” or
“recreational” pot.]_

Tired of the legislature’s refusal to legalize marijuana for medical use, the
Marijuana Policy Project from Washington DC, has brought 72 percent of the
$267,000 raised to place a ballot initiative on the state’s November ballot,
contributing 44 percent -- $118,000 – on its own. MPP, along with the Drug
Policy Alliance and NORML, are the three organizations most responsible for
the legalization of marijuana in the US.

Read _The Salt Lake Tribune’s_ “From Legalizing Medical Marijuana to Raising
Taxes for Schools, Utah Voters Will Have a Lot of Decisions to Make in
November” here.

**Step 2. Expand eligible conditions.**  
_Once you’ve got marijuana legalized for medical use, expand the number of
conditions that are eligible for its use._

Regulators in Michigan are thinking about adding 22 more conditions to the
list of 14 that are currently eligible for “medical” marijuana use. (States
have “approved” marijuana to treat more than 70 different conditions thus
far.)

Read _WXYZ.com_ “Michigan Considering Expanding Conditions Covered under
Medical Marijuana Law” here.

**Step 3. With a little help from the media . . .**  
_Conduct research with pharmaceutical-grade marijuana components, but always
illustrate news articles about the research with a marijuana plant._

Two new, privately funded studies were announced today. One, a $740,000 grant,
is to the University of Utah to study how THC and CBD interact with the brain.
The other, a $4.7 million grant, is to the University of San Diego School of
Medicine’s Center for Medicinal Cannabis Research to study childhood autism.
The latter study (and presumably the former) will administer pharmaceutical-
grade synthesized CBD manufactured by INSYS Therapeutics. Its CBD product is
in Phase 2 clinical trials seeking FDA approval. It looks nothing like the
picture above that accompanies _The Salt Lake Tribune’s_ story or the picture
below that accompanies the _Newswise.com_ story.

One caveat: The gifts to the two universities come from the Rae and Tye Noorda
Foundation of Utah in partnership with the Wholistic Research and Education
Foundation of California. Andy Noorda, who serves as a board member of his
deceased parents’ foundation, co-founded the Wholistic Research and Education
Foundation along with Mana Artisan Botanics of Hawaii. The company makes CBD
products from hemp grown in Colorado. We have learned from alcohol and tobacco
that industry-funded research is not always trustworthy.

Read _The Salt Lake Tribune’s_ “University of Utah Launches $740,000 Study on
How Marijuana Interacts with the Human Brain” here and _Newswise.com’s_
“Philanthropic Gift will Fund Multidisciplinary Investigation of Mechanisms
and Potential Therapeutic Benefits of Cannabidiol for Treating
Neurodevelopmental Disorder” here.  
Visit the Wholistic Research and Education Foundation here and Mana Artisan
Botanics here.

**Step 4. Join marijuana Industry to legalize recreational pot.**  
_Link up with the marijuana industry that makes medicines, not one of which
has been approved by FDA. Join forces to legalize marijuana for recreational
use. (All 8 states that have done this legalized pot for medicine first.)_

Proponents have succeeded in placing an initiative on Michigan’s November 2018
ballot that would legalize marijuana for recreational use. Among other
provisions, the initiative calls for a 10 percent excise tax and a 6 percent
sales tax. While allowing communities to ban marijuana businesses within their
boundaries, 15 percent of those revenues would go to “communities that allow
marijuana businesses within their borders and 15 percent would go to counties
where marijuana business are located.”

Read the _Detroit Free Press_ article, “Michigan Approves Marijuana
Legalization Vote for November” here.

**Step 5. Deny the consequences of legalization.**  
Colorado legalized marijuana for medical use in 2000, legalized cultivation
and dispensaries in 2009, and legalized recreational use in 2012, effective
2014\. Drug-related deaths have nearly tripled since legalization began.

Read _KOAA’s_ “Overdose Fatalities Continue to Reach New Record Highs in
Colorado” here.

**See Step 5.**  
More than 3,400 marijuana violations occurred in Colorado elementary, middle,
and high schools last academic year, up more than 18 percent from two years
before.

Read _Fox 31’s_ “Marijuana Violations in Colorado K-12 Schools Up 18 Percent”
here.

Source: nfia@nationalfamilies.org

The Marijuana Report is a weekly e-newsletter published by National Families
in Action in partnership with SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana).

May 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

The proliferation of retail boutiques in California did not really bother him,
Evan told me, but the billboards did. Advertisements for delivery,
advertisements promoting the substance for relaxation, for fun, for health.
"Shop. It's legal." "Hello marijuana, goodbye hangover." "It's not a trigger,"
he told me. "But it is in your face."

When we spoke, he had been sober for a hard-fought seven weeks: seven weeks of
sleepless nights, intermittent nausea, irritability, trouble focusing, and
psychological turmoil. There were upsides, he said, in terms of reduced mental
fog, a fatter wallet, and a growing sense of confidence that he could quit. "I
don't think it's a 'can' as much as a 'must,'" he said.

Evan, who asked that his full name not be used for fear of the professional
repercussions, has a self-described cannabis-use disorder. If not necessarily
because of legalization, but alongside legalization, such problems are
becoming more common: The share of adults with one has doubled since the early
aughts, as the share of cannabis users who consume it daily or near-daily has
jumped nearly 50 percent-all "in the context of increasingly permissive
cannabis legislation, attitudes, and lower risk perception," as the National
Institutes of Health put it.

Public-health experts worry about the increasingly potent options available,
and the striking number of constant users. "Cannabis is potentially a real
public-health problem," said Mark A. R. Kleiman, a professor of public policy
at New York University. "It wasn't obvious to me 25 years ago, when 9 percent
of self-reported cannabis users over the last month reported daily or near-
daily use. I always was prepared to say, 'No, it's not a very abusable drug.
Nine percent of anybody will do something stupid.' But that number is now
[something like] 40 percent." They argue that state and local governments are
setting up legal regimes without sufficient public-health protection, with
some even warning that the country is replacing one form of reefer madness
with another, careening from treating cannabis as if it were as dangerous as
heroin to treating it as if it were as benign as kombucha.

But cannabis is not benign, even if it is relatively benign, compared with
alcohol, opiates, and cigarettes, among other substances. Thousands of
Americans are finding their own use problematic-in a climate where pot
products are getting more potent, more socially acceptable to use, and yet
easier to come by, not that it was particularly hard before.

For Keith Humphreys, a professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at
Stanford University, the most compelling evidence of the deleterious effects
comes from users themselves. "In large national surveys, about one in 10
people who smoke it say they have a lot of problems. They say things like, 'I
have trouble quitting. I think a lot about quitting and I can't do it. I
smoked more than I intended to. I neglect responsibilities.' There are plenty
of people who have problems with it, in terms of things like concentration,
short-term memory, and motivation," he said. "People will say, 'Oh, that's
just you fuddy-duddy doctors.' Actually, no. It's millions of people who use
the drug who say that it causes problems."

Users or former users I spoke with described lost jobs, lost marriages, lost
houses, lost money, lost time. Foreclosures and divorces. Weight gain and
mental-health problems. And one other thing: the problem of convincing other
people that what they were experiencing was real. A few mentioned jokes about
Doritos, and comments implying that the real issue was that they were lazy
stoners. Others mentioned the common belief that you can be "psychologically"
addicted to pot, but not "physically" or "really" addicted. The condition
remains misunderstood, discounted, and strangely invisible, even as
legalization and white-marketization pitches ahead.

The country is in the midst of a volte-face on marijuana. The federal
government still classifies cannabis as Schedule I drug, with no accepted
medical use. (Meth and PCP, among other drugs, are Schedule II.) Politicians
still argue it is a gateway to the use of things like heroin and cocaine. The
country still spends billions of dollars fighting it in a bloody and futile
drug war, and still arrests more people for offenses related to cannabis than
it does for all violent crimes combined.

Yet dozens of states have pushed ahead with legalization for medical or
recreational purposes, given that for decades physicians have argued that
marijuana's health risks have been overstated and its medical uses overlooked;
activists have stressed prohibition's tremendous fiscal cost and far worse
human cost; and researchers have convincingly argued that cannabis is far less
dangerous than alcohol. A solid majority of Americans support legalization
nowadays.

Academics and public-health officials, though, have raised the concern that
cannabis's real risks have been overlooked or underplayed-perhaps as part of a
counter-reaction to federal prohibition, and perhaps because millions and
millions cannabis users have no problems controlling their use. "Part of how
legalization was sold was with this assumption that there was no harm, in
reaction to the message that everyone has smoked marijuana was going to ruin
their whole life," Humphreys told me. It was a point Kleiman agreed with. "I
do think that not legalization, but the legalization movement, does have a lot
on its conscience now," he said. "The mantra about how this is a harmless,
natural, and non-addictive substance-it's now known by everybody. And it's a
lie."

Thousands of businesses, as well as local governments earning tax money off of
sales, are now literally invested in that lie. "The liquor companies are
salivating," Matt Karnes of GreenWave Advisors told me. "They can't wait to
come in full force." He added that Big Pharma was targeting the medical
market, with Wall Street, Silicon Valley, food businesses, and tobacco
companies aiming at the recreational market.

Sellers are targeting broad swaths of the consumer market-soccer moms, recent
retirees, folks looking to replace their nightly glass of chardonnay with a
precisely dosed, low-calorie, and hangover-free mint. Many have consciously
played up cannabis as a lifestyle product, a gift to give yourself, like a
nice crystal or an antioxidant face cream. "This is not about marijuana," one
executive at the California retailer MedMen recently argued. "This is about
the people who use cannabis for all the reasons people have used cannabis for
hundreds of years. Yes for recreation, just like alcohol, but also for
wellness."

Evan started off smoking with his friends when they were playing sports or
video games, lighting up to chill out after his nine-to-five as a paralegal at
a law office. But that soon became couch-lock, and he lost interest in working
out, going out, doing anything with his roommates. Then came a lack of
motivation and the slow erosion of ambition, and law school moving further out
of reach. He started smoking before work and after work. Eventually, he
realized it was impossible to get through the day without it. "I was smoking
anytime I had to do anything boring, and it took a long time before I realized
that I wasn't doing anything without getting stoned," he said.

His first attempts to reduce his use went miserably, as the consequences on
his health and his life piled up. He gained nearly 40 pounds, he said, when he
stopped working out and cooking his own food at home. He recognized that he
was just barely getting by at work, and was continually worried about getting
fired. Worse, his friends were unsympathetic to the idea that he was
struggling and needed help. "[You have to] try to convince someone that
something that is hurting you is hurting you," he said.

Other people who found their use problematic or had managed to quit, none of
whom wanted to use their names, described similar struggles and consequences.
"I was running two companies at the time, and fitting smoking in between
running those companies. Then, we sold those companies and I had a whole lot
of time on my hands," one other former cannabis user told me. "I just started
sitting around smoking all the time. And things just came to a halt. I was in
terrible shape. I was depressed."

Lax regulatory standards and aggressive commercialization in some states have
compounded some existing public-health risks, raised new ones, and failed to
tamp down on others, experts argue. In terms of compounding risks, many cite
the availability of hyper-potent marijuana products. "We're seeing these
increases in the strength of cannabis, as we are also seeing an emergence of
new types of products," such as edibles, tinctures, vape pens, sublingual
sprays, and concentrates, Ziva Cooper, an associate professor of clinical
neurobiology in the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia University Medical
Center, told me. "A lot of these concentrates can have up to 90 percent THC,"
she said, whereas the kind of flower you could get 30 years ago was far, far
weaker. Scientists are not sure how such high-octane products affect people's
bodies, she said, but worry that they might have more potential for raising
tolerance, introducing brain damage, and inculcating dependence.

As for new risks: In many stores, budtenders are providing medical advice with
no licensing or training whatsoever. "I'm most scared of the advice to smoke
marijuana during pregnancy for cramps," said Humphreys, arguing that sellers
were providing recommendations with no scientific backing, good or bad, at
all.

In terms of long-standing risks, the lack of federal involvement in
legalization has meant that marijuana products are not being safety-tested
like pharmaceuticals; measured and dosed like food products; subjected to
agricultural-safety and pesticide standards like crops; and held to labelling
standards like alcohol. (Different states have different rules and testing
regimes, complicating things further.)

Health experts also cited an uncomfortable truth about allowing a vice product
to be widely available, loosely regulated, and fully commercialized: Heavy
users will make up a huge share of sales, with businesses wanting them to buy
more and spend more and use more, despite any health consequences.

"The reckless way that we are legalizing marijuana so far is mind-boggling
from a public-health perspective," Kevin Sabet, an Obama administration
official and a founder of the non-profit Smart Approaches to Marijuana, told
me. "The issue now is that we have lobbyists, special interests, and people
whose motivation is to make money that are writing all of these laws and
taking control of the conversation."

This is not to say that prohibition is a more attractive policy, or that
legalization has proven a public-health disaster. "The big-picture view is
that the vast majority of people who use cannabis are not going to be
problematic users," said Jolene Forman, an attorney at the Drug Policy
Alliance. "They're not going to have a cannabis-use disorder. They're going to
have a healthy relationship with it. And criminalization actually increases
the harms related to cannabis, and so having like a strictly regulated market
where there can be limits on advertising, where only adults can purchase
cannabis, and where you're going to get a wide variety of products makes
sense."

Still, strictly regulated might mean more strictly regulated than today, at
least in some places, drug-policy experts argue. "Here, what we've done is
we've copied the alcohol industry fully formed, and then on steroids with very
minimal regulation," Humphreys said. "The oversight boards of a number of
states are the industry themselves. We've learned enough about capitalism to
know that's very dangerous."

A number of policy reforms might tamp down on problem use and protect
consumers, without quashing the legal market or pivoting back to prohibition
and all its harms. One extreme option would be to require markets to be non-
commercial: The District of Columbia, for instance, does not allow
recreational sales, but does allow home cultivation and the gifting of
marijuana products among adults. "If I got to pick a policy, that would
probably be it," Kleiman told me. "That would be a fine place to be if we were
starting from prohibition, but we are starting from patchwork legalization. As
the Vermont farmer says, I don't think you can get there from here. I fear its
time has passed. It's generally true that the drug warriors have never missed
an opportunity to miss an opportunity."

There's no shortage of other reasonable proposals, many already in place or
under consideration in some states. The government could run marijuana stores,
as in Canada. States could require budtenders to have some training or to
refrain from making medical claims. They could ask users to set a monthly THC
purchase cap and remain under it. They could cap the amount of THC in
products, and bar producers from making edibles that are attractive to kids,
like candies. A ban or limits on marijuana advertising are also options, as is
requiring cannabis dispensaries to post public-health information.

Then, there are THC taxes, designed to hit heavy users the hardest. Some drug-
policy experts argue that such levies would just push people from marijuana to
alcohol, with dangerous health consequences. "It would be like saying, 'Let's
let the beef and pork industries market and do whatever they wish, but let's
have much tougher restrictions on tofu and seitan,'" said Mason Tvert of the
Marijuana Policy Project. "In light of the current system, where alcohol is so
prevalent and is a more harmful substance, it is bad policy to steer people
toward that." Yet reducing the commercial appeal of all vice products-
cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana-is an option, if not necessarily a popular one.

Perhaps most important might be reintroducing some reasonable skepticism about
cannabis, especially until scientists have a better sense of the health
effects of high-potency products, used frequently. Until then, listening to
and believing the hundreds of thousands of users who argue marijuana is not
always benign might be a good start.

Source: info@learnaboutsam.org 20th August 2018

www.learnaboutsam.org

Filed under: Addiction,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts,Social Affairs (Papers) :

It is no accident that in almost the same week both Australia and UK have
decided that cannabis is to be recommended for a host of medical disorders
mostly in advance of gold standard clinical trials. This is a direct product
of the organized transnational global drug liberalization movement
orchestrated from New York.

I wish to most respectfully disagree with the points made by BMJ editor Dr.
Godlee. Diarrhoea and colic occur in cannabis withdrawal; Crohn’s disease has
a prominent immune aspect, and cannabinoids are likely acting partly as immune
modulators. Statements from patients are uninterpretable without understanding
the treatments tried, their withdrawal symptomatology and their personal
preferences.

Most importantly, as Dr Godlee states, cannabis is a mixture of 104
cannabinoids. The tide cannot be both out and in at the same time. Medicines
in western nations are universally pure substances. This comprises a
fundamental difficulty.

Medical research has confirmed that the body’s endocannabinoid system is a
finely regulated and highly complex system which is involved in the detailed
regulation of essentially all body systems including the brain and
cardiovascular systems and stem cell niches.

Studies have shown that the rate of use of cannabis by expecting mothers
closely parallels that in the wider community. In fact given the long half-
life of cannabis in tissues even were a maternal habitual smoker to stop when
she discovered her pregnancy, her infant would continue to be exposed to her
on-board cannabinoid load for several months afterwards during critical
periods of organogenesis. And other studies show that the father’s cannabis
use is even more damaging than the mothers’.

Whilst much research has focussed on the effects of endocannabinoids in the
adult brain relatively little research has looked at the impact of these same
effects in the developing brain of the foetus and neonate. Whilst the brain
stem is almost devoid of type 1 cannabinoid receptors (CB1Rs) they are in high
concentration in many parts of the midbrain, limbic system, subcortical
regions and cerebral and cerebellar cortices. Foetal CB1Rs have been shown to
play key roles in virtually all aspects of brain development including neural
stem cell function, determining the ratio of glial v neuronal differentiation,
brain inflammation, axonal growth cone guidance, stem cell niche function and
signalling, blood flow signalling, white matter and CNS tract formation, glial
cell differentiation, myelination, dendrite formation, neural migration into
the developing cortex, synapse formation and integration of newly formed
neurons into the neural network. They are also found in high density on
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria from which latter they indirectly
control major issues including cognition, DNA maintenance and repair systems
both by supplying energy and by metabolite shuttle and RNA signalling.

Hence it is not surprising that gestational cannabis has been linked with a
clear continuum of defects, including in protracted longitudinal studies from
Pittsburgh, Ottawa and Netherlands impaired cortical and executive
functioning; reduced spatial judgement; the need to recruit more brain to
perform similar computational tasks; microcephaly; lifelong smaller heads and
smaller brains; anencephaly (in two CDC studies), and increased foetal death.
This progression clearly reflects a spectrum of congenital neurological
impairment which is quite consistent with the known distribution of CB1Rs
mainly across the foetal and adult forebrain and midbrain and its derivatives.

It is also consistent with a recent explosion of autism in Colorado,
California, New Jersey and many other sites in USA and internationally in
recent years. Moreover cannabis induced synpatopathy closely mimics that seen
in autism, as do similar white matter disconnection endophenotypes.

A similar scenario plays out in the cardiovasculature. The American Heart
Association and American Academy of Pediatrics issued a joint statement as
long ago as 2007 noting that foetal cannabis exposure was linked with
increased rates of ventricular septal defect and Ebstein's anomaly (complex
tricuspid valvopathy). This is consistent with recent Colorado experience
where ventricular septal defect has risen from 43.9 to 59.4 / 10,000 live
births, or 35.3% 2000-2013. Both of these structures are derivatives of the
endocardial cushions which are rich in CB1Rs. Concerningly Colorado has also
seen a 262% rise in atrial septal defects over the same period. Exposure to
other drugs does not explain this change as they were falling across this
period. It has also been reported that the father’s use of cannabis is the
strongest environmental factor implicated in cardiovascular defects, here
involving transposition of the great arteries, which is a derivative of the
conoventricular ridges immediately distal and continuous with embryonic
endocardial cushions, and also rich in CB1Rs.

Similar findings play out in gastroschisis. There is an impressive concordance
amongst the larger studies of the relationship of gastroschisis and congenital
cannabis exposure where senior Canadian authors concluded that cannabis caused
a three-fold rise in gastroschisis, consistent with a high density of CB1Rs on
the umbilical vessels.

And cannabis has also been implicated as an indirect chromosomal clastogen and
indirect genotoxin through its effect to disrupt the mitotic spindle by
microtubule inhibition, and likely DNA maintenance and repair by its effect on
nuclear actin filaments.

Moreover cannabidiol has been shown to alter the epigenome, to be genotoxic,
and to bind to CB1Rs at high doses, so the simplistic case that “Cannabidiol
is good” – fails.

These considerations imply that if clinical trials continue to show efficacy
for additional indications for cannabinoids, their genotoxic and teratogenic
potential, from both mother and father, will need to be carefully balanced
with their clinical utility. They also imply that these issues will need to be
more widely canvassed and discussed in order to introduce more balance into
the heavily biased present global media coverage of the highly misleading
misnomer “medical cannabis”.

Only once before has a known teratogen been marketed globally: the thalidomide
disaster is the proximate reason for modern pharmaceutical laws. With its
widespread uptake, rising concentrations, asymptotic genotoxic dose-response
curves and actions through the paternal line cannabis could be much worse.

Albert S Reece

Doctor

University of Western Australia and Edith Cowan University at Joondalup in
Western Australia

Brisbane

Source: https://www.bmj.com/content/362/bmj.k3357/rr-0

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health :

Abstract  
Core deficits in social functioning are associated with various
neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders, yet biomarker
identification and the development of effective pharmacological interventions
has been limited. Recent data suggest the intriguing possibility that
endogenous cannabinoids, a class of lipid neuromodulators generally implicated
in the regulation of neurotransmitter release, may contribute to species-
typical social functioning. Systematic study of the endogenous cannabinoid
signaling could, therefore, yield novel approaches to understand the
neurobiological underpinnings of atypical social functioning.

This article provides a critical review of the major components of the
endogenous cannabinoid system (for example, primary receptors and
effectors—Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol, anandamide and
2-arachidonoylglycerol) and the contributions of cannabinoid signaling to
social functioning. Data are evaluated in the context of Research Domain
Criteria constructs (for example, anxiety, chronic stress, reward learning,
motivation, declarative and working memory, affiliation and attachment, and
social communication) to enable interrogation of endogenous cannabinoid
signaling in social functioning across diagnostic categories. The empirical
evidence reviewed strongly supports the role for dysregulated cannabinoid
signaling in the pathophysiology of social functioning deficits observed in
brain disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, major
depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder and bipolar disorder.
Moreover, these findings indicate that the endogenous cannabinoid system holds
exceptional promise as a biological marker of, and potential treatment target
for, neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by
impairments in social functioning.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5048207/

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Effects of Drugs
(Papers),Health,Medical Studies :

Introduction  
Synaptic cell-adhesion molecules and their interactions with other molecular
pathways affect both synapse formation and its function (Varoqueaux et al.,
2006; Sudhof, 2008; Bemben et al., 2015a). Neurexins are presynaptic cell-
adhesion molecules that interact with neuroligins and other postsynaptic
partners. Neurexins are encoded by three genes, each of which encodes a long
and short isoform, termed α- and β-neurexins, respectively (Sudhof, 2008).
Interestingly, despite studies linking neurexins to autism and other
neuropsychiatric disorders (Leone et al., 2010; Rabaneda et al., 2014), the
precise cellular mechanisms underlying the role of neurexins in cognition
remain poorly understood.

Since most biochemical studies of neurexins have focused on β-neurexins,
investigating the synaptic actions of β-neurexins is particularly imperative.
In their timely Cell article, Anderson et al. reported that β-neurexins
selectively modulate synaptic strength at excitatory synapses by regulating
postsynaptic endocannabinoid synthesis, describing an unexpected trans-
synaptic mechanism for β-neurexins to control neural circuits via
endocannabinoid signaling.

Source: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2016.00203/full

See also:

https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/2018/08/%CE%B2-neurexins-control-neural-
circuits-by-regulating-synaptic-endocannabinoid-signaling/

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Medical Studies :

Abstract  
α- and β-neurexins are presynaptic cell-adhesion molecules implicated in
autism and schizophrenia. We find that although β-neurexins are expressed at
much lower levels than α-neurexins, conditional knockout of β-neurexins with
continued expression of α-neurexins dramatically decreased neurotransmitter
release at excitatory synapses in cultured cortical neurons. The β-neurexin
knockout phenotype was attenuated by CB1-receptor inhibition which blocks
presynaptic endocannabinoid signaling or by 2-arachidonoylglycerol synthesis
inhibition which impairs postsynaptic endocannabinoid release. In synapses
formed by CA1-region pyramidal neurons onto burst-firing subiculum neurons,
presynaptic in vivo knockout of β-neurexins aggravated endocannabinoid-
mediated inhibition of synaptic transmission and blocked LTP; presynaptic
CB1-receptor antagonists or postsynaptic 2-arachidonoylglycerol synthesis
inhibition again reversed this block. Moreover, conditional knockout of
β-neurexins in CA1-region neurons impaired contextual fear memories. Thus, our
data suggest that presynaptic β-neurexins control synaptic strength in
excitatory synapses by regulating postsynaptic 2-arachidonoylglycerol
synthesis, revealing an unexpected role for β-neurexins in the
endocannabinoid-dependent regulation of neural circuits.

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4709013/

See also:

https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/2018/08/endocannabinoid-mediates-excitatory-
synaptic-function-of-%ce%b2-neurexins-commentary-%ce%b2-neurexins-control-
neural-circuits-by-regulating-synaptic-endocannabinoid-signaling/

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Medical Studies :

These are very shocking videos with information about some of the effects of
drug legalisation in the USA.

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drugs and Accidents,Education,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts,Legal Sector :

Report by prominent marijuana policy group finds costs would outweigh any tax
revenue under legalization; Healthy and Productive Illinois coalition urges
rejection of legalization

Today, the day before the unofficial "marijuana holiday," Healthy and
Productive Illinois (HPIL) - a project of Smart Approaches to Marijuana Action
(SAM Action) - released a comprehensive working paper on the projected costs
of legalization in Illinois, finding that legalization would cost the state
$670.5 million, far outweighing estimated tax revenue projections of
approximately $566 million. The report will be released today at 9:30 am in
Room N505 of the Thompson State Building in Chicago, during a press conference
by HPIL to announce opposition to legalization.

This report uses data from states like Colorado that have legalized marijuana
to debunk the myth that taxed marijuana sales will be a boon to the state's
well-reported fiscal crisis. A conservative approximation of quantifiable data
such as administrative and regulatory enforcement, increased drugged driving
fatalities and other vehicle related property damages, short term health
costs, and increased workplace absenteeism and accidents would cost the state
$670.5 million in 2020.

"This study clearly demonstrates that the only people who will make money from
marijuana commercialization are those in the industry that grow and sell it,
at the direct expense of public health and safety," said Dr. Aaron Weiner
Director of Addiction Services at Linden Oaks Behavioral Health. "This
industry is actively lobbying in Springfield to move their agenda forward,
misleading our leaders and the general public. We have to speak up about the
truth to protect the health of our State," continued Dr. Weiner.

Healthy and Productive Illinois is a coalition formed to spread science-based
awareness on marijuana harms and push back against the movement to legalize
marijuana. The group believes the marijuana industry is mimicking the tactics
of the Big Tobacco industry.

"We know that when citizens of Illinois are informed that marijuana is already
decriminalized, only 23% want to fully legalize it," said Andy Duran,
Executive Director of Linking Efforts Against Drugs (LEAD). "Lack of knowledge
and confusion is the fuel that drives the commercial marijuana market forward,
just like tobacco before it. Imagine what would happen if everyone was aware
that the State will lose money, too," continued Duran.

There is sufficient information available to suggest that marijuana
legalization could incur additional costly side effects, but at this time data
is not robust enough to quantify their long-term impact. One of these
additional costs would be controlling an expanded black market.

"In Oregon and Colorado, we are seeing thriving black markets and illegal grow
operations hiding amongst legal growers," said Chief James Black, Vice
President of the Illinois Association of Chiefs of Police. "This expanded
black market creates a real problem for law enforcement who now have to work
even harder and allocate more precious resources to weed out illegal grow
ops," continued Chief Black.

Additional costs include:

  * Additional workplace injuries among part-time employees

  * Increases in alcohol use and abuse

  * Increases in tobacco use

  * More opioid abuse

  * Increases in short-term/long-term recovery for marijuana use disorders

  * Greater marijuana use among underage students

  * Property and other economic damage from marijuana extraction lab explosions

  * Controlling an expanded black market, sales to minors, and public intoxication

  * Other administrative burdens of most state legalization programs, such as:

  * money for drugged driving awareness campaigns;

  * drug prevention programs; and

  * pesticide control and other agricultural oversight mechanisms

  * Long-term health impacts of marijuana use

"Cost reports such as this are the dirty truth that the pot industry doesn't
want law makers and the general public to see," said Dr. Kevin Sabet, Founder
and President of SAMA and former senior drug policy advisor to President
Obama. "The pot industry is dead set on becoming the next Big Tobacco. The men
in suits behind Big Pot will become rich while communities of color continue
to suffer with addiction, black markets thrive, and states are left to foot
the bill," continued Dr. Sabet.

Source: Email from SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana) info@learnaboutsam.org

April 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

by Kerstin Iffland and Franjo Grotenhermen

**Introduction:** This literature survey aims to extend the comprehensive
survey performed by Bergamaschi et al. in 2011 on cannabidiol (CBD) safety and
side effects. Apart from updating the literature, this article focuses on
clinical studies and CBD potential interactions with other drugs.

**Results:** In general, the often described favorable safety profile of CBD
in humans was confirmed and extended by the reviewed research. The majority of
studies were performed for treatment of epilepsy and psychotic disorders.
Here, the most commonly reported side effects were tiredness, diarrhea, and
changes of appetite/weight. In comparison with other drugs, used for the
treatment of these medical conditions, CBD has a better side effect profile.
This could improve patients ' compliance and adherence to treatment. CBD is
often used as adjunct therapy. Therefore, more clinical research is warranted
on CBD action on hepatic enzymes, drug transporters, and interactions with
other drugs and to see if this mainly leads to positive or negative effects,
for example, reducing the needed clobazam doses in epilepsy and therefore
clobazam's side effects.

**Conclusion:** This review also illustrates that some important toxicological
parameters are yet to be studied, for example, if CBD has an effect on
hormones. Additionally, more clinical trials with a greater number of
participants and longer chronic CBD administration are still lacking.

**_*Keywords:_ * : ** cannabidiol, cannabinoids, medical uses, safety, side
effects, toxicity

## Introduction

Since several years, other pharmacologically relevant constituents of the
Cannabis plant, apart from Δ9-THC, have come into the focus of research and
legislation. The most prominent of those is cannabidiol (CBD). In contrast to
Δ9-THC, it is nonintoxicating, but exerts a number of beneficial
pharmacological effects. For instance, it is anxiolytic, anti-inflammatory,
antiemetic, and antipsychotic. Moreover, neuroprotective properties have been
shown.1,2 Consequently, it could be used at high doses for the treatment of a
variety of conditions ranging in psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia
and dementia, as well as diabetes and nausea.1,2

At lower doses, it has physiological effects that promote and maintain health,
including antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotection effects. For
instance, CBD is more effective than vitamin C and E as a neuroprotective
antioxidant and can ameliorate skin conditions such as acne.3,4

The comprehensive review of 132 original studies by Bergamaschi et al.
describes the safety profile of CBD, mentioning several properties: catalepsy
is not induced and physiological parameters are not altered (heart rate, blood
pressure, and body temperature). Moreover, psychological and psychomotor
functions are not adversely affected. The same holds true for gastrointestinal
transit, food intake, and absence of toxicity for nontransformed cells.
Chronic use and high doses of up to 1500 mg per day have been repeatedly shown
to be well tolerated by humans.1

Nonetheless, some side effects have been reported for CBD, but mainly _in
vitro_ or in animal studies. They include alterations of cell viability,
reduced fertilization capacity, and inhibition of hepatic drug metabolism and
drug transporters (e.g., p-glycoprotein).1 Consequently, more human studies
have to be conducted to see if these effects also occur in humans. In these
studies, a large enough number of subjects have to be enrolled to analyze
long-term safety aspects and CBD possible interactions with other substances.

This review will build on the clinical studies mentioned by Bergamaschi et al.
and will update their survey with new studies published until September 2016.

## Relevant Preclinical Studies

Before we discuss relevant animal research on CBD possible effects on various
parameters, several important differences between route of administration and
pharmacokinetics between human and animal studies have to be mentioned. First,
CBD has been studied in humans using oral administration or inhalation.
Administration in rodents often occures either via intraperitoneal injection
or via the oral route. Second, the plasma levels reached via oral
administration in rodents and humans can differ. Both these observations can
lead to differing active blood concentrations of CBD.1,5,6

In addition, it is possible that CBD targets differ between humans and
animals. Therefore, the same blood concentration might still lead to different
effects. Even if the targets, to which CBD binds, are the same in both studied
animals and humans, for example, the affinity or duration of CBD binding to
its targets might differ and consequently alter its effects.

The following study, which showed a positive effect of CBD on obsessive
compulsive behavior in mice and reported no side effects, exemplifies the
existing pharmacokinetic differences.5 When mice and humans are given the same
CBD dose, more of the compound becomes available in the mouse organism. This
higher bioavailability, in turn, can cause larger CBD effects.

Deiana et al. administered 120 mg/kg CBD either orally or intraperitoneally
and measured peak plasma levels.5 The group of mice, which received oral CBD,
had plasma levels of 2.2 μg/ml CBD. In contrast, i.p. injections resulted in
peak plasma levels of 14.3 μg/ml. Administering 10 mg/kg oral CBD to humans
leads to blood levels of 0.01 μg/ml.6 This corresponds to human blood levels
of 0.12 μg/ml, when 120 mg/kg CBD was given to humans. This calculation was
performed assuming the pharmacokinetics of a hydrophilic compound, for
simplicity's sake. We are aware that the actual levels of the lipophilic CBD
will vary.

A second caveat of preclinical studies is that supraphysiological
concentrations of compounds are often used. This means that the observed
effects, for instance, are not caused by a specific binding of CBD to one of
its receptors but are due to unspecific binding following the high compound
concentration, which can inactivate the receptor or transporter.

The following example and calculations will demonstrate this. _In vitro_
studies have shown that CBD inhibits the ABC transporters P-gp (P glycoprotein
also referred to as ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 1= _ABCB1_ ; 3–100
μM CBD) and Bcrp (Breast Cancer Resistance Protein; also referred to as
_ABCG2_ =ATP-binding cassette subfamily G member 2).7 After 3 days, the P-gp
protein expression was altered in leukemia cells. This can have several
implications because various anticancer drugs also bind to these membrane-
bound, energy-dependent efflux transporters.1 The used CBD concentrations are
supraphysiological, however, 3 μM CBD approximately corresponds to plasma
concentrations of 1 μg/ml. On the contrary, a 700 mg CBD oral dose reached a
plasma level of 10 ng/ml.6 This means that to reach a 1 μg/ml plasma
concentration, one would need to administer considerably higher doses of oral
CBD. The highest ever applied CBD dose was 1500 mg.1Consequently, more
research is warranted, where the CBD effect on ABC transporters is analyzed
using CBD concentrations of, for example, 0.03–0.06 μM. The rationale behind
suggesting these concentrations is that studies summarized by Bih et al. on
CBD effect on ABCC1 and ABCG2 in SF9 human cells showed that a CBD
concentration of 0.08 μM elicited the first effect.7

Using the pharmacokinetic relationships mentioned above, one would need to
administer an oral CBD dose of 2100 mg CBD to affect ABCC1 and ABCG2. We used
10 ng/ml for these calculations and the ones in Table 1,6,8 based on a 6-week
trial using a daily oral administration of 700 mg CBD, leading to mean plasma
levels of 6–11 ng/ml, which reflects the most realistic scenario of CBD
administration in patients.6 That these levels seem to be reproducible, and
that chronic CBD administration does not lead to elevated mean blood
concentrations, was shown by another study. A single dose of 600 mg led to
reduced anxiety and mean CBD blood concentrations of 4.7–17 ng/ml.9

### Table 1.

**Inhibition of Human Metabolic Enzymes by Exogenous Cannabinoids _In Vitro_
and the Extrapolated Levels of Oral Daily CBD Administration in Humans Needed
to Reach These _In Vitro_ Concentrations (Adapted)6,8**

CYP-450 isoform | 1A1 | 1A2 | 1B1 | 2A6 | 2B6 | 2C9 | 2D6 | 3A4 | 3A5 | 3A7  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
CBD (in μM) | 0.2 | 2.7 | 3.6 | 55.0 | 0.7 | 0.9–9.9 | 1.2–2.7 | 1.0 | 0.2 |
12.3  
aExtrapolated oral daily CBD doses to reach the levels above (in mg) | 4900 |
63,000 | 84,000 | 1.28 Mio. | Ca. 16,000 | 21,000–231,000 | 28,000–63,000 |
Ca. 23,000 | 4900 | 0.29 Mio.

aThe calculations made here are based on the assumption that the CBD
distribution in the blood follows the pharmacokinetics of a hydrophilic
substance such as alcohol. The reality is more complex, because CBD is
lipophilic and, for example, will consequently accumulate in fat tissue. These
calculations were made with the intention to give the reader an impression and
an approximation of the supraphysiological levels used in _in vitro_ studies.

It also seems warranted to assume that the mean plasma concentration exerts
the total of observed CBD effects, compared to using peak plasma levels, which
only prevail for a short amount of time. This is not withstanding, that a
recent study measured Cmax values for CBD of 221 ng/ml, 3 h after
administration of 1 mg/kg fentanyl concomitantly with a single oral dose of
800 mg CBD.10

### CBD-drug interactions

#### Cytochrome P450-complex enzymes

This paragraph describes CBD interaction with general (drug)-metabolizing
enzymes, such as those belonging to the cytochrome P450 family. This might
have an effect for coadministration of CBD with other drugs.7 For instance,
CBD is metabolized, among others, via the CYP3A4 enzyme. Various drugs such as
ketoconazol, itraconazol, ritonavir, and clarithromycin inhibit this enzyme.11
This leads to slower CBD degradation and can consequently lead to higher CBD
doses that are longer pharmaceutically active. In contrast, phenobarbital,
rifampicin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin induce CYP3A4, causing reduced CBD
bioavailability.11 Approximately 60% of clinically prescribed drugs are
metabolized via CYP3A4.1 Table 1 shows an overview of the cytochrome
inhibiting potential of CBD. It has to be pointed out though, that the _in
vitro_ studies used supraphysiological CBD concentrations.

Studies in mice have shown that CBD inactivates cytochrome P450 isozymes in
the short term, but can induce them after repeated administration. This is
similar to their induction by phenobarbital, thereby implying the 2b subfamily
of isozymes.1 Another study showed this effect to be mediated by upregulation
of mRNA for CYP3A, 2C, and 2B10, after repeated CBD administration.1

Hexobarbital is a CYP2C19 substrate, which is an enzyme that can be inhibited
by CBD and can consequently increase hexobarbital availability in the
organism.12,13 Studies also propose that this effect might be caused _in vivo_
by one of CBD metabolites.14,15 Generally, the metabolite 6a-OH-CBD was
already demonstrated to be an inducer of CYP2B10. Recorcinol was also found to
be involved in CYP450 induction. The enzymes CYP3A and CYP2B10 were induced
after prolonged CBD administration in mice livers, as well as for human CYP1A1
_in vitro_.14,15 On the contrary, CBD induces CYP1A1, which is responsible for
degradation of cancerogenic substances such as benzopyrene. CYP1A1 can be
found in the intestine and CBD-induced higher activity could therefore prevent
absorption of cancerogenic substances into the bloodstream and thereby help to
protect DNA.2

#### Effects on P-glycoprotein activity and other drug transporters

A recent study with P-gp, Bcrp, and P-gp/Bcrp knockout mice, where 10 mg/kg
was injected subcutaneously, showed that CBD is not a substrate of these
transporters itself. This means that they do not reduce CBD transport to the
brain.16 This phenomenon also occurs with paracetamol and haloperidol, which
both inhibit P-gp, but are not actively transported substrates. The same goes
for gefitinib inhibition of Bcrp.

These proteins are also expressed at the blood–brain barrier, where they can
pump out drugs such as risperidone. This is hypothesized to be a cause of
treatment resistance.16 In addition, polymorphisms in these genes, making
transport more efficient, have been implied in interindividual differences in
pharmacoresistance.10 Moreover, the CBD metabolite 7-COOH CBD might be a
potent anticonvulsant itself.14 It will be interesting to see whether it is a
P-gp substrate and alters pharmacokinetics of coadministered P-gp-substrate
drugs.

An _in vitro_ study using three types of trophoblast cell lines and _ex vivo_
placenta, perfused with 15 μM CBD, found BCRP inhibition leading to
accumulation of xenobiotics in the fetal compartment.17 BCRP is expressed at
the apical side of the syncytiotrophoblast and removes a wide variety of
compounds forming a part of the placental barrier. Seventy-two hours of
chronic incubation with 25 μM CBD also led to morphological changes in the
cell lines, but not to a direct cytotoxic effect. In contrast, 1 μM CBD did
not affect cell and placenta viability.17 The authors consider this effect
cytostatic. Nicardipine was used as the BCRP substrate in the _in vitro_
studies, where the Jar cell line showed the largest increase in BCRP
expression correlating with the highest level of transport.17,and references
therein

The _ex vivo_ study used the antidiabetic drug and BCRP substrate glyburide.17
After 2 h of CBD perfusion, the largest difference between the CBD and the
placebo placentas ( _n_ =8 each) was observed. CBD inhibition of the BCRP
efflux function in the placental cotyledon warrants further research of
coadministration of CBD with known BCRP substrates such as nitrofurantoin,
cimetidine, and sulfasalazine. In this study, a dose–response curve should be
established in male and female subjects (CBD absorption was shown to be higher
in women) because the concentrations used here are usually not reached by oral
or inhaled CBD administration. Nonetheless, CBD could accumulate in organs
physiologically restricted via a blood barrier.17

### Physiological effects

CBD treatment of up to 14 days (3–30 mg/kg b.w. i.p.) did not affect blood
pressure, heart rate, body temperature, glucose levels, pH, pCO2, pO2,
hematocrit, K+ or Na+ levels, gastrointestinal transit, emesis, or rectal
temperature in a study with rodents.1

Mice treated with 60 mg/kg b.w. CBD i.p. for 12 weeks (three times per week)
did not show ataxia, kyphosis, generalized tremor, swaying gait, tail
stiffness, changes in vocalization behavior or open-field physiological
activity (urination, defecation).1

### Neurological and neurospychiatric effects

#### Anxiety and depression

Some studies indicate that under certain circumstances, CBD acute anxiolytic
effects in rats were reversed after repeated 14-day administration of CBD.2
However, this finding might depend on the used animal model of anxiety or
depression. This is supported by a study, where CBD was administered in an
acute and “chronic” (2 weeks) regimen, which measured
anxiolytic/antidepressant effects, using behavioral and operative models
(OBX=olfactory bulbectomy as model for depression).18 The only observed side
effects were reduced sucrose preference, reduced food consumption and body
weight in the nonoperated animals treated with CBD (50 mg/kg). Nonetheless,
the behavioral tests (for OBX-induced hyperactivity and anhedonia related to
depression and open field test for anxiety) in the CBD-treated OBX animals
showed an improved emotional response. Using microdialysis, the researchers
could also show elevated 5-HT and glutamate levels in the prefrontal cortex of
OBX animals only. This area was previously described to be involved in
maladaptive behavioral regulation in depressed patients and is a feature of
the OBX animal model of depression. The fact that serotonin levels were only
elevated in the OBX mice is similar to CBD differential action under
physiological and pathological conditions.

A similar effect was previously described in anxiety experiments, where CBD
proved to be only anxiolytic in subjects where stress had been induced before
CBD administration. Elevated glutamate levels have been proposed to be
responsible for ketamine's fast antidepressant function and its dysregulation
has been described in OBX mice and depressed patients. Chronic CBD treatment
did not elicit behavioral changes in the nonoperated mice. In contrast, CBD
was able to alleviate the affected functionality of 5HT1A receptors in limbic
brain areas of OBX mice.18 and references therein

Schiavon et al. cite three studies that used chronic CBD administration to
demonstrate its anxiolytic effects in chronically stressed rats, which were
mostly mediated via hippocampal neurogenesis.19 and references therein For
instance, animals received daily i.p. injections of 5 mg/kg CBD. Applying a
5HT1A receptor antagonist in the DPAG (dorsal periaqueductal gray area), it
was implied that CBD exerts its antipanic effects via these serotonin
receptors. No adverse effects were reported in this study.

#### Psychosis and bipolar disorder

Various studies on CBD and psychosis have been conducted.20 For instance, an
animal model of psychosis can be created in mice by using the NMDAR antagonist
MK-801. The behavioral changes (tested with the prepulse inhibition [PPI]
test) were concomitant with decreased mRNA expression of the NMDAR GluN1
subunit gene (GRN1) in the hippocampus, decreased parvalbumin expression (=a
calcium-binding protein expressed in a subclass of GABAergic interneurons),
and higher FosB/ΔFosB expression (=markers for neuronal activity). After 6
days of MK-801 treatment, various CBD doses were injected intraperitoneally
(15, 30, 60 mg/kg) for 22 days. The two higher CBD doses had beneficial
effects comparable to the atypical antipsychotic drug clozapine and also
attenuated the MK-801 effects on the three markers mentioned above. The
publication did not record any side effects.21

One of the theories trying to explain the etiology of bipolar disorder (BD) is
that oxidative stress is crucial in its development. Valvassori et al.
therefore used an animal model of amphetamine-induced hyperactivity to model
one of the symptoms of mania. Rats were treated for 14 days with various CBD
concentrations (15, 30, 60 mg/kg daily i.p.). Whereas CBD did not have an
effect on locomotion, it did increase brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
levels and could protect against amphetamine-induced oxidative damage in
proteins of the hippocampus and striatum. No adverse effects were recorded in
this study.22

Another model for BD and schizophrenia is PPI of the startle reflex both in
humans and animals, which is disrupted in these diseases. Peres et al., list
five animal studies, where mostly 30 mg/kg CBD was administered and had a
positive effect on PPI.20 Nonetheless, some inconsistencies in explaining CBD
effects on PPI as model for BD exist. For example, CBD sometimes did not alter
MK-801-induced PPI disruption, but disrupted PPI on its own.20 If this effect
can be observed in future experiments, it could be considered to be a possible
side effect.

#### Addiction

CBD, which is nonhedonic, can reduce heroin-seeking behavior after, for
example, cue-induced reinstatement. This was shown in an animal heroin self-
administration study, where mice received 5 mg/kg CBD i.p. injections. The
observed effect lasted for 2 weeks after CBD administration and could
normalize the changes seen after stimulus cue-induced heroin seeking
(expression of AMPA, GluR1, and CB1R). In addition, the described study was
able to replicate previous findings showing no CBD side effects on locomotor
behavior.23

#### Neuroprotection and neurogenesis

There are various mechanisms underlying neuroprotection, for example, energy
metabolism (whose alteration has been implied in several psychiatric
disorders) and proper mitochondrial functioning.24 An early study from 1976
found no side effects and no effect of 0.3–300 μg/mg protein CBD after 1 h of
incubation on mitochondrial monoamine oxidase activity in porcine brains.25 In
hypoischemic newborn pigs, CBD elicited a neuroprotective effect, caused no
side effects, and even led to beneficial effects on ventilatory, cardiac, and
hemodynamic functions.26

A study comparing acute and chronic CBD administration in rats suggests an
additional mechanism of CBD neuroprotection: Animals received i.p. CBD (15,
30, 60 mg/kg b.w.) or vehicle daily, for 14 days. Mitochondrial activity was
measured in the striatum, hippocampus, and the prefrontal cortex.27 Acute and
chronic CBD injections led to increased mitochondrial activity (complexes I-V)
and creatine kinase, whereas no side effects were documented. Chronic CBD
treatment and the higher CBD doses tended to affect more brain regions. The
authors hypothesized that CBD changed the intracellular Ca2+ flux to cause
these effects. Since the mitochondrial complexes I and II have been implied in
various neurodegenerative diseases and also altered ROS (reactive oxygen
species) levels, which have also been shown to be altered by CBD, this might
be an additional mechanism of CBD-mediated neuroprotection.1,27

Interestingly, it has recently been shown that the higher ROS levels observed
after CBD treatment were concomitant with higher mRNA and protein levels of
heat shock proteins (HSPs). In healthy cells, this can be interpreted as a way
to protect against the higher ROS levels resulting from more mitochondrial
activity. In addition, it was shown that HSP inhibitors increase the CBD
anticancer effect _in vitro_.28 This is in line with the studies described by
Bergamaschi et al., which also imply ROS in CBD effect on (cancer) cell
viability in addition to, for example, proapoptotic pathways such as via
caspase-8/9 and inhibition of the procarcinogenic lipoxygenase pathway.1

Another publication studied the difference of acute and chronic administration
of two doses of CBD in nonstressed mice on anxiety. Already an acute i.p.
administration of 3 mg/kg was anxiolytic to a degree comparable to 20 mg/kg
imipramine (an selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SSRI] commonly
prescribed for anxiety and depression). Fifteen days of repeated i.p.
administration of 3 mg/kg CBD also increased cell proliferation and
neurogenesis (using three different markers) in the subventricular zone and
the hippocampal dentate gyrus. Interestingly, the repeated administration of
30 mg/kg also led to anxiolytic effects. However, the higher dose caused a
decrease in neurogenesis and cell proliferation, indicating dissociation of
behavioral and proliferative effects of chronic CBD treatment. The study does
not mention adverse effects.19

### Immune system

Numerous studies show the CBD immunomodulatory role in various diseases such
as multiple sclerosis, arthritis, and diabetes. These animal and human _ex
vivo_ studies have been reviewed extensively elsewhere, but studies with pure
CBD are still lacking. Often combinations of THC and CBD were used. It would
be especially interesting to study when CBD is proinflammatory and under which
circumstances it is anti-inflammatory and whether this leads to side effects
(Burstein, 2015: Table 1 shows a summary of its anti-inflammatory actions;
McAllister et al. give an extensive overview in Table 1 of the interplay
between CBD anticancer effects and inflammation signaling).29,30

In case of Alzheimer's disease (AD), studies in mice and rats showed reduced
amyloid beta neuroinflammation (linked to reduced interleukin [IL]-6 and
microglial activation) after CBD treatment. This led to amelioration of
learning effects in a pharmacological model of AD. The chronic study we want
to describe in more detail here used a transgenic mouse model of AD, where
2.5-month-old mice were treated with either placebo or daily oral CBD doses of
20 mg/kg for 8 months (mice are relatively old at this point). CBD was able to
prevent the development of a social recognition deficit in the AD transgenic
mice.

Moreover, the elevated IL-1 beta and TNF alpha levels observed in the
transgenic mice could be reduced to WT (wild-type) levels with CBD treatment.
Using statistical analysis by analysis of variance, this was shown to be only
a trend. This might have been caused by the high variation in the transgenic
mouse group, though. Also, CBD increased cholesterol levels in WT mice but not
in CBD-treated transgenic mice. This was probably due to already elevated
cholesterol in the transgenic mice. The study observed no side effects.31 and
references within

In nonobese diabetes-prone female mice (NOD), CBD was administered i.p. for 4
weeks (5 days a week) at a dose of 5 mg/kg per day. After CBD treatment was
stopped, observation continued until the mice were 24 weeks old. CBD treatment
lead to considerable reduction of diabetes development (32% developed
glucosuria in the CBD group compared to 100% in untreated controls) and to
more intact islet of Langerhans cells. CBD increased IL-10 levels, which is
thought to act as an anti-inflammatory cytokine in this context. The IL-12
production of splenocytes was reduced in the CBD group and no side effects
were recorded.32

After inducing arthritis in rats using Freund's adjuvant, various CBD doses
(0.6, 3.1, 6.2, or 62.3 mg/day) were applied daily in a gel for transdermal
administration for 4 days. CBD reduced joint swelling, immune cell
infiltration. thickening of the synovial membrane, and nociceptive
sensitization/spontaneous pain in a dose-dependent manner, after four
consecutive days of CBD treatment. Proinflammatory biomarkers were also
reduced in a dose-dependent manner in the dorsal root ganglia (TNF alpha) and
spinal cord (CGRP, OX42). No side effects were evident and exploratory
behavior was not altered (in contrast to Δ9-THC, which caused
hypolocomotion).33

### Cell migration

#### Embryogenesis

CBD was shown to be able to influence migratory behavior in cancer, which is
also an important aspect of embryogenesis.1 For instance, it was recently
shown that CBD inhibits Id-1. Helix-loop-helix Id proteins play a role in
embryogenesis and normal development via regulation of cell differentiation.
High Id1-levels were also found in breast, prostate, brain, and head and neck
tumor cells, which were highly aggressive. In contrast, Id1 expression was low
in noninvasive tumor cells. Id1 seems to influence the tumor cell phenotype by
regulation of invasion, epithelial to mesenchymal transition, angiogenesis,
and cell proliferation.34

There only seems to exist one study that could not show an adverse CBD effect
on embryogenesis. An _in vitro_ study could show that the development of two-
cell embryos was not arrested at CBD concentrations of 6.4, 32, and 160 nM.35

#### Cancer

Various studies have been performed to study CBD anticancer effects. CBD anti-
invasive actions seem to be mediated by its TRPV1 stimulation and its action
on the CB receptors. Intraperitoneal application of 5 mg/kg b.w. CBD every 3
days for a total of 28 weeks, almost completely reduced the development of
metastatic nodules caused by injection of human lung carcinoma cells (A549) in
nude mice.36 This effect was mediated by upregulation of ICAM1 and TIMP1.
This, in turn, was caused by upstream regulation of p38 and p42/44 MAPK
pathways. The typical side effects of traditional anticancer medication,
emesis, and collateral toxicity were not described in these studies.
Consequently, CBD could be an alternative to other MMP1 inhibitors such as
marimastat and prinomastat, which have shown disappointing clinical results
due to these drugs' adverse muscoskeletal effects.37,38

Two studies showed in various cell lines and in tumor-bearing mice that CBD
was able to reduce tumor metastasis.34,39 Unfortunately, the _in vivo_ study
was only described in a conference abstract and no route of administration or
CBD doses were mentioned.36 However, an earlier study used 0.1, 1.0, or 1.5
μmol/L CBD for 3 days in the aggressive breast cancer cells MDA-MB231. CBD
downregulated Id1 at promoter level and reduced tumor aggressiveness.40

Another study used xenografts to study the proapoptotic effect of CBD, this
time in LNCaP prostate carcinoma cells.36 In this 5-week study, 100 mg/kg CBD
was administered daily i.p. Tumor volume was reduced by 60% and no adverse
effects of treatment were described in the study. The authors assumed that the
observed antitumor effects were mediated via TRPM8 together with ROS release
and p53 activation.41 It has to be pointed out though, that xenograft studies
only have limited predictive validity to results with humans. Moreover, to
carry out these experiments, animals are often immunologically compromised, to
avoid immunogenic reactions as a result to implantation of human cells into
the animals, which in turn can also affect the results.42

Another approach was chosen by Aviello et al.43 They used the carcinogen
azoxymethane to induce colon cancer in mice. Treatment occurred using IP
injections of 1 or 5 mg/kg CBD, three times a week for 3 weeks (including 1
week before carcinogen administration). After 3 months, the number of aberrant
crypt foci, polyps, and tumors was analyzed. The high CBD concentration led to
a significant decrease in polyps and a return to near-normal levels of
phosphorylated Akt (elevation caused by the carcinogen).42 No adverse effects
were mentioned in the described study.43

### Food intake and glycemic effects

Animal studies summarized by Bergamaschi et al. showed inconclusive effects of
CBD on food intake1: i.p. administration of 3–100 mg/kg b.w. had no effect on
food intake in mice and rats. On the contrary, the induction of hyperphagia by
CB1 and 5HT1A agonists in rats could be decreased with CBD (20 mg/kg b.w.
i.p.). Chronic administration (14 days, 2.5 or 5 mg/kg i.p.) reduced the
weight gain in rats. This effect could be inhibited by coadministration of a
CB2R antagonist.1

The positive effects of CBD on hyperglycemia seem to be mainly mediated via
CBD anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. For instance, in ob/ob mice (an
animal model of obesity), 4-week treatment with 3 mg/kg (route of
administration was not mentioned) increased the HDL-C concentration by 55% and
reduced total cholesterol levels by more than 25%. In addition, treatment
increased adiponectin and liver glycogen concentrations.44 and references
therein

### Endocrine effects

High CBD concentrations (1 mM) inhibited progesterone 17-hydroxylase, which
creates precursors for sex steroid and glucocorticoid synthesis, whereas 100
μM CBD did not in an _in vitro_ experiment with primary testis microsomes.45
Rats treated with 10 mg/kg i.p. b.w. CBD showed inhibition of testosterone
oxidation in the liver.46

### Genotoxicity and mutagenicity

Jones et al. mention that 120 mg/kg CBD delivered intraperetonially to Wistar
Kyoto rats showed no mutagenicity and genotoxicity based on personal
communication with GW Pharmaceuticals47,48These data are yet to be published.
The 2012 study with an epilepsy mouse model could also show that CBD did not
influence grip strength, which the study describes as a “putative test for
functional neurotoxicity.”48

Motor function was also tested on a rotarod, which was also not affected by
CBD administration. Static beam performance, as an indicator of sensorimotor
coordination, showed more footslips in the CBD group, but CBD treatment did
not interfere with the animals' speed and ability to complete the test.
Compared to other anticonvulsant drugs, this effect was minimal.48
Unfortunately, we could not find more studies solely focusing on genotoxicity
by other research groups neither in animals nor in humans.

## Acute Clinical Data

Bergamaschi et al. list an impressive number of acute and chronic studies in
humans, showing CBD safety for a wide array of side effects.1 They also
conclude from their survey, that none of the studies reported tolerance to
CBD. Already in the 1970s, it was shown that oral CBD (15–160 mg), iv
injection (5–30 mg), and inhalation of 0.15 mg/kg b.w. CBD did not lead to
adverse effects. In addition, psychomotor function and psychological functions
were not disturbed. Treatment with up to 600 mg CBD neither influenced
physiological parameters (blood pressure, heart rate) nor performance on a
verbal paired-associate learning test.1

Fasinu et al. created a table with an overview of clinical studies currently
underway, registered in Clinical Trials. gov.49 In the following chapter, we
highlight recent, acute clinical studies with CBD.

### CBD-drug interactions

CBD can inhibit CYP2D6, which is also targeted by omeprazole and
risperidone.2,14 There are also indications that CBD inhibits the hepatic
enzyme CYP2C9, reducing the metabolization of warfarin and diclofenac.2,14
More clinical studies are needed, to check whether this interaction warrants
an adaption of the used doses of the coadministered drugs.

The antibiotic rifampicin induces CYP3A4, leading to reduced CBD peak plasma
concentrations.14 In contrast, the CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole, an
antifungal drug, almost doubles CBD peak plasma concentration. Interestingly,
the CYP2C19 inhibitor omeprazole, used to treat gastroesophageal reflux, could
not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of CBD.14

A study, where a regimen of 6×100 mg CBD daily was coadministered with
hexobarbital in 10 subjects, found that CBD increased the bioavailability and
elimination half-time of the latter. Unfortunately, it was not mentioned
whether this effect was mediated via the cytochrome P450 complex.16

Another aspect, which has not been thoroughly looked at, to our knowledge, is
that several cytochrome isozymes are not only expressed in the liver but also
in the brain. It might be interesting to research organ-specific differences
in the level of CBD inhibition of various isozymes. Apart from altering the
bioavailability in the overall plasma of the patient, this interaction might
alter therapeutic outcomes on another level. Dopamine and tyramine are
metabolized by CYP2D6, and neurosteroid metabolism also occurs via the
isozymes of the CYP3A subgroup.50,51 Studying CBD interaction with
neurovascular cytochrome P450 enzymes might also offer new mechanisms of
action. It could be possible that CBD-mediated CYP2D6 inhibition increases
dopamine levels in the brain, which could help to explain the positive CBD
effects in addiction/withdrawal scenarios and might support its 5HT
(=serotonin) elevating effect in depression.

Also, CBD can be a substrate of UDP glucuronosyltransferase.14Whether this
enzyme is indeed involved in the glucuronidation of CBD and also causes
clinically relevant drug interactions in humans is yet to be determined in
clinical studies. Generally, more human studies, which monitor CBD-drug
interactions, are needed.

### Physiological effects

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study, CBD was coadministered
with intravenous fentanyl to a total of 17 subjects.10Blood samples were
obtained before and after 400 mg CBD (previously demonstrated to decrease
blood flow to (para)limbic areas related to drug craving) or 800 mg CBD
pretreatment. This was followed by a single 0.5 (Session 1) or 1.0μg/kg
(Session 2, after 1 week of first administration to allow for sufficient drug
washout) intravenous fentanyl dose. Adverse effects and safety were evaluated
with both forms of the Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Events
(SAFTEE). This extensive tool tests, for example, 78 adverse effects divided
into 23 categories corresponding to organ systems or body parts. The SAFTEE
outcomes were similar between groups. No respiratory depression or
cardiovascular complications were recorded during any test session.

The results of the evaluation of pharmacokinetics, to see if interaction
between the drugs occurred, were as follows. Peak CBD plasma concentrations of
the 400 and 800 mg group were measured after 4 h in the first session (CBD
administration 2 h after light breakfast). Peak urinary CBD and its metabolite
concentrations occurred after 6 h in the low CBD group and after 4 h in the
high CBD group. No effect was evident for urinary CBD and metabolite excretion
except at the higher fentanyl dose, in which CBD clearance was reduced.
Importantly, fentanyl coadministration did not produce respiratory depression
or cardiovascular complications during the test sessions and CBD did not
potentiate fentanyl's effects. No correlation was found between CBD dose and
plasma cortisol levels.

Various vital signs were also measured (blood pressure, respiratory/heart
rate, oxygen saturation, EKG, respiratory function): CBD did not worsen the
adverse effects (e.g., cardiovascular compromise, respiratory depression) of
iv fentanyl. Coadministration was safe and well tolerated, paving the way to
use CBD as a potential treatment for opioid addiction. The validated
subjective measures scales Anxiety (visual analog scale [VAS]), PANAS
(positive and negative subscores), and OVAS (specific opiate VAS) were
administered across eight time points for each session without any significant
main effects for CBD for any of the subjective effects on mood.10

A Dutch study compared subjective adverse effects of three different strains
of medicinal cannabis, distributed via pharmacies, using VAS. “Visual analog
scale is one of the most frequently used psychometric instruments to measure
the extent and nature of subjective effects and adverse effects. The 12
adjectives used for this study were as follows: alertness, tranquility,
confidence, dejection, dizziness, confusion/disorientation, fatigue, anxiety,
irritability, appetite, creative stimulation, and sociability.” The high CBD
strain contained the following concentrations: 6% Δ9-THC/7.5% CBD ( _n_ =25).
This strain showed significantly lower levels of anxiety and dejection.
Moreover, appetite increased less in the high CBD strain. The biggest observed
adverse effect was “fatigue” with a score of 7 (out of 10), which did not
differ between the three strains.52

### Neurological and neurospychiatric effects

#### Anxiety

Forty-eight participants received subanxiolytic levels (32 mg) of CBD, either
before or after the extinction phase in a double-blind, placebo-controlled
design of a Pavlovian fear-conditioning experiment (recall with conditioned
stimulus and context after 48 h and exposure to unconditioned stimulus after
reinstatement). Skin conductance (=autonomic response to conditioning) and
shock expectancy measures (=explicit aspects) of conditioned responding were
recorded throughout. Among other scales, the Mood Rating Scale (MRS) and the
Bond and Bodily Symptoms Scale were used to assess anxiety, current mood, and
physical symptoms. “CBD given postextinction (active after consolidation
phase) enhanced consolidation of extinction learning as assessed by shock
expectancy.” Apart from the extinction-enhancing effects of CBD in human
aversive conditioned memory, CBD showed a trend toward some protection against
reinstatement of contextual memory. No side/adverse effects were reported.53

#### Psychosis

The review by Bergamaschi et al. mentions three acute human studies that have
demonstrated the CBD antipsychotic effect without any adverse effects being
observed. This holds especially true for the extrapyramidal motor side effects
elicited by classical antipsychotic medication.1

Fifteen male, healthy subjects with minimal prior Δ9-THC exposure (<15 times)
were tested for CBD affecting Δ9-THC propsychotic effects using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and various questionnaires on three
occasions, at 1-month intervals, following administration of 10 mg
delta-9-Δ9-THC, 600 mg CBD, or placebo. Order of drug administration was
pseudorandomized across subjects, so that an equal number of subjects received
any of the drugs during the first, second, or third session in a double-blind,
repeated-measures, within-subject design.54 No CBD effect on psychotic
symptoms as measured with PANSS positive symptoms subscale, anxiety as indexed
by the State Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) state, and Visual Analogue Mood
Scale (VAMS) tranquilization or calming subscale, compared to the placebo
group, was observed. The same is true for a verbal learning task (=behavioral
performance of the verbal memory).

Moreover, pretreatment with CBD and subsequent Δ9-THC administration could
reduce the latter's psychotic and anxiety symptoms, as measured using a
standardized scale. This effect was caused by opposite neural activation of
relevant brain areas. In addition, no effects on peripheral cardiovascular
measures such as heart rate and blood pressure were measured.54

A randomized, double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled trial was conducted
in 16 healthy nonanxious subjects using a within-subject design. Oral
Δ9-THC=10 mg, CBD=600 mg, or placebo was administered in three consecutive
sessions at 1-month intervals. The doses were selected to only evoke
neurocognitive effects without causing severe toxic, physical, or psychiatric
reactions. The 600 mg CBD corresponded to mean (standard deviation) whole
blood levels of 0.36 (0.64), 1.62 (2.98), and 3.4 (6.42) ng/mL, 1, 2, and 3 h
after administration, respectively.

Physiological measures and symptomatic effects were assessed before, and at 1,
2, and 3 h postdrug administration using PANSS (a 30-item rating instrument
used to assess psychotic symptoms, with ratings based on a semistructured
clinical interview yielding subscores for positive, negative, and general
psychopathology domains), the self-administered VAMS with 16 items (e.g.,
mental sedation or intellectual impairment, physical sedation or bodily
impairments, anxiety effects and other types of feelings or attitudes), the
ARCI (Addiction Research Center Inventory; containing empirically derived
drug-induced euphoria; stimulant-like effects; intellectual efficiency and
energy; sedation; dysphoria; and somatic effects) to assess drug effects and
the STAI-T/S, where subjects were evaluated on their current mood and their
feelings in general.

There were no significant differences between the effects of CBD and placebo
on positive and negative psychotic symptoms, general psychopathology (PANSS),
anxiety (STAI-S), dysphoria (ARCI), sedation (VAMS, ARCI), and the level of
subjective intoxication (ASI, ARCI), where Δ9-THC did have a pronounced
effect. The physiological parameters, heart rate and blood pressure, were also
monitored and no significant difference between the placebo and the CBD group
was observed.55

#### Addiction

A case study describes a patient treated for cannabis withdrawal according to
the following CBD regimen: “treated with oral 300 mg on Day 1; CBD 600 mg on
Days 2–10 (divided into two doses of 300 mg), and CBD 300 mg on Day 11.” CBD
treatment resulted in a fast and progressive reduction in withdrawal,
dissociative and anxiety symptoms, as measured with the Withdrawal Discomfort
Score, the Marijuana Withdrawal Symptom Checklist, Beck Anxiety Inventory, and
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Hepatic enzymes were also measured daily, but
no effect was reported.56

Naturalistic studies with smokers inhaling cannabis with varying amounts of
CBD showed that the CBD levels were not altering psychomimetic symptoms.1
Interestingly, CBD was able to reduce the “wanting/liking”=implicit
attentional bias caused by exposure to cannabis and food-related stimuli. CBD
might work to alleviate disorders of addiction, by altering the attentive
salience of drug cues. The study did not further measure side effects.57

CBD can also reduce heroin-seeking behaviors (e.g., induced by a conditioned
cue). This was shown in the preclinical data mentioned earlier and was also
replicated in a small double-blind pilot study with individuals addicted to
opioids, who have been abstinent for 7 days.52,53 They either received placebo
or 400 or 800 mg oral CBD on three consecutive days. Craving was induced with
a cue-induced reinstatement paradigm (1 h after CBD administration). One hour
after the video session, subjective craving was already reduced after a single
CBD administration. The effect persisted for 7 days after the last CBD
treatment. Interestingly, anxiety measures were also reduced after treatment,
whereas no adverse effects were described.23,58

A pilot study with 24 subjects was conducted in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled design to evaluate the impact of the _ad hoc_ use of CBD in
smokers, who wished to stop smoking. Pre- and post-testing for mood and
craving of the participants was executed. These tests included the Behaviour
Impulsivity Scale, BDI, STAI, and the Severity of Dependence Scale. During the
week of CBD inhalator use, subjects used a diary to log their craving (on a
scale from 1 to 100=VAS measuring momentary subjective craving), the
cigarettes smoked, and the number of times they used the inhaler. Craving was
assessed using the Tiffany Craving Questionnaire (11). On day 1 and 7, exhaled
CO was measured to test smoking status. Sedation, depression, and anxiety were
evaluated with the MRS.

Over the course of 1 week, participants used the inhaler when they felt the
urge to smoke and received a dose of 400 μg CBD via the inhaler (leading to

> 65% bioavailability); this significantly reduced the number of cigarettes
smoked by ca. 40%, while craving was not significantly different in the groups
post-test. At day 7, the anxiety levels for placebo and CBD group did not
differ. CBD did not increase depression (in contract to the selective CB1
antagonist rimonabant). CBD might weaken the attentional bias to smoking cues
or could have disrupted reconsolidation, thereby destabilizing drug-related
memories.59

### Cell migration

According to our literature survey, there currently are no studies about CBD
role in embryogenesis/cell migration in humans, even though cell migration
does play a role in embryogenesis and CBD was shown to be able to at least
influence migratory behavior in cancer.1

### Endocrine effects and glycemic (including appetite) effects

To the best of our knowledge, no acute studies were performed that solely
concentrated on CBD glycemic effects. Moreover, the only acute study that also
measured CBD effect on appetite was the study we described above, comparing
different cannabis strains. In this study, the strain high in CBD elicited
less appetite increase compared to the THC-only strain.52

Eleven healthy volunteers were treated with 300 mg (seven patients) and 600 mg
(four patients) oral CBD in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Growth
hormone and prolactin levels were unchanged. In contrast, the normal decrease
of cortisol levels in the morning (basal measurement=11.0±3.7 μg/dl; 120 min
after placebo=7.1±3.9 μg/dl) was inhibited by CBD treatment (basal
measurement=10.5±4.9 μg/dl; 120 min after 300 mg CBD=9.9±6.2 μg/dl; 120 min
after 600 mg CBD=11.6±11.6 μg/dl).60

A more recent study also used 600 mg oral CBD for a week and compared 24
healthy subjects to people at risk for psychosis ( _n_ =32; 16 received
placebo and 16 CBD). Serum cortisol levels were taken before the TSST (Trier
Social Stress Test), immediately after, as well as 10 and 20 min after the
test. Compared to the healthy individuals, the cortisol levels increased less
after TSST in the 32 at-risk individuals. The CBD group showed less reduced
cortisol levels but differences were not significant.61 It has to be mentioned
that these data were presented at a conference and are not yet published (to
our knowledge) in a peer-reviewed journal.

## Chronic CBD Studies in Humans

Truly chronic studies with CBD are still scarce. One can often argue that what
the studies call “chronic” CBD administration only differs to acute treatment,
because of repeated administration of CBD. Nonetheless, we also included these
studies with repeated CBD treatment, because we think that compared to a one-
time dose of CBD, repeated CBD regimens add value and knowledge to the field
and therefore should be mentioned here.

### CBD-drug interactions

An 8-week-long clinical study, including 13 children who were treated for
epilepsy with clobazam (initial average dose of 1 mg/kg b.w.) and CBD (oral;
starting dose of 5 mg/kg b.w. raised to maximum of 25 mg/kg b.w.), showed the
following. The CBD interaction with isozymes CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 caused
increased clobazam bioavailability, making it possible to reduce the dose of
the antiepileptic drug, which in turn reduced its side effects.62

These results are supported by another study described in the review by
Grotenhermen et al.63 In this study, 33 children were treated with a daily
dose of 5 mg/kg CBD, which was increased every week by 5 mg/kg increments, up
to a maximum level of 25 mg/kg. CBD was administered on average with three
other drugs, including clobazam (54.5%), valproic acid (36.4%), levetiracetam
(30.3%), felbamate (21.2%), lamotrigine (18.2%), and zonisamide (18.2%). The
coadministration led to an alteration of blood levels of several antiepileptic
drugs. In the case of clobazam this led to sedation, and its levels were
subsequently lowered in the course of the study.

### Physiological effects

A first pilot study in healthy volunteers in 1973 by Mincis et al.
administering 10 mg oral CBD for 21 days did not find any neurological and
clinical changes (EEG; EKG).64 The same holds true for psychiatry and blood
and urine examinations. A similar testing battery was performed in 1980, at
weekly intervals for 30 days with daily oral CBD administration of 3 mg/kg
b.w., which had the same result.65

### Neurological and neuropsychiatric effects

#### Anxiety

Clinical chronic (lasting longer than a couple of weeks) studies in humans are
crucial here but were mostly still lacking at the time of writing this review.
They hopefully will shed light on the inconsistencies observerd in animal
studies. Chronic studies in humans may, for instance, help to test whether,
for example, an anxiolytic effect always prevails after chronic CBD treatment
or whether this was an artifact of using different animal models of anxiety or
depression.2,18

#### Psychosis and bipolar disorder

In a 4-week open trial, CBD was tested on Parkinson's patients with psychotic
symptoms. Oral doses of 150–400 mg/day CBD (in the last week) were
administered. This led to a reduction of their psychotic symptoms. Moreover,
no serious side effects or cognitive and motor symptoms were reported.66

Bergamaschi et al. describe a chronic study, where a teenager with severe side
effects of traditional antipsychotics was treated with up to 1500 mg/day of
CBD for 4 weeks. No adverse effects were observed and her symptoms improved.
The same positive outcome was registered in another study described by
Bergamaschi et al., where three patients were treated with a starting dose of
CBD of 40 mg, which was ramped up to 1280 mg/day for 4 weeks.1 A double-blind,
randomized clinical trial of CBD versus amisulpride, a potent antipsychotic in
acute schizophrenia, was performed on a total of 42 subjects, who were treated
for 28 days starting with 200 mg CBD per day each.67 The dose was increased
stepwise by 200 mg per day to 4×200 mg CBD daily (total 800 mg per day) within
the first week. The respective treatment was maintained for three additional
weeks. A reduction of each treatment to 600 mg per day was allowed for
clinical reasons, such as unwanted side effects after week 2. This was the
case for three patients in the CBD group and five patients in the amisulpride
group. While both treatments were effective (no significant difference in
PANSS total score), CBD showed the better side effect profile. Amisulpride,
working as a dopamine D2/D3-receptor antagonist, is one of the most effective
treatment options for schizophrenia. CBD treatment was accompanied by a
substantial increase in serum anandamide levels, which was significantly
associated with clinical improvement, suggesting inhibition of anandamide
deactivation via reduced FAAH activity.

In addition, the FAAH substrates palmitoylethanolamide and linoleoyl-
ethanolamide (both lipid mediators) were also elevated in the CBD group. CBD
showed less serum prolactin increase (predictor of galactorrhoea and sexual
dysfunction), fewer extrapyramidal symptoms measured with the Extrapyramidal
Symptom Scale, and less weight gain. Moreover, electrocardiograms as well as
routine blood parameters were other parameters whose effects were measured but
not reported in the study. CBD better safety profile might improve acute
compliance and long-term treatment adherence.67,68

A press release by GW Pharmaceuticals of September 15th, 2015, described 88
patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenic psychosis, treated either with
CBD (in addition to their regular medication) or placebo. Important clinical
parameters improved in the CBD group and the number of mild side effects was
comparable to the placebo group.2 Table 2 shows an overview of studies with
CBD for the treatment of psychotic symptoms and its positive effect on
symptomatology and the absence of side effects.69

### Table 2.

**Studies with CBD with Patients with Psychotic Symptoms (Adapted)69**

Assessment | Oral CBD administration | Total number of study participants |
Main findings  
\---|---|---|---  
BPRS (brief psychiatric rating scale) | Up to 1500 mg/day for 26 days | 1 |
Improvement of symptomatology, no side effects  
BPRS | Up to 1280 mg/day for 4 weeks | 3 | Mild improvement of symptomatology
of 1 patient, no side effects  
BPRS, Parkinson Psychosis Questionnaire (PPQ) | Up to 600 mg/day for 4 weeks |
6 | Improvement of symptomatology, no side effects  
Stroop Color Word Test, BPRS, PANSS (positive and negative symptom scale) |
Single doses of 300 or 600 mg | 28 | Performance after placebo and CBD 300 mg
compared to CBD 600 mg; no effects on symptomatology  
BPRS, PANSS | Up to 800 mg/day for 4 weeks | 39 | CBD as effective as
amisulpride in terms of improvement of symptomatology; CBD displayed superior
side effect profile

Treatment of two patients for 24 days with 600–1200 mg/day CBD, who were
suffering from BD, did not lead to side effects.70 Apart from the study with
two patients mentioned above, CBD has not been tested systematically in acute
or chronic administration scenarios in humans for BD according to our own
literature search.71

#### Epilepsy

Epileptic patients were treated for 135 days with 200–300 mg oral CBD daily
and evaluated every week for changes in urine and blood. Moreover,
neurological and physiological examinations were performed, which neither
showed signs of CBD toxicity nor severe side effects. The study also
illustrated that CBD was well tolerated.65

A review by Grotenhermen and Müller-Vahl describes several clinical studies
with CBD2: 23 patients with therapy-resistant epilepsy (e.g., Dravet syndrome)
were treated for 3 months with increasing doses of up to 25 mg/kg b.w. CBD in
addition to their regular epilepsy medication. Apart from reducing the seizure
frequency in 39% of the patients, the side effects were only mild to moderate
and included reduced/increased appetite, weight gain/loss, and tiredness.

Another clinical study lasting at least 3 months with 137 children and young
adults with various forms of epilepsy, who were treated with the CBD drug
Epidiolex, was presented at the American Academy for Neurology in 2015. The
patients were suffering from Dravet syndrome (16%), Lennox–Gastaut syndrome
(16%), and 10 other forms of epilepsy (some among them were very rare
conditions). In this study, almost 50% of the patients experienced a reduction
of seizure frequency. The reported side effects were 21% experienced
tiredness, 17% diarrhea, and 16% reduced appetite. In a few cases, severe side
effects occurred, but it is not clear, if these were caused by Epidiolex.
These were status epilepticus ( _n_ =10), diarrhea ( _n_ =3), weight loss (
_n_ =2), and liver damage in one case.

The largest CBD study conducted thus far was an open-label study with
Epidiolex in 261 patients (mainly children, the average age of the
participants was 11) suffering from severe epilepsy, who could not be treated
sufficiently with standard medication. After 3 months of treatment, where
patients received CBD together with their regular medication, a median
reduction of seizure frequency of 45% was observed. Ten percent of the
patients reported side effects (tiredness, diarrhea, and exhaustion).2

After extensive literature study of the available trials performed until
September 2016, CBD side effects were generally mild and infrequent. The only
exception seems to be a multicenter open-label study with a total of 162
patients aged 1–30 years, with treatment-resistant epilepsy. Subjects were
treated for 1 year with a maximum of 25 mg/kg (in some clinics 50 mg/kg) oral
CBD, in addition to their standard medication.

This led to a reduction in seizure frequency. In this study, 79% of the cohort
experienced side effects. The three most common adverse effects were
somnolence ( _n_ =41 [25%]), decreased appetite ( _n_ =31 [19%]), and diarrhea
( _n_ =31 [19%]).72 It has to be pointed out that no control group existed in
this study (e.g., placebo or another drug). It is therefore difficult to put
the side effect frequency into perspective. Attributing the side effects to
CBD is also not straightforward in severely sick patients. Thus, it is not
possible to draw reliable conclusions on the causation of the observed side
effects in this study.

#### Parkinson's disease

In a study with a total of 21 Parkinson's patients (without comorbid
psychiatric conditions or dementia) who were treated with either placebo, 75
mg/day CBD or 300 mg/day CBD in an exploratory double-blind trial for 6 weeks,
the higher CBD dose showed significant improvement of quality of life, as
measured with PDQ-39. This rating instrument comprised the following factors:
mobility, activities of daily living, emotional well-being, stigma, social
support, cognition, communication, and bodily discomfort. For the factor,
“activities of daily living,” a possible dose-dependent relationship could
exist between the low and high CBD group—the two CBD groups scored
significantly different here. Side effects were evaluated with the UKU (Udvalg
for Kliniske Undersøgelser). This assessment instrument analyzes adverse
medication effects, including psychic, neurologic, autonomic, and other
manifestations. Using the UKU and verbal reports, no significant side effects
were recognized in any of the CBD groups.73

#### Huntington's disease

Fifteen neuroleptic-free patients with Huntington's disease were treated with
either placebo or oral CBD (10 mg/kg b.w. per day) for 6 weeks in a double-
blind, randomized, crossover study design. Using various safety outcome
variables, clinical tests, and the cannabis side effect inventory, it was
shown that there were no differences between the placebo group and the CBD
group in the observed side effects.6

### Immune system

Forty-eight patients were treated with 300 mg/kg oral CBD, 7 days before and
until 30 days after the transplantation of allogeneic hematopoietic cells from
an unrelated donor to treat acute leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome in
combination with standard measures to avoid GVHD (graft vs. host disease;
cyclosporine and short course of MTX). The occurrence of various degrees of
GVHD was compared with historical data from 108 patients, who had only
received the standard treatment. Patients treated with CBD did not develop
acute GVHD. In the 16 months after transplantation, the incidence of GHVD was
significantly reduced in the CBD group. Side effects were graded using the
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4.0) classification,
which did not detect severe adverse effects.74

### Endocrine and glycemic (including appetite, weight gain) effects

In a placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind study with 62 subjects with
noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes, 13 patients were treated with twice-daily
oral doses of 100 mg CBD for 13 weeks. This resulted in lower resistin levels
compared to baseline. The hormone resistin is associated with obesity and
insulin resistance. Compared to baseline, glucose-dependent insulinotropic
peptide levels were elevated after CBD treatment. This incretin hormone is
produced in the proximal duodenum by K cells and has insulinotropic and
pancreatic b cell preserving effects. CBD was well tolerated in the patients.
However, with the comparatively low CBD concentrations used in this
phase-2-trial, no overall improvement of glycemic control was observed.40

When weight and appetite were measured as part of a measurement battery for
side effects, results were inconclusive. For instance, the study mentioned
above, where 23 children with Dravet syndrome were treated, increases as well
as decreases in appetite and weight were observed as side effects.2 An open-
label trial with 214 patients suffering from treatment-resistant epilepsy
showed decreased appetite in 32 cases. However, in the safety analysis group,
consisting of 162 subjects, 10 showed decreased weight and 12 had gained
weight.52 This could be either due to the fact that CBD only has a small
effect on these factors, or appetite and weight are complex endpoints
influenced by multiple factors such as diet and genetic predisposition. Both
these factors were not controlled for in the reviewed studies.

## Conclusion

This review could substantiate and expand the findings of Bergamaschi et al.
about CBD favorable safety profile.1Nonetheless, various areas of CBD research
should be extended. First, more studies researching CBD side effects after
real chronic administration need to be conducted. Many so-called chronic
administration studies, cited here were only a couple of weeks long. Second,
many trials were conducted with a small number of individuals only. To perform
a throrough general safety evaluation, more individuals have to be recruited
into future clinical trials. Third, several aspects of a toxicological
evaluation of a compound such as genotoxicity studies and research evaluating
CBD effect on hormones are still scarce. Especially, chronic studies on CBD
effect on, for example, genotoxicity and the immune system are still missing.
Last, studies that evaluate whether CBD-drug interactions occur in clinical
trials have to be performed.

In conclusion, CBD safety profile is already established in a plethora of
ways. However, some knowledge gaps detailed above should be closed by
additional clinical trials to have a completely well-tested pharmaceutical
compound.

## Abbreviations Used

AD | Alzheimer's disease  
\---|---  
ARCI | Addiction Research Center Inventory  
BD | bipolar disorder  
BDI | Beck Depression Inventory  
CBD | cannabidiol  
HSP | heat shock protein  
IL | interleukin  
MRS | Mood Rating Scale  
PPI | prepulse inhibition  
ROS | reactive oxygen species  
SAFTEE | Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Events  
STAI | State Trait Anxiety Inventory  
TSST | Trier Social Stress Test  
UKU | Udvalg for Kliniske Undersøgelser  
VAMS | Visual Analogue Mood Scale  
VAS | Visual Analog Scales

## Acknowledgments

The study was commissioned by the European Industrial Hemp Association. The
authors thank Michal Carus, Executive Director of the EIHA, for making this
review possible, for his encouragement, and helpful hints.

## Author Disclosure Statement

EIHA paid nova-Institute for the review. F.G. is Executive Director of IACM.#

## References

1\. Bergamaschi MM, Queiroz RH, Zuardi AW, et al. Safety and side effects of
cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent. Curr Drug Saf. 2011;6:237–249
[PubMed]

2\. Grotenhermen F, Müller-Vahl K. Cannabis und Cannabinoide in der Medizin:
Fakten und Ausblick. Suchttherapie. 2016;17:71–76

3\. Hampson AJ, Grimaldi M, Axelrod J, et al. Cannabidiol and
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol are neuroprotective antioxidants. PNAS.
1998;95:8268–8273 [PMC free article] [PubMed]

4\. Oláh A, Tóth BI, Borbíró I, et al. Cannabidiol exerts sebostatic and
antiinflammatory effects on human sebocytes. J Clin Invest. 2014:124:3713.
[PMC free article] [PubMed]

5\. Deiana S, Watanabe A, Yamasaki Y, et al. Plasma and brain pharmacokinetic
profile of Cannabidiol (CBD), cannabidivarine (CBDV), Delta
(9)-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV) and cannabigerol (CBG) in rats and mice
following oral and intraperitoneal administration and CBD action on obsessive
compulsive behaviour. Psychopharmacology. 2012;219:859–873[PubMed]

6\. Consroe P, Laguna J, Allender J, et al. Controlled clinical trial of
cannabidiol in Huntington's disease. Pharmacol Biochem Beh. 1991;40:701–708
[PubMed]

7\. Bih CI, Chen T, Nunn AV, et al. Molecular targets of cannabidiol in
neurological disorders. Neurotherapeutics. 2015;12:699–730 [PMC free article]
[PubMed]

8\. Stout SM, Cimino NM. Exogenous cannabinoids as substrates, inhibitors, and
inducers of human drug metabolizing enzymes: a systematic review. Drug Metab
Rev. 2014;46:86–95 [PubMed]

9\. Fusar-Poli P, Crippa JA, Bhattacharyya S, et al. Distinct effects of
D9-tetrahydro-cannabinoland cannabidiol on neural activation during emotional
processing. Arch Gen Psychiat. 2009;66:9–5.[PubMed]

10\. Manini AF, Yiannoulos G, Bergamaschi MM, et al. Safety and
pharmacokinetics of oral cannabidiol when administered concomitantly with
intravenous fentanyl in humans. J Addict Med. 2014;9:204–210 [PMC free
article] [PubMed]

11\. Monographie NN. Cannabidiol. Deutscher Arzneimittel-Codex (DAC) inkl.
Neues Rezeptur-Formularium (NRF). DAC/NRF October 22, 2015

12\. Pelkonen O, Mäeenpäeä J, Taavitsainen P, et al. Inhibition and induction
of human cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. Xenobiotica. 1998;28:1203–1253
[PubMed]

13\. Karlgren M, Bergström CA. How physicochemical properties of drugs affect
their metabolism and clearance. In: New horizons in predictive drug metabolism
and pharmacokinetics. Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge, UK, 2015

14\. Ujváry I, Hanuš L. Human metabolites of cannabidiol: a review on their
formation, biological activity, and relevance in therapy. Cannabis Cannabinoid
Res. 2016;1:90–101

15\. Bornheim LM, Everhart ET, Li J, et al. Induction and genetic regulation
of mouse hepatic cytochrome P450 by cannabidiol. Biochem Pharmacol.
1994;48:161–171 [PubMed]

16\. Brzozowska N, Li KM, Wang XS, et al. ABC transporters P-gp and Bcrp do
not limit the brain uptake of the novel antipsychotic and anticonvulsant drug
cannabidiol in mice. Peer J. 2016;4:e208–1. [PMC free article] [PubMed]

17\. Feinshtein V, Erez O, Ben-Zvi Z, et al. Cannabidiol enhances xenobiotic
permeability through the human placental barrier by direct inhibition of
breast cancer resistance protein: an ex vivo study. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2013;209:573-e1 [PubMed]

18\. Linge R, Jiménez-Sánchez L, Campa L, et al. Cannabidiol induces rapid-
acting antidepressant-like effects and enhances cortical 5-HT/glutamate
neurotransmission: role of 5-HT 1A receptors. Neuropharmacology.
2016;103:16–26 [PubMed]

19\. Schiavon AP, Bonato JM, Milani H, et al. Influence of single and repeated
cannabidiol administration on emotional behavior and markers of cell
proliferation and neurogenesis in non-stressed mice. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016;64:27–34 [PubMed]

20\. Peres FF, Levin R, Almeida V, et al. Cannabidiol, among other cannabinoid
drugs, modulates prepulse inhibition of startle in the SHR animal model:
implications for schizophrenia pharmacotherapy. Front Pharmacol. 2016;7:30–3.
[PMC free article] [PubMed]

21\. Gomes FV, Issy AC, Ferreira FR, et al. Cannabidiol attenuates
sensorimotor gating disruption and molecular changes induced by chronic
antagonism of NMDA receptors in mice. J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015;18:pyu04–1.
[PMC free article][PubMed]

22\. Valvassori SS, Elias G, de Souza B, et al. Effects of cannabidiol on
amphetamine-induced oxidative stress generation in an animal model of mania. J
Psychopharmacol. 2011;25:274–280 [PubMed]

23\. Ren Y, Whittard J, Higuera-Matas A, et al. Cannabidiol, a nonpsychotropic
component of cannabis, inhibits cue-induced heroin seeking and normalizes
discrete mesolimbic neuronal disturbances. J Neurosci. 2009;29:14764–14769
[PMC free article][PubMed]

24\. Sun S, Hu F, Wu J, Zhang S. Cannabidiol attenuates OGD/R-induced damage
by enhancing mitochondrial bioenergetics and modulating glucose metabolism via
pentose-phosphate pathway in hippocampal neurons. Redox Biol. 2017;11:577–585
[PMC free article] [PubMed]

25\. Schurr A, Livne A. Differential inhibition of mitochondrial monoamine
oxidase from brain by hashish components. Biochem Pharmacol. 1976;25:1201–1203
[PubMed]

26\. Alvarez FJ, Lafuente H, Rey-Santano MC. Neuroprotective effects of the
nonpsychoactive cannabinoid cannabidiol in hypoxicischemic newborn piglets.
Pediatr Res. 2008;64:653–658[PubMed]

27\. Valvassori SS, Bavaresco DV, Scaini G. Acute and chronic administration
of cannabidiol increases mitochondrial complex and creatine kinase activity in
the rat brain. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2013;35:380–386 [PubMed]

28\. Scott KA, Dennis JL, Dalgleish AG, et al. Inhibiting heat shock proteins
can potentiate the cytotoxic effect of cannabidiol in human glioma cells.
Anticancer Res. 2015;35:5827–5837 [PubMed]

29\. Burstein S. Cannabidiol (CBD) and its analogs: a review of their effects
on inflammation. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015;23:1377–1385[PubMed]

30\. McAllister SD, Soroceanu L, Desprez PY. The antitumor activity of plant-
derived non-psychoactive cannabinoids. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol.
2015;10:255–267 [PMC free article][PubMed]

31\. Cheng D, Spiro AS, Jenner AM, et al. Long-term cannabidiol treatment
prevents the development of social recognition memory deficits in Alzheimer's
disease transgenic mice. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;42:1383–1396 [PubMed]

32\. Weiss L, Zeira M, Reich S, et al. Cannabidiol arrests onset of autoimmune
diabetes in NOD mice. Neuropharmacology. 2008;54:244–249 [PMC free article]
[PubMed]

33\. Hammell DC, Zhang LP, Ma F, et al. Transdermal cannabidiol reduces
inflammation and pain-related behaviours in a rat model of arthritis. Eur J
Pain. 2015;20:936–948 [PMC free article] [PubMed]

34\. Murase R, Limbad C, Murase R. Id-1 gene and protein as novel therapeutic
targets for metastatic cancer. Cancer Res. 2012;72:530–8.

35\. Paria BC, Das SK, Dey SK. The preimplantation mouse embryo is a target
for cannabinoid ligand-receptor signaling. PNAS. 1995;92:9460–9464 [PMC free
article] [PubMed]

36\. Leanza L, Managò A, Zoratti M, et al. Pharmacological targeting of ion
channels for cancer therapy: in vivo evidences. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2016;1863:1385–1397 [PubMed]

37\. Ramer R, Merkord J, Rohde H, et al. Cannabidiol inhibits cancer cell
invasion via upregulation of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-1.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2010;79:955–966[PubMed]

38\. Ramer R, Bublitz K, Freimuth N. Cannabidiol inhibits lung cancer cell
invasion and metastasis via intercellular adhesion molecule-1. FASEB J.
2012;26:1535–1548 [PubMed]

39\. Benhamou Y. Gene and protein as novel therapeutic targets for metastatic
cancer. Available at www.marschallplan.at (accessed on October1, 2016)

40\. McAllister SD, Christian RT, Horowitz MP. Cannabidiol as a novel
inhibitor of Id-1 gene expression in aggressive breast cancer cells. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2007;6:2921–2927 [PubMed]

41\. De Petrocellis L, Ligresti A, Schiano Moriello A, et al. Non-Δ9-THC
cannabinoids inhibit prostate carcinoma growth in vitro and in vivo: pro-
apoptotic effects and underlying mechanisms. Br J Pharmacol. 2013;168:79–102
[PMC free article] [PubMed]

42\. Fowler CJ. Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol as potential
curative agents for cancer: a critical examination of the preclinical
literature. Pharmacol Ther. 2015;97:587–596 [PubMed]

43\. Aviello G, Romano B, Borrelli F, et al. Chemopreventive effect of the
non-psychotropic phytocannabinoid cannabidiol on experimental colon cancer. J
Mol Med. 2012;90:925–934 [PubMed]

44\. Jadoon KA, Ratcliffe SH, Barrett DA. Efficacy and safety of cannabidiol
and tetrahydrocannabivarin on glycemic and lipid parameters in patients with
type 2 diabetes: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel
group pilot study. Diabetes Care. 2016;39:1777–1786 [PubMed]

45\. Watanabe K, Motoya E, Matsuzawa N, et al. Marijuana extracts possess the
effects like the endocrine disrupting chemicals. Toxicology. 2005;206:471–478
[PubMed]

46\. Narimatsu S, Watanabe K, Yamamoto I. Inhibition of hepatic microsomal
cytochrome P450 by cannabidiol in adult male rats. Chem Pharm Bull.
1990;38:1365–1368 [PubMed]

47\. Jones NA, Hill AJ, Smith I, et al. Cannabidiol displays antiepileptiform
and antiseizure properties in vitro and in vivo. J Pharm Ex Ther.
2010;332:569–577 [PMC free article] [PubMed]

48\. Jones NA, Glyn SE, Akiyama S, et al. Cannabidiol exerts anti-convulsant
effects in animal models of temporal lobe and partial seizures. Seizure.
2012;21:344–352 [PubMed]

49\. Fasinu PS, Phillips S, ElSohly MA, et al. Current status and prospects
for cannabidiol preparations as new therapeutic agents. Pharmacotherapy.
2016;36:781–796 [PubMed]

50\. Persson A, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Pharmacogenomics of cytochrome P450
dependent metabolism of endogenous compounds: implications for behavior,
psychopathology and treatment. J Pharmacogenomics Pharmacoproteomics
2014;5:12–7.

51\. Ghosh C, Hossain M, Solanki J, et al. Pathophysiological implications of
neurovascular P450 in brain disorders. Drug Discov Today. 2016;21:1609–1619
[PMC free article] [PubMed]

52\. Brunt TM, van Genugten M, Höner-Snoeken K, et al.Therapeutic satisfaction
and subjective effects of different strains of pharmaceutical-grade cannabis.
J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2014;34:344–349 [PubMed]

53\. Das RK, Kamboj SK, Ramadas M, et al. Cannabidiol enhances consolidation
of explicit fear extinction in humans. Psychopharmacology. 2013;226:781–792
[PubMed]

54\. Bhattacharyya S, Morrison PD, Fusar-Poli P, et al. Opposite effects of
Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on human brain function and
psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35:764–774 [PMC free article]
[PubMed]

55\. Martin-Santos R, Crippa J, Batalla A. Acute effects of a single, oral
dose of d9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) administration
in healthy volunteers. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18:4966–4979 [PubMed]

56\. Crippa JAS, Hallak JEC, Machado-de-Sousa JP, et al.Cannabidiol for the
treatment of cannabis withdrawal syndrome: a case report. J Clin Pharm Ther.
2013;38:162–164 [PubMed]

57\. Morgan CJ, Freeman TP, Schafer GL. Cannabidiol attenuates the appetitive
effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans smoking their chosen cannabis.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35:1879–1885 [PMC free article] [PubMed]

58\. Hurd YL, Yoon M, Manini AF. Early phase in the development of cannabidiol
as a treatment for addiction: opioid relapse takes initial center stage.
Neurotherapeutics. 2015;12:807–815 [PMC free article] [PubMed]

59\. Morgan CJ, Das RK, Joye A, et al. Cannabidiol reduces cigarette
consumption in tobacco smokers: preliminary findings. Addictive Behav.
2013;38:2433–2436 [PubMed]

60\. Zuardi AW, Guimaraes FS, Moreira AC. Effect of cannabidiol on plasma
prolactin, growth hormone and cortisol in human volunteers. Braz J Med Biol
Res. 1993;26:213–217 [PubMed]

61\. Appiah-Kusi E, Mondelli V, McGuire P, et al. Effects of cannabidiol
treatment on cortisol response to social stress in subjects at high risk of
developing psychosis. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2016;7(Supplement):23–24

62\. Geffrey AL, Pollack SF, Bruno PL, et al. Drug–drug interaction between
clobazam and cannabidiol in children with refractory epilepsy. Epilepsia.
2015;56:1246–1251 [PubMed]

63\. Grotenhermen F, Gebhardt K, Berger M. Cannabidiol. Nachtschatten Verlag:
Solothurn, Switzerland, 2016

64\. Mincis M, Pfeferman A, Guimarães RX. Chronic administration of
cannabidiol in man. Pilot study. AMB Rev Assoc Med Bras.1973;19:185–190
[PubMed]

65\. Cunha J, Carlini EA, Pereira AE, et al. Chronic administration of
cannabidiol to healthy volunteers and epileptic patients. Pharmacology.
1980;21:175–185 [PubMed]

66\. Zuardi AW, Crippa JAS, Hallak JEC, et al. Cannabidiol for the treatment
of psychosis in Parkinson's disease. J Psychopharmacol. 2009;3:979–983
[PubMed]

67\. Leweke FM, Piomelli D, Pahlisch F. Cannabidiol enhances anandamide
signaling and alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Transl
psychiatry. 2012;2:e9–4. [PMC free article][PubMed]

68\. Leweke F, Koethe D, Gerth C. Cannabidiol as an antipsychotic: a double-
blind, controlled clinical trial of cannabidiol versus amisulpiride in acute
schizophrenia. In: 15th annual symposium on cannabinoids Cannabinoid Research
Society: Clearwater Beach, FL, 2005

69\. Iseger TA, Bossong MG. A systematic review of the antipsychotic
properties of cannabidiol in humans. Schizophr Res. 2015;162:153–161 [PubMed]

70\. Zuardi AW, Crippa JAS, Dursun SM, et al. Cannabidiol was ineffective for
manic episode of bipolar affective disorder. J Psychopharmacol.
2010;24:135–137 [PubMed]

71\. Braga RJ, Abdelmessih S, Tseng J, et al. Cannabinoids and bipolar
disorder. Cannabinoids in neurologic and mental disease. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
2015, p. 205

72\. Devinsky O, Marsh E, Friedman D, et al. Cannabidiol in patients with
treatment-resistant epilepsy: an open-label interventional trial. Lancet
Neurol. 2016;15:270–278 [PubMed]

73\. Chagas MHN, Zuardi AW, Tumas V, et al. Effects of cannabidiol in the
treatment of patients with Parkinson's disease: an exploratory double-blind
trial. J Psychopharmacol. 2014;28:1088–1098 [PubMed]

74\. Yeshurun M, Shpilberg O, Herscovici C, et al. Cannabidiol for the
prevention of graft-versus- host-disease after allogeneic hematopoietic cell
transplantation: results of a phase II study. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2015;21:1770–1775 [PubMed]

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5569602/

June 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Effects of Drugs (Papers),Medical
Studies,Medicine and Marijuana :

There was _big_ news in Congress today that I wanted you to know about. A
proposed government spending bill released today eliminated a provision that
has protected the marijuana industry from federal prosecution for violating
the Controlled Substances Act.

The Rohrabacher-Farr language was eliminated from the Commerce, Justice,
Science bill that funds the Department of Justice, even though the language
had previously been included in the 2017 base text. In addition, the Financial
Services bill retained language preventing Washington, DC from implementing
full retail sales and commercialization of recreational marijuana.

Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM) submitted testimony to the Appropriations
Committee to push back against this provision, which has allowed unsafe and
untested products to masquerade as medicine. Rather than submit their products
to the FDA for approval as safe and effective medicines, the marijuana
industry has instead been using medical marijuana laws as a guise to increase
demand for marijuana consumption and service the black market with large
amounts of high-potency marijuana.

"If I were an investor, I would sell my marijuana stocks short," said Kevin
Sabet, President of SAM. "The marijuana industry has lost in every state in
which they were pushing legislation in 2017, the industry's largest lobbying
group is losing its bank account , and now they are losing protection that has
helped them thrive despite marijuana's illegal status. Although the debate
over Rohrbacher-Farr is far from over, the bad news just keeps coming for the
pot industry. But it's great news for parents, prevention groups, law
enforcement, medical professionals, victims' rights advocates and everyone who
cares about putting public health before profits."

Evidence demonstrates that marijuana - which has skyrocketed in average
potency over the past decade - is addictive and harmful to the human brain,
especially when used by adolescents. Moreover, in states that have already
legalized the drug, there has been an increase in drugged driving crashes and
youth marijuana use. States that have legalized marijuana have also failed to
shore up state budget shortfalls with marijuana taxes, continue to see a
thriving black market, and are experiencing a continued rise in alcohol sales.

Thank you for the work that you are doing to help with these big wins for
public health and safety!

Source: Email from Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM) June 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Political
Sector,USA :

There was _big_ news in Congress yesterday that I wanted you to know about. We
are pleased to report that the House has not included any pro-pot riders in
its spending bills this year! Thank you for all of your efforts, including
calls and emails. Congress has heard your voice and acted to preserve the
public health and safety of our kids and communities.

Pro-pot advocates filed more than ten amendments to protect the marijuana
industry and increase marijuana investment opportunities, but none of the
amendments were allowed to proceed. The lessons of legalization are getting
out, and it's clear the experiment has failed, as our recent Cole Memo Report
has shown. The black market is thriving, kids are ending up in emergency
rooms, and drugged driving fatalities are soaring .

The fight isn't over, though. _Even though the House bill is clear, the Senate
version of the spending bill still contains key marijuana industry
protections_. Those differences will be resolved in the coming months. We will
continue to send out alerts to let you know when it 's time to come together
and act.

Thank you again for all your work over the past years. You've made a
difference, and we are grateful for your partnership. Please consider a
donation to help with our efforts as we continue this battle in the coming
months.

Source: Email SAM Action info@samaction.net from Kevin Sabet September 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA :

I was just learning this morning that CBD is well documented to trigger and
act via PPAR gamma receptors which are well known to physicians as used in a
class of diabetes drugs called the thiazolidinediones (pioglitazone and its
congeners).

So I thought I should just check if this was involved in pregnancy and
gestation.

Sure enough – BINGO!!!

Another strike of GOLD!!!

So I wrote this to add in the references…

Cannabidiol is known to interact with the (Peroxisome Proliferation Activated
Receptor) PPARγ pathway 1-8.

PPARγ is known to be a very important transcription factor in metabolic
regulation and is also the master regulator of the adipogenic differentiation
pathway.

It also plays a key role in the reproductive tract with actions on the corpus
luteum and developing gametes.

It has been documented in a rich literature to have a major effect on
developing embryos and the reproductive tract 9-32.

References

1 De Filippis, D. et al. Cannabidiol reduces intestinal inflammation through
the control of neuroimmune axis. PLoS One 6, e28159,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028159 (2011).  
2 Esposito, G. et al. Cannabidiol reduces Abeta-induced neuroinflammation and
promotes hippocampal neurogenesis through PPARgamma involvement. PLoS One 6,
e28668, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028668 (2011).  
3 Hegde, V. L., Singh, U. P., Nagarkatti, P. S. & Nagarkatti, M. Critical Role
of Mast Cells and Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor gamma in the
Induction of Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells by Marijuana Cannabidiol In
Vivo. J Immunol 194, 5211-5222, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1401844 (2015).  
4 Hind, W. H., England, T. J. & O'Sullivan, S. E. Cannabidiol protects an in
vitro model of the blood-brain barrier from oxygen-glucose deprivation via
PPARgamma and 5-HT1A receptors. Br J Pharmacol 173, 815-825,
doi:10.1111/bph.13368 (2016).  
5 O'Sullivan, S. E. & Kendall, D. A. Cannabinoid activation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors: potential for modulation of inflammatory
disease. Immunobiology 215, 611-616, doi:10.1016/j.imbio.2009.09.007 (2010).  
6 O'Sullivan, S. E., Sun, Y., Bennett, A. J., Randall, M. D. & Kendall, D. A.
Time-dependent vascular actions of cannabidiol in the rat aorta. European
journal of pharmacology 612, 61-68, doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.03.010 (2009).  
7 Ramer, R. et al. COX-2 and PPAR-gamma confer cannabidiol-induced apoptosis
of human lung cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther 12, 69-82,
doi:10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0335 (2013).  
8 Scuderi, C., Steardo, L. & Esposito, G. Cannabidiol promotes amyloid
precursor protein ubiquitination and reduction of beta amyloid expression in
SHSY5YAPP+ cells through PPARgamma involvement. Phytother Res 28, 1007-1013,
doi:10.1002/ptr.5095 (2014).  
9 Adaikalakoteswari, A. et al. Low Vitamin B12 in Pregnancy Is Associated With
Adipose-Derived Circulating miRs Targeting PPARgamma and Insulin Resistance.
The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 102, 4200-4209,
doi:10.1210/jc.2017-01155 (2017).  
10 Anghebem-Oliveira, M. I. et al. Type 2 diabetes-associated genetic variants
of FTO, LEPR, PPARg, and TCF7L2 in gestational diabetes in a Brazilian
population. Arch Endocrinol Metab 61, 238-248, doi:10.1590/2359-3997000000258
(2017).  
11 Casamadrid, V., Amaya, C. A. & Mendieta, Z. H. Body Mass Index in Pregnancy
Does Not Affect Peroxisome Proliferator-activated Receptor Gamma Promoter
Region (-359 to -260) Methylation in the Neonate. Ann Med Health Sci Res 6,
38-43, doi:10.4103/2141-9248.180272 (2016).  
12 Cawyer, C. et al. Attenuation of hyperglycemia-induced apoptotic signaling
and anti-angiogenic milieu in cultured cytotrophoblast cells. Hypertens
Pregnancy 35, 159-169, doi:10.3109/10641955.2015.1122035 (2016).  
13 Drew, P. D. & Kane, C. J. Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor-gamma
Agonists: Potential Therapeutics for Neuropathology Associated with Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorders. J Clin Cell Immunol 7,
doi:10.4172/2155-9899.1000469 (2016).  
14 Gao, F., Hu, W., Li, Y., Shen, H. & Hu, J. Mono-2-ethylhexyl phthalate
inhibits human extravillous trophoblast invasion via the PPARgamma pathway.
Toxicology and applied pharmacology 327, 23-29, doi:10.1016/j.taap.2017.04.014
(2017).  
15 Hasby Saad, M., El-Anwar, N., Lotfy, S., Fouda, M. & Hasby, E. Human
placental PPAR-gamma & SOX2 expression in serologically proved toxoplasmosis.
Parasite Immunol, e12529, doi:10.1111/pim.12529 (2018).  
16 Hu, W. et al. Activation of Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor
Gamma and Disruption of Progesterone Synthesis of 2-Ethylhexyl Diphenyl
Phosphate in Human Placental Choriocarcinoma Cells: Comparison with Triphenyl
Phosphate. Environ Sci Technol 51, 4061-4068, doi:10.1021/acs.est.7b00872
(2017).  
17 Kurzynska, A., Chojnowska, K., Bogacki, M. & Bogacka, I. PPAR ligand
association with prostaglandin F2alpha and E2 synthesis in the pig corpus
luteum-An in vitro study. Anim Reprod Sci 172, 157-163,
doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2016.07.014 (2016).  
18 Lecoutre, S. et al. Depot- and sex-specific effects of maternal obesity in
offspring's adipose tissue. The Journal of endocrinology 230, 39-53,
doi:10.1530/JOE-16-0037 (2016).  
19 Lendvai, A., Deutsch, M. J., Plosch, T. & Ensenauer, R. The peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors under epigenetic control in placental
metabolism and fetal development. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 310, E797-810,
doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00372.2015 (2016).  
20 Lin, Y., Bircsak, K. M., Gorczyca, L., Wen, X. & Aleksunes, L. M.
Regulation of the placental BCRP transporter by PPAR gamma. J Biochem Mol
Toxicol 31, doi:10.1002/jbt.21880 (2017).  
21 Maekawa, M. et al. Polyunsaturated fatty acid deficiency during
neurodevelopment in mice models the prodromal state of schizophrenia through
epigenetic changes in nuclear receptor genes. Transl Psychiatry 7, e1229,
doi:10.1038/tp.2017.182 (2017).  
22 Mahendra, J. et al. Evidence Linking the Role of Placental Expressions of
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor-gamma and Nuclear Factor-Kappa B in
the Pathogenesis of Preeclampsia Associated With Periodontitis. J Periodontol
87, 962-970, doi:10.1902/jop.2016.150677 (2016).  
23 Marginean, C. et al. The role of TGF-beta1 869 T > C and PPAR gamma2 34 C >
G polymorphisms, fat mass, and anthropometric characteristics in predicting
childhood obesity at birth: A cross-sectional study according the parental
characteristics and newborn's risk for child obesity (the newborns obesity's
risk) NOR study. Medicine (Baltimore) 95, e4265,
doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000004265 (2016).  
24 Meher, A. P. et al. Placental DHA and mRNA levels of PPARgamma and LXRalpha
and their relationship to birth weight. J Clin Lipidol 10, 767-774,
doi:10.1016/j.jacl.2016.02.004 (2016).  
25 Papamitsou, T., Toskas, A., Papadopoulou, K., Economou, Z. & Sioga, A.
Expression of peroxisome proliferator activation receptors (PPARs) and
TNFalpha in placenta tissues in unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss: an
immunohistochemical study. Histology and histopathology 31, 1029-1036,
doi:10.14670/HH-11-734 (2016).  
26 Roberti, S. L. et al. Critical role of mTOR, PPARgamma and PPARdelta
signaling in regulating early pregnancy decidual function, embryo viability
and feto-placental growth. Molecular human reproduction,
doi:10.1093/molehr/gay013 (2018).  
27 Shapiro, A. L. et al. Nicotinamide Promotes Adipogenesis in Umbilical Cord-
Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells and Is Associated with Neonatal Adiposity: The
Healthy Start BabyBUMP Project. PLoS One 11, e0159575,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0159575 (2016).  
28 Singh, S. P. et al. Gestational Exposure to Sidestream (Secondhand)
Cigarette Smoke Promotes Transgenerational Epigenetic Transmission of
Exacerbated Allergic Asthma and Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia. J Immunol 198,
3815-3822, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1700014 (2017).  
29 Sonanez-Organis, J. G. et al. HIF-1alpha and PPARgamma during physiological
cardiac hypertrophy induced by pregnancy: Transcriptional activities and
effects on target genes. Gene 591, 376-381, doi:10.1016/j.gene.2016.06.025
(2016).  
30 Wang, L. L., Yu, Y., Guan, H. B. & Qiao, C. Effect of Human Umbilical Cord
Mesenchymal Stem Cell Transplantation in a Rat Model of Preeclampsia. Reprod
Sci 23, 1058-1070, doi:10.1177/1933719116630417 (2016).  
31 Wu, Y., Ruan, Y., Shen, L. & Gong, Q. Protective effects of PPAR-gamma
against pregnancy-induced hypertension by differential ETR expression in rat
models. J Cell Biochem 119, 3118-3128, doi:10.1002/jcb.26454 (2018).  
32 Xu, Y. et al. An M1-like Macrophage Polarization in Decidual Tissue during
Spontaneous Preterm Labor That Is Attenuated by Rosiglitazone Treatment. J
Immunol 196, 2476-2491, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1502055 (2016).

Source: Email to www.drugwatch.org from Stuart Reece April 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth :

The Oregon Health Authority also issued this month a baseline report titled
_Marijuana Report: Use, Attitudes, and Health Effects in Oregon_. This
comprehensive report includes several key findings.

Pictured above, for example, is a state map showing the 40 cities and 11
counties that have banned marijuana businesses within their boundaries.
However, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Dispensary Program shows those numbers
to be higher. Some 80 of the state’s 242 cities and 17 of its 36 counties have
banned marijuana processing businesses and marijuana dispensaries from
conducting business within their boundaries.

Oregon legalized marijuana for medical use in 1998 and for recreational use in
2014\. Possession of up to eight ounces became legal for those age 21 or older
July 1, 2015. Because recreational dispensaries will not open until late this
year, the state allowed dispensaries selling pot for medical use to begin
selling pot for recreational use as well October 1, 2015.

In just three months, however, some changes are already being seen. Marijuana-
related calls to the state’s Poison Control Center increased in the last half
of 2015, for example, from 105 in 2014 to 158 in 2015.

Other data include:

  * One in ten 8th-graders and one in five 11th-graders used marijuana in the past month, about the same as national levels.
  * Approximately 90% of marijuana users smoke the drug.
  * Some 62% of 11th-graders report marijuana is easy to get, some say easier than cigarettes.
  * Nearly half of current marijuana using 11th-graders who drive say they drove within three hours of using the drug.
  * Half (51%) of Oregon adults have seen marijuana store or product advertising, but less than one-third (29%) have seen information about marijuana health effects.
  * Nearly two-thirds (63%) of Oregon adults say they don’t know when it is legal to drive after using marijuana.

Read this report here.

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Youth :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/07/cannabisoil-300x200.jpg)

Cannabis oil has come under scrutiny

RUNGROJ YONGRIT/EPA-EFE/REX/Shutterstock

By Alison George

Cannabis is in the headlines for its potential medical benefits after the
recent confiscation of cannabis oil medication from the mother of a 12-year-
old British boy with severe epilepsy. The furore that ensued is shining a
light on campaigns for cannabis oils to be made legal for medical reasons, and
the UK government has now announced a review into the use of medicinal
cannabis. Here’s what you need to know.

**What is cannabis oil?**

Cannabis oil is extracted from the cannabis plant _Cannabis sativa_. The
plants medicinal properties have been touted for more than 3,000 years. It was
described in the ancient Eygyptian Ebers papyrus around 1550BC, and it was
likely used as a medicine in China before that. Some varieties of the plant
contain high levels of the psychoactive substance tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
which is responsible for the “high” that comes from smoking or eating cannabis
leaves or resin. The plant’s other major chemical component is cannabidiol,
which has no psychoactive effect. Both act on the body’s natural cannabinoid
receptors which are involved in many processes such as memory, pain and
appetite. The cannabis plant also contains more than 100 other different
cannabinoid compounds at lower concentrations.

**So can cannabis oil make you high?**

It depends on the THC content. Some types of _Cannabis sativa_ plant, known as
hemp, contain very little THC. The extracts from these plants contain mainly
cannabidiol, so will not get anyone stoned.

**Is it legal?**

That’s a complicated question. In the UK cannabidiol is legal. Cannabis plant
extracts (known as hemp or CBD oils) are available in high-street stores but
the THC content must be below 0.2 per cent. “THC is not psychoactive at this
level,” says David Nutt, a neuropsychopharmacologist at Imperial College
London. But cannabidiol is illegal in many other countries.

In the USA for example, cannabidiol is classed as a schedule 1 controlled
substance, and can only be sold in states where cannabis use is legal.

However, the tide may turn in favour of cannabidiol after a recent World
Health Organisation review. This concluded that cannabidiol “exhibits no
effects indicative of any abuse or dependence potential” but “has been
demonstrated as an effective treatment of epilepsy … and may be a useful
treatment for a number of other medical conditions.”

**What is the evidence that cannabis oils can help treat epilepsy?**

Although there is some scientific evidence that THC has potential to control
convulsions, its mind-altering effects mean that much of the focus has turned
to cannabidiol – particularly for childhood epilepsies that conventional drugs
fail to control.

Two recent high quality randomised and placebo controlled trials showed that
cannabidiol is an effective treatment for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet
syndrome, severe forms of epilepsy. The mechanism of action is unknown, but it
may be due to a combination of effects, such as inhibiting the activity of
neurons and dampening inflammation in the brain.

The situation is less clear when it comes to the use of commercial cannabis
oils to control seizures, where the evidence is mainly anecdotal, and the oils
can contain differing concentrations of cannabidiol and THC.

The UK government announced on 19 June that it would review the use of medical
cannabis.

**Are there any cannabis-based epilepsy drugs on the market?**

Not yet. In April the US Food and Drug Administration recommended the approval
of a drug called Epidiolex for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome.
Its active ingredient is cannabidiol, and final approval is due at the end of
this month.

However, it is possible the drug is not as effective as cannabis oil
containing THC, says Nutt. For example, the cannabis oil used to treat Billy
Caldwell, the boy at the centre of the recent cannabis oil confiscation
furore, contained cannabidiol and a low dose of THC, because cannabidiol alone
did not stop all his seizures.

This is one of the big unknowns. “It is important to remember that there is
currently very little scientific evidence to support cannabis oil containing
both THC and cannabidiol as a treatment for epilepsy,” said the charity
Epilepsy Action, in a statement issued this month.

**Are cannabis-based medications available for other conditions?**

Yes. A synthetic version of THC called Nabilone has been used since the 1980s
to treat nausea after chemotherapy and to help people put on weight. A drug
called Sativex is also approved for the treatment of pain and spasms
associated with multiple sclerosis. It contains an equal mix of THC and
cannabidiol, but would not be suitable for the treatment of children with
epilepsy such as Billy. “If you used that to treat epilepsy, the kids would be
stoned off their heads,” says Nutt.

**What is the aim of the UK government’s review of medical cannabis?**

The first part of the review will look at the evidence for the therapeutic
value of cannabis-based products. It can recommend any promising ones for the
second part of the review. This will be carried out by the government’s
Advisory Council for the Misuse of Drugs, which can recommend a change to the
legal medical status of cannabis and cannabinoids.

This will hopefully lead to a relaxation of the rules surrounding research
into cannabis-based medicines says Tom Freeman, a clinical
psychopharmacologist at King’s College London.

In the UK cannabis currently has Schedule 1 status, the most restrictive
category, which is for drugs which are not used medicinally such as LSD. “This
creates a Catch 22 situation,” says Freeman. “You can’t show that cannabis and
cannabis-based products have medicinal value because of restrictions on
medical research.” If cannabis is moved to the Schedule 2 category, it will
join substances such as morphine and diamorphine (heroin) which can be
prescribed by doctors if there is a clinical need.

Source: https://www.newscientist.com/article/2172415-cannabis-oil-what-is-it-
and-does-it-really-work-as-medicine/ June 2018

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine :

Watch Here and Share!

As the legal status of marijuana changes its perceived dangers are lessening
while the potency of the drug is increasing.

This video covers marijuana as a psychoactive substance that induces its
effects by manipulation of natural brain chemicals known as the
endocannabinoids.The toxic and addictive impact that results from the drug's
disruption of natural endocannibinoids is characterized in this video by the
testimony of those impacted by the drug and by the scientists who are studying
its effects.

This video is 26 minutes and will help to clarify the many myths and
misconceptions regarding the effects of marijuana.

Source: Email from SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana) info@learnaboutsam.org

March 2018

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana :

Submitted by Livia Edegger

As support for decriminalising and legalising marijuana is growing, several
new studies highlight the potentially harmful effects of the drug on its
user’s brain and heart. The findings are particularly revealing in the field
of recreational cannabis use. While studying the brains of a group of twenty
occasional cannabis smokers, researchers from Harvard University found that as
few as one or two uses a week can change the brain. Smoking marijuana was
found to primarily affect the areas involved in decision making, emotions and
motivations. Along the same lines, a group of French researchers found that
marijuana use ups the risk of developing heart problems (i.e. strokes, heart
attacks and circulation problems). More research is needed to better
understand the health risks associated with marijuana.

Links:

  * Cannabis Use Is Quantitatively Associated with Nucleus Accumbens and Amygdala Abnormalities in Young Adult Recreational Users(link is external) – The Journal of Neuroscience
  * Cannabis Use: Signal of Increasing Risk of Serious Cardiovascular Disorders(link is external) – Journal of the American Heart Association

Source:

http://preventionhub.org/en/prevention-update/even-casual-cannabis-use-can-
affect-health

25th April 2014

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health :

# Submitted by Andy Travis

Early onset of alcohol use is associated with a greater likelihood of
developing alcohol abuse or dependence at a later age, according to data from
the US National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH).

Those who first used alcohol at or before the age of 14 were nearly four times
more likely to meet the criteria for past year alcohol abuse or dependence
than those who started using alcohol between the ages of 18 and 20 (16.5% vs.
4.4%) and more than six times more likely than those who started using alcohol
at or after age 21 (16.5% vs. 2.5%).

These findings illustrate the need for alcohol education and prevention
efforts as early as middle school.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/1.png)

**Percentage of Adults (Ages 21 or Older) Who Abused or Were Dependent on
Alcohol in the Past Year, by Age of First Alcohol Use, 2009.**

Similarly, adults who first started using marijuana at or before the age of 14
are most likely to have abused or been dependent on illicit drugs in the past
year. Adults who first used marijuana at age 14 or younger were six times more
likely to meet the criteria for past year illicit drug abuse or dependence
than those who first used marijuana when they were 18 or older (12.6% vs.
2.1%) and almost twice as likely as those who started between the ages of 15
and 17 (12.6% vs. 6.6%).

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/2.png)

**Percentage of Adults (Ages 21 or Older) Who Abused or Were Dependent on
Illicit Drugs in the Past Year, by Age of First Marijuana Use, 2009.**

Links:  
• Adults Who Initiate Alcohol Use Before Age 21 More Likely to Abuse or Become
Dependent on Alcohol(link is external) - CESAR FAX, University of Maryland,
USA.  
• Early Marijuana Use Related to Later Illicit Drug Abuse and Dependence(link
is external) - CESAR FAX, University of Maryland, USA.

Source:

http://preventionhub.org/en/prevention-update/adults-who-initiate-alcohol-and-
marijuana-use-age-21-are-much-more-likely-abuse-or-become-d

22nd October 2010

Filed under: Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Prevention and Intervention,Youth :

Submitted by Andy Travis

Much research on normative misconceptions among university students has been
published in North America, but much less has surfaced in Europe. This cross-
sectional study is based on 12 classes of second-year French college students
in sociology, medicine, nursing or foreign language. Rather than focus on one
substance the students were asked to estimate the proportion of tobacco,
cannabis, alcohol use and heavy episodic drinking among their peers and to
report their own use.

Researchers found that that substance use patterns and perceptions of the
norms differ significantly across academic disciplines and that substance
users are more likely to misjudge real peer use prevalence.

They conclude that social norms of substance use are an important factor among
students personal use. Overestimating these norms is associated with increased
levels of use. In addition to other strategies, the researchers recommend that
prevention programs should consider changing use perception when it is
overestimated.

"These results show that there are grounds for university level prevention
campaigns based on local survey results."

> read more…

Source:

http://preventionhub.org/en/prevention-update/french-students-found-
overestimate-their-peers-consumption-cannabis-tobacco-and-alcohol-pre

Filed under: Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Nicotine,Prevention and Intervention :

An effective drug-free workplace policy is one of the best ways for employers
to protect their businesses. An effective program does not end with pre-
employment screening, since any drug user can count up to three days before
the test and then begin to use again after being hired.

Drug-free workplace policies reduce the amount of sick time, absenteeism,
workman's comp claims, insurance premiums, and protects against civil lawsuits
because of an employee who inflicts damage on others because of impairment.

Communities that emphasize and encourage drug-free workplace practices can
have an impact on overall drug use in the community. When combined with
effective education and prevention, and by increasing the incentive of users
to seek treatment, we can promote a drug-free culture and a thriving business
environment that protects individuals, families and the community.

While some might think they don’t need a drug-free workplace policy, as we
discussed last week, that’s really not true. Small businesses, not just large
companies, need firm drug testing policies.

One new form of marijuana that’s growing in popularity nationwide underscores
the need for workplace drug testing programs. This dangerous drug, wax
marijuana, can easily be used in the workplace because it doesn’t look like
regular marijuana — and frighteningly, it’s the most powerful form of the
drug.

Here’s what employers need to know about wax marijuana, and why it shows the
need to participate in Drug Free Work Week.

# The 411 on Wax Marijuana – and What it Means for Drug Free Workplace

Programs

### With aliases like butter and honeycomb because of its waxy texture, wax is

the most powerful form of marijuana.

According to wax marijuana users, a single hit can leave a high lasting all
day. One dosage is equal to 20 marijuana cigarettes and can produce powerful
hallucinations and psychotic effects. This potency is because wax marijuana is
more than 80% pure THC.

Manufacturers produce wax by extracting the main psychoactive compound,
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), from marijuana. They use flammable substances like
butane in the process, which makes it quite dangerous, but renders the wax
marijuana very strong.

While wax marijuana is legal in states like Colorado and Washington, it’s
illegal under federal law and in most states.

### Employers should take note – due to its appearance, wax marijuana can be

passed off as lip balm.

### This means that your employees could bring the most powerful form of

marijuana into the workplace and use it right under your nose.

Remember, any on-the-clock substance abuse has lasting effects on your
workplace, particularly when it comes to the safety of your employees. Just
one hit of wax marijuana can result in an extremely powerful, daylong high —
rendering your worker a serious danger to everyone around them.

### Your workplace needs a drug testing policy to combat new trends in

substance use, like wax marijuana.

Drug Free Work Week is a great opportunity for you to take stock of your
existing drug testing policy or create a new workplace drug testing program.
If you don’t take the time now to create or revise a policy, you may pay for
it down the line as your employees try new drugs, such as wax marijuana, and
end up causing injuries or financial damage to your workplace.

## Partner With ARCpoint Labs for Workplace Drug Testing Policies.

Located nationwide, ARCpoint Labs provides workplace drug testing assistance.
We can work with you to create and implement a drug testing policy that fits
your unique needs, considering desired detection windows, new and emerging
drugs, and your community’s particular substance abuse issues. Let us work
with you to carry out a custom drug testing program.

Source: http://sober-work-place.com/drug-testing-2/with-wax-marijuana-use-on-
the-rise-make-sure-you-celebrate-drug-free-work-week/ Introduction from Monte
Stiles from DWI

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects :

**_Psychology of Addictive Behaviors journal makes corrections, SAM calls on
media to correct stories_**

**FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE**

**January 19, 2015**

**Contact: Jeffrey Zinsmeister**

**jeff@learnaboutsam.org**

**+1 (415) 680-3993**

[WASHINGTON, DC] - A prominent journal article about marijuana and health
which resulted in media outlets reporting on marijuana's harmlessness has now
been corrected. A recheck of the statistics has now found that the incidence
of psychotic disorders trended toward a 2.5-fold increase in marijuana users,
a difference that went beyond a trend to reach significance in a one-tailed
statistical test. This degree of impact matches very well the results of many
prior studies involving marijuana use and psychosis though falls short of the
five-fold increase in psychosis risk for marijuana users seen with the high
strength strains that are more recently available.

Dr. Christine Miller, a former schizophrenia researcher from Johns Hopkins
University and now Director of SAM Maryland, first alerted the journal,
_Psychology of Addictive Behaviors,_ last December. Some media outlets have
already corrected their original story.

"We commend the Washington Post's Ariana Cha for now updating her story, and
hope many more will follow her lead," remarked Dr. Miller. "The flaw in the
original University of Pittsburgh report were certain correction factors
applied to the raw data, factors which are strongly affected by psychosis
rather than being causes of such a disorder. These inappropriate corrections
overpowered the marijuana effect. We're glad the corrections have been made."

SAM urges other media outlets to correct their headlines and stories.

The new data comes on the heels of a major report released by the State of
Vermont's Health Department which found that marijuana worsened conditions
ranging from mental illness to motor vehicle accidents to negative pregnancy
effects - and almost all of them are found to be worsened by marijuana:

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/1-1.png)

For more information about marijuana use and its effects, see
http://www.learnaboutsam.org.

###

**About SAM**

Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM) is a nonpartisan, non-profit alliance of
physicians, policy makers, prevention workers, treatment and recovery
professionals, scientists, and other concerned citizens opposed to marijuana
legalization who want health and scientific evidence to guide marijuana
policies. SAM has affiliates in 31 states.

www.learnaboutsam.org

Source:

http://psycnet.apa.org/record/2015-58335-001

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Health :

_Submitted by_ _Livia Edegger_

Earlier this month Germany celebrated the results of the 2014 drug report
which revealed a rapid decline in smoking, drinking and marijuana use among
youth over the past ten years. Smoking among German teens aged 12 – 17 has
halved in ten years (11.7%). Smoking rates have also dropped among 18 – 25
year olds, not as significantly though. Drinking rates have fallen from 17.9%
in 2001 to 13.6% in 2012 among 12 – 17 year olds. In terms of gender
differences, teenage boys are twice more likely to consume alcohol than their
female counterparts. Little has changed among 18 – 25 year olds, the group
that accounts for the highest alcohol consumption rate. Drinking in that age
group was reported at 38.4% in 2012 which means it only dropped by a little
over 1%. Cannabis ranks first among illicit drugs used with 5.6% of 12 – 17
year old teenagers using it compared to 9.2% in 2001. After years of steady
consumption rates, cannabis use among 18 – 25 year olds is on the rise again
and at 15.8% resembles figures of 2001.

  * Read more

Source:

http://preventionhub.org/en/prevention-update/germany-releases-drug-report

23rd July 2014

Filed under: Addiction,Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Nicotine,Youth :

A teenage rugby player cut off his own penis and stabbed his mother while high
on skunk, his father has revealed, as he called for the drug to be
reclassified.

The father, named only as Nick because he wants to remain anonymous as his son
is rebuilding his life, is backing Lord Nicholas Monson's campaign to have
skunk reclassified from a class B to a class A drug and for the traditional
weaker form of cannabis to be decriminalised.

Lord Monson launched his call following the suicide of his 21-year-old son
Rupert, who was addicted to skunk.

Nick, speaking for the first time in an interview with Radio Five Live, said
his son, a county rugby player, started smoking "weed" when he was around
sixteen and a half before switching to skunk because of "boredom".

That was the beginning of what Nick said his son would describe as "two and a
half years of hell" which culminated in a psychotic episode.

His son went from a "very bright, bubbly lad" to a "waste of space". The
teenager became delusional and paranoid, including sleeping "with a tennis
racket in his bed because he thought people were living in the walls".

Describing the horrific incident when his son attacked his mother and
inflicted "incredibly deep self harm", Nick said it had been a "perfectly
normal day" before his son woke in the middle of the night ranting and raving.

"It was absolutely devastating, you can't imagine anything of that nature
happening…the whole episode was just surreal, I remember looking back its
almost as if I'm peering in through a window and it's happening to someone
else."

Nick's son was in a mental institute for around 6 months, and in total spent
almost two years in prison following the incident.

He has undergone surgery, and will have more operations to repair the damage,
though Nick said he couldn't say whether his son would be able to have
children. He is clean of drink and drugs, but Nick cautioned that even being
around other people smoking skunk could trigger another psychotic episode. His
ex-wife has recovered, and has fully reconciled with her son who, Nick said,
is "actually in really good form."

"We recognise that this was an illness… he was totally oblivious, actually has
no real memory of anything that happened, even now," Nick said. "Maybe that's
for the best."

Source:

https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/06/02/teenage-rugby-player-cut-penis-
high-onskunk-says-father-wants/

2 JUNE 2017 • 4:04PM

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts :

A team of researchers from the UF Drug Policy Institute, Harvard University,
and other institutions authored a lengthy response to a recent monograph
written by the George Soros-funded ICSDP claiming that cannabis health claims
have been overblown.

The team, led by former American Society of Addiction Medicine President Stu
Gitlow, and other researchers with leadership ties to groups like the American
Academy of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, the University of Texas,
the University of Pennsylvania, and other institutions found that the ICSDP
report is an example of deceptive and biased research and that it contains
abundant factual errors and logical flaws.

The report's introduction reads: **" The ICSDP conveniently cites evidence
that supports its own predetermined narrative, concluding that only the pro-
marijuana lobby has any substantive evidence in its favor-and ignores evidence
to the contrary. Its main strategy is to attribute overblown "straw man"
arguments to established marijuana researchers, misstating their positions and
then claiming to "rebut" these positions with research.**

**" This response/critique reveals the lack of objectivity present in the
report and, point-by-point, shows how the interests of the nascent Big
Marijuana industry, private equity firms, and lobbyists lining up to
capitalize on a new marijuana industry, are served**."

**About the UF Drug Policy Institute**

_The UF Drug Policy Institute (DPI) serves the state of Florida, the Nation,
and the global community in delivering evidence-based, policy-relevant,
information to policymakers, practitioners, scholars, and the community to
make educated decisions about issues of policy significance in the field of
substance use, abuse, and addiction._

Read about our Distinguished Fellows Here

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,USA :

Just finished reading the cannabis section of the world drug report mentioned
below and here were of the points that stuck out to me:

  * Cannabis herb (they make a distinction between herb and resin) seizures in North America account for 64% of worldwide seizures.

  * US outdoor eradication rates significantly dropped (6,470 in 2012 from 23, 622 in 2011) but it is unclear if the decrease was due to declining law enforcement activity in that area or to increasing legal grows due to new laws in CO and WA.

  * In 2012 , between 125 million and 227 million people who estimated to have used cannabis, that corresponds to 2.7 and 4.9% of the population aged 15-64 years.

We are changing laws to accommodate this small proportion of the population.
These laws will have a deleterious knock on effect for the 95% majority of the
population.

  * Over the past 5 years (in N. America, the largest cannabis herb market) prevalence rates in the US have increased but declined in Canada between 2008-2011 and increasing again between 2011-2012.

Cannabis use in the UK is down to the lowest levels since measurements began
in 1996….. but the UK Government has not so far relaxed firm drug laws.

  * In the US, between 2006-2010 there was a 59% increase in cannabis-related ER visits and a 14% increase in cannabis-related treatment admissions.

• Expert analyses predicts that legalization of cannabis will most likely
reduce production costs which would in turn be expected decease prices
overtime. Since cannabis consumption responds to prices, the lower prices will
likely lead to high consumption. It is estimated that for each 10% drop in
price there will be an approx. 3% increase in total users and a 3-5%

Source:

World Drug Report 2014

http://www.unodc.org/wdr2014/

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana :

_Submitted by_ _Andy Travis_

This study found that youth with more substance users in their networks
reported greater alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana consumption regardless of
whether these network members provided tangible or emotional support. The
homeless setting was more significant in consumption than meeting network
members in other contexts. Numbers of adults and school attendees in networks
reduced consumption.

Read more

Links:  
• One in three parents do not talk to their children about the risks
associated with drinking alcohol(link is external) Full statement ,with
further links.  
• Alcohol. It's no joke. | Why Let Drink Decide(link is external) The video
campaign.

Source:

http://preventionhub.org/en/prevention-update/survey-uk-parents-suggests-
parents-more-concerned-about-risks-drugs-alcohol-government-anno

_11th January 2011_

Filed under: Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Nicotine,Youth :

Henrietta Szutorisza, Yasmin L. Hurda,

**A B S T R A C T  
**  
Extensive debates continue regarding marijuana (Cannabis spp), the most
commonly used illicit substance in many countries worldwide. There has been an
exponential increase of cannabis studies over the past two decades but the
drug’s long-term effects still lack in-depth scientific data. The epigenome is
a critical molecular machinery with the capacity to maintain persistent
alterations of gene expression and behaviors induced by cannabinoids that have
been observed across the individual’s lifespan and even into the subsequent
generation.

Though mechanistic investigations regarding the consequences of developmental
cannabis exposure remain sparse, human and animal studies have begun to reveal
specific epigenetic disruptions in the brain and the periphery. In this
article, we focus attention on long-term disturbances in epigenetic regulation
in relation to prenatal, adolescent and parental germline cannabinoid
exposure. Expanding knowledge about the protracted molecular memory could help
to identify novel targets to develop preventive strategies and treatments for
behaviors relevant to neuropsychiatric risks associated with developmental
cannabis exposure.

_Source: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 85 (2018) 93–101_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects :

**Abstract**

Metabolic and behavioural effects of, and interactions between
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) are influenced by dose and
administration route.

Therefore we investigated, in Wistar rats, effects of pulmonary, oral and
subcutaneous (sc.) THC, CBD and THC+CBD. Concentrations of THC, its
metabolites 11-OH-THC and THC-COOH, and CBD in serum and brain were determined
over 24h, locomotor activity (open field) and sensorimotor gating (prepulse
inhibition, PPI) were also evaluated.

In line with recent knowledge we expected metabolic and behavioural
interactions between THC and CBD. While cannabinoid serum and brain levels
rapidly peaked and diminished after pulmonary administration, sc. and oral
administration produced long-lasting levels of cannabinoids with oral reaching
the highest brain levels.

Except pulmonary administration, CBD inhibited THC metabolism resulting in
higher serum/brain levels of THC. Importantly, following sc. and oral CBD
alone treatments, THC was also detected in serum and brain. S.c. cannabinoids
caused hypolocomotion, oral treatments containing THC almost complete
immobility.

In contrast, oral CBD produced mild hyperlocomotion. CBD disrupted, and THC
tended to disrupt PPI, however their combination did not.

In conclusion, oral administration yielded the most pronounced behavioural
effects which corresponded to the highest brain levels of cannabinoids. Even
though CBD potently inhibited THC metabolism after oral and sc.
administration, unexpectedly it had minimal impact on THC-induced behaviour.

Of central importance was the novel finding that THC can be detected in serum
and brain after administration of CBD alone which, if confirmed in humans and
given the increasing medical use of CBD-only products, might have important
legal and forensic ramifications.

_Source: Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017 Dec;27(12):1223-1237. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2017.10.037. Epub 2017 Nov 10._

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Effects of Drugs (Papers) :

**Abstract**

**Background**

Marijuana is a widely used recreational substance. Few cases have been
reported of acute myocardial infarction following marijuana use. To our
knowledge, this is the first ever study analyzing the lifetime odds of acute
myocardial infarction (AMI) with marijuana use and the outcomes in AMI
patients with versus without marijuana use.

**Methods**

We queried the 2010-2014 National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database for
11-70-year-old AMI patients.

Pearson Chi-square test for categorical variables and Student T-test for
continuous variables were used to compare the baseline demographic and
hospital characteristics between two groups (without vs. with marijuana) of
AMI patients. The univariate and multivariate analyses were used to assess and
compare the clinical outcomes between two groups. We used Cochran–Armitage
test to measure the trends. All statistical analyses were executed by IBM SPSS
Statistics 22.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY). We used  
weighted data to produce national estimates in our study.

**Results**

Out of 2,451,933 weighted hospitalized AMI patients, 35,771 patients with a
history of marijuana and 2,416,162 patients without a history of marijuana use
were identified. The AMI-marijuana group consisted more of younger, male,
African American patients. The length of stay and mortality rate were lower in
the AMI-marijuana group with more patients being discharged against medical
advice.

Multivariable analysis showed that marijuana use was a significant risk factor
for AMI development when adjusted for age, sex, race (adjusted OR 1.079, 95%
CI 1.065-1.093, p<0.001); adjusted for age, female, race, smoking, cocaine
abuse (adjusted OR 1.041, 95% CI 1.027-1.054, p<0.001); and also when adjusted
for age, female, race, payer status, smoking, cocaine abuse, amphetamine abuse
and alcohol abuse (adjusted OR: 1.031, 95% CI: 1.018-1.045, p<0.001).
Complications such as respiratory failure (OR 18.9, CI 15.6-23.0, p<0.001),
cerebrovascular disease (OR 9.0, CI 7.0-11.7, p<0.001), cardiogenic shock (OR
6.0, CI 4.9-7.4, p<0.001), septicemia (OR 1.8, CI 1.5–2.2, p<0.001), and
dysrhythmia (OR 1.8, CI 1.5-2.1, p<0.001) were independent predictors of
mortality in AMI-marijuana group.

**Conclusion**

The lifetime AMI odds were increased in recreational marijuana users. Overall
odds of mortality were not increased significantly in AMI-marijuana group.
However, marijuana users showed higher trends of AMI prevalence and related
mortality from 2010-2014. It is crucial to assess cardiovascular effects
related to marijuana overuse and educate patients for the same.

_Source: Desai R, Patel U, Sharma S, et al. (November 03, 2017) Recreational
Marijuana Use and Acute Myocardial Infarction: Insights from Nationwide
Inpatient Sample in the United States . Cureus 9(11): e1816. DOI
10.7759/cureus.1816_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health :

Hamilton County Coroner Dr. Lakshmi Kode Sammarco released 2017 drug
statistics Tuesday.

Last fall, the coroner said overdoses in Hamilton County had surpassed the
total of last year, with 427 suspected deaths – and three months remaining in
2017, making the toll the worst since the heroin epidemic began. in the Tri-
State.

Most overdose deaths have been due to fentanyl or chemically similar drugs,
Sammarco said.

The county reported 403 overdose deaths in 2016 - up 30 percent, overdose
deaths were totalled at 529 for 2017.

Sammarco described the increasing number of cases as "scary." She said drug
prevention efforts can only do so much without the help of the public.

"We can't do this alone. Everybody here is busting their butt to try to get a
handle on not just the supply, but to get help for the addicts and families.
But we need the communities to step up, we need every neighborhood to keep an
eye on their neighborhood. To try and help us get the dealers off the street,
to try and get help to the addicts. You see something, say something."

Sammarco noted the death toll was reduced by Narcan.

"The number of lives being saved is huge," she said. "There's no doubt they
would've been double or triple what they were without Narcan."

The coroner said 30,000 items were turned into the office’s drug section in
2017\. Hfour drug analysts each processed well over 7,000 items, which 2.5
times higher than any other lab in Ohio.

Prevention First, a local non-profit aimed at reducing substance abuse
released their findings from this year's student drug-use survey.

They said of the more than 30,000 students grades 7 through 12 surveyed,
nearly 14 percent have admitted to using alcohol in the past 30 days.

Tobacco use was only reported in five percent of students. Marijuana usage was
slightly higher at more than eight percent.

Prescription drug abuse was reported in only 2.4 percent of students.

Commissioners said aside from marijuana use, the statistics have been trending
downward since 2000.

"Hats off to Prevention First for leading the charge on that and for providing
all of this really important information when it comes to prevention and what
young people are doing in this community because this is the tip of the
spear," Commissioner Denise Driehaus said.

The survey, which is given every two years by Prevention First, was
distributed to 80 public and private schools in six southwest Ohio counties.

To try to top overdoses before they happen, the Hamilton County Heroin
Coalition is launching a Quick Response Teams early next month, on April 3.

The coalition is uniting with fire departments, law enforcement and social
workers to create a team that follows up with overdose victims and offers them
same-day addiction treatment. according to a prepared statement.

Modelled on an effort in Colerain Twp., the team will try to find overdose
survivors using a database maintained by the Greater Cincinnati Fusion Center,
a public safety data collecting agency.

Heroin Coalition commander and Norwood Police Lt. Tom Fallon told Hamilton
County commissioners Monday the database would help locate overdose survivors
who are otherwise hard to find.

The team will also use “predictive analysis” to track drug activity to target
potential overdoses in with the help of University of Cincinnati’s Institute
of Crime Science.

The effort is funded by a $400,000 grant from the U.S. Department of Justice
funded through the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act.

_Source: http://www.fox19.com/story/37764381/hamilton-county-coroner_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,USA :

All creatures great and small are being poisoned by the pesticides and
rodenticides in the water they drink, and in the food they eat. This polluted
water from northern California marijuana grows eventually flows to much of the
State. The lawless pot industry is nothing less than purveyors of poison. The
recent scientific study “Cultivating Disaster: The Effect of Cannabis
Cultivation on the Environment of Calaveras County,” points out that the
cultivation of the drug was allowed by the State without adequate
understanding of the impact on the environment and public health, welfare and
safety. The chemicals that flow from the grow sites to the watershed had never
been approved for these crops.

California does not regulate marijuana as a medicine because it is a Schedule
1 Controlled Substance under Federal Law, rather it is classified as an
agricultural product. However, pot growers do not have to meet the same
stringent requirements for chemicals and fertilizers as do all other farmers.
Though there is limited testing being conducted by local water providers to
determine if dangerous chemicals are leaching into water supplies or waste
treatment systems, independent water experts testing water samples in
Calaveras County found two thirds of the samples contained chemicals proven to
be deadly poison to humans, fish and animals.

Of particular concern is carbofuron, an extremely toxic, water soluble
granular pesticide banned in the U.S. but used among Mexican cartels. It is
reported that an eighth of a teaspoon would kill a 300 lb black bear. In 2017,
UC Davis researchers found harmful bacteria and deadly mold and Aspergillus
fungi on marijuana in grows and dispensaries. This critical threat from
marijuana grows to our environment and the human population is just beginning
to surface.

The damaging effects of marijuana (cannabis), often considered a
hallucinogenic drug, have long been known. High level THC, the mind-altering
chemical in marijuana, is being grown and sold today as a “medicine.” It is
long acting and addictive, causing brain damage, loss of intellect, psychotic
breaks, suicides, mental illness, and birth defects and leads to other social
costs from higher crime rates, highway deaths, excessive high school dropouts,
and increased ER admissions, among others.

This lawless Big Marijuana Industry follows the playbook of Big Tobacco: GET
KIDS HOOKED – ADDICTION OFTEN FOLLOWS. Their advertisements include images of
Santa Claus, kids’ movies and cartoons, and they sell “edibles,” pot infused
candy, lollipops and gummy bears with THC levels 50-70%. Many products are
advertised as being 94-95% THC. Now there is crystalline THC that is 99.99%
THC, known as “the strongest weed in the world.” Unfortunately, the public
perception of marijuana is based on marijuana of the past – with 1- 5% THC.

The Calaveras Study estimates 1200 grows sites in that county; U.S. Forest
Service estimates a tag of 2 billion to reclaim these sites. An estimated
50,000 grow sites in California would cost 50 - 80 billion to reclaim. The
California Department of Fish and Wildlife says, “We are aware of the
seriousness of the problem, but (we) do not know who is going to help clean it
up.”

U.S. Attorney General Sessions has indicated his willingness to enforce our
federal food and drug and environment laws when it comes to marijuana. Our
California U.S. Attorneys must prosecute those who have broken federal, state,
and county ordinances and explore funding to pay for cleanup of the land. This
is not just a California issue, the U.S. Supreme Court

has ruled that federal marijuana laws preempt state laws and that marijuana
control is a federal matter, not a states’ rights matter. There is no time to
waste. Our future is at stake.

_Source: Press Release Californians Against Legalisation of Marijuana Feb.6th
2018_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Social Affairs :

Marijuana has always been seen as the laid-back drug. It might make you crave
ice cream and chocolate cake or induce you to fall asleep, but it certainly
wasn't dangerous.

Yet, as governments in Britain and Canada consider decriminalizing the drug,
medical researchers are warning that smoking cannabis increases the risk of
lung disease and, more disturbingly, that its use can exacerbate psychosis and
that it is linked with the onset of schizophrenia in adolescents.

"We have the evidence of cannabis and its dangers," said Dr. Richard Russell,
a respiratory specialist and a spokesman for the British Lung Foundation,
which published a report this week on the dangers of cannabis.

"What we really want to avoid is the situation we had in the 1930s, '40s and
'50s with cigarettes, where doctors were recommending tobacco as being good
for you."

In its report, the lung foundation warns that cannabis is more harmful to the
lungs than tobacco. It says smoking three joints a day can cause the same
damage as 20 cigarettes, and tar from marijuana contains 50 per cent more
carcinogens than that from tobacco.

Persistent users are risking lung cancer, emphysema, bronchitis and other
respiratory illnesses, it says.

One of the major problems is posed by the way users smoke marijuana and
hashish: They take puffs that are almost twice as large as those tobacco
smokers take and hold the smoke in four times as long. "This means that there
is a greater respiratory burden of carbon monoxide and smoke particulates such
as tar than when smoking a similar quantity of tobacco."

The foundation also noted that in the 1960s, the average marijuana joint
contained about 10 milligrams of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which accounts
for the drug's psychoactive properties. Because of sophisticated cultivation
techniques, the average joint today has 150 mg of THC, a 15-fold increase.

Dr. Russell, the respiratory specialist, worries that young people think
cannabis is a "cool drug" that is risk-free. A survey carried out this year
showed that 79 per cent of British children believe cannabis is safe.

The Canadian government indicated in its Speech from the Throne last month
that it is considering the decriminalization of marijuana possession.

Already, it gives exemptions to drug laws to allow sick people to have
marijuana. On the other hand, pot grown for medicinal purposes in an abandoned
Manitoba mine with Ottawa's sanction sits in storage.

In Britain, under a proposal due to become law next year, simple possession of
a small amount of cannabis will no longer result in an automatic arrest
although police will still be able to go after users in "aggravated"
circumstances, such as smoking in the presence of children. Cannabis
trafficking will also continue to bring a prison sentence.

Meanwhile, clinical studies on the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes are
under way with HIV patients in Canada and with people suffering from multiple
sclerosis in Britain.

The British Lung Foundation says it is not trying to get involved in the
debate over whether cannabis should be legalized, leaving that to politicians.
"Our report is not about the moral rights and wrongs of cannabis, but simply
making sure everyone is completely clear about the respiratory health risks
involved," said Dr. Mark Britton, chairman of the foundation.

Dr. Russell says he recently saw a 40-year-old patient in his clinic with
"severe end-stage emphysema" and has about 18 months to live. The patient has
been smoking three joints a day for the past 25 years, the equivalent of
smoking 60 cigarettes a day from the age of 15, he says.

Studies of heavy cannabis smoking among Rastafarians in the Caribbean have
also pointed to increased danger of early lung cancer, Dr. Russell says.

Les Iversen, a professor of pharmacology at King's College in London and an
expert on cannabis, agrees that smoking marijuana poses dangers, but he says
the report's findings are exaggerated.

There is no specific evidence linking cannabis smoking with lung cancer, Prof.
Iversen says.

He says it's absurd to say smoking three joints is equivalent to smoking 20
cigarettes because joints come in different sizes and strengths as do
commercial cigarettes.

Although he adds, "I don't think any drug is safe."

Psychiatrists have also linked cannabis use to schizophrenia.

"People with schizophrenia do not take more alcohol, heroin or ecstasy than
the rest of us, but they are twice as likely to smoke cannabis regularly,"
says Dr. Robin Murray, a professor of psychiatry at the Institute of
Psychiatry in London.

Dr. Murray says cannabis, along with cocaine and amphetamines, encourage the
release of dopamine in the brain, which in turn leads to increased
hallucinations.

He notes that the incidence of schizophrenia in south London has doubled in
the past 40 years, and he says increased use of both cannabis and cocaine
could be at fault.

Dr. Murray cites a study that interviewed 50,000 conscripts to the Swedish
Army about their drug use and followed up later. Heavy users of cannabis at
the age of 18 were six times as likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia by
the time they were 33 than those who kept away from the drug.

Another study, this one in the Netherlands, interviewed 7,500 people about
their consumption of drugs and looked at their behaviour over the next three
years. Regular users of cannabis were more likely to develop psychosis than
those who did not use the drug.

"Any public debate on cannabis needs to take account of the risks as well as
the pleasure," Dr. Murray says. "Pro-marijuana campaigners claim,
extrapolating from their Saturday-night joint, that cannabis is totally safe.
Yet they would be unlikely to claim that a bottle of vodka a day is healthy on
the basis of sharing a bottle of Chablis over dinner.

"No drugs that alter brain chemistry are totally safe," he says. "Just as some
who drink heavily become alcoholic, so a minority of those who smoke cannabis
daily go psychotic."

A major study on the links between cannabis and schizophrenia is due to be
published in the British Medical Journal next week by Louise Arsenault, a
biomedical researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry who was trained at the
University of Montreal.

Research made public last year by Dr. Arsenault showed that young men who
regularly smoke cannabis are five times more likely to be violent than those
who avoid the drug. Using data from a study of 961 young adults in Dunedin,
New Zealand, she discovered that one-third of those with a cannabis habit had
a court conviction for violence by the time they hit 21 or had displayed
violent behaviour. That was three times the level of those who drank excessive
amounts of alcohol.

The warnings about marijuana have not deterred members of Britain's Legalize
Cannabis Alliance, who say the report is merely a selective study of existing
medical literature, which ignores studies that discount the health threats
posed by the drug.

"I've used it for 30 years and it doesn't seem to have affected my health,"
says Alun Buffry, the alliance's national co-ordinator.

"I stopped tobacco three or four years ago and I have noticed that since then
my health has improved. My general level of energy has improved and I get more
of a high from cannabis than the sleepiness I used to get, which I think had
to do with tobacco."

Mr. Buffry argues that it would be best to legalize cannabis to control the
quality of what is sold and eliminate "dirty supplies" that may include
potentially harmful glues, fillers and colouring agents.

"I would argue that it would be far more dangerous illegal than it would be
legalized," he says. "Even if cannabis were the most dangerous substance in
the world, it is still consumed by millions of people."

Alan Freeman is The Globe and Mail's European correspondent.

Source:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/incoming/theres-a-reason-they-call-it-getting-
wasted/article1028091/ Mar. 21 2009

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

Click on the images to enlarge the detail.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/page-1-2-1024x724.jpg)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/page-2-1-1024x724.jpg)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/page-3-1-e1524503373152-776x1024.jpg)

Source:

https://www.intervenenow.com/breaking-the-stigma-of-recovery/

Filed under: Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Nicotine,Prescription Drugs,Treatment
and Addiction :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2018/04/image002-1024x682.jpg)

NEW YORK (MainStreet) — Even as a marijuana legalization gains traction around
the U.S. and the world, the anti-pot contingent soldiers on to promote its own
agenda. These advocates are on a mission to keep marijuana illegal where it
is, make it illegal where it is not and to inform the public of the dangers of
marijuana legalization as they see it.

So who are these anti-marijuana legalization crusaders?

They come from different backgrounds. Some come from the business world. Two
are former White House cabinet members. Another is an academic. Two are former
ambassadors. One is the scion of a famous political family. Many are
psychiatrists or psychologists. Others are former addicts. Still others are in
the field of communications. Oh - one is a Pope.

They have different motivations. Some act because of the people they met who
suffered from drug abuse. Others are staunch in their positions for moral
reasons and concern for the nation’s future; still others for medical and
scientific reasons.

Here is a list of the most significant:

  1. **Calvina Fay**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image004.jpg)

Drug Free America Foundation, Inc. and Save Our Society From Drugs (SOS). She
is also the founder and director of the International Scientific and Medical
Forum on Drug Abuse.

She was a drug policy advisor to President George W. Bush and former Tennessee
Governor Lamar Alexander. She has been a U.S. delegate and lecturer at
international conferences.

President Bush acknowledged her efforts in drug prevention in 2008, and in
2009 she received the President’s Award from the National Narcotics Officers
Associations Coalition.

She related during an interview that she became involved in the world of
countering drug abuse as a businessperson. She started a company that wrote
drug policy for employers, educated employees on the dangers of drugs and
trained supervisors on how to recognize drug abuse. It was from this that she
became aware of the gravity of the issue.

“People used to come to me to tell me they had a nephew or niece who had a
drug problem," Fay said. "This was when I realized how broad a problem this
is. It became personally relevant at one point.”

President Bush acknowledged her efforts in drug prevention in 2008, and in
2009 she received the President’s Award from the National Narcotics Officers
Associations Coalition.

I realized how broad a problem this is. It became personally relevant at one
point.”

After she sold her company, she was approached by the DEA and the Houston
Chamber of Commerce to improve the way substance abuse in the workplace was
addressed. After a while she built a coalition of about 3,000 employers.

During this time she kept meeting more and more people who were addicted or
had loved ones who were. So it became important to her to be involved in drug
abuse prevention and treatment. She then became aware of the movement to
legalize drugs.

“I knew that we had to push back against legalization, because if we did not
prevention and treatment would not matter," Fay asserted.

  1. **Kevin Sabet**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image006.jpg)

Sabet is the director of the Drug Policy Institute at the University of
Florida, where he is an assistant professor in the psychiatry department at
the College of Medicine.

He is a co-founder of Project SAM (Smart Approaches to Marijuana) and has been
called the quarterback of the anti-drug movement.

Sabet served in the Obama Administration as a senior advisor for the White
House Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) from 2009-2011. He
previously worked on research, policy and speech writing at ONDCP in 2000 and
from 2003-2004 in the Clinton and Bush Administrations, respectively. This
gives him the distinction of being the only staff member at ONDCP to hold a
political appointment in both the Bush and Obama Administrations.

He was one of three main writers of President Obama’s first National Drug
Control Strategy, and his tasks included leading the office’s efforts on
marijuana policy, legalization issues, international demand reduction,drugged
driving and synthetic drug (e.g. “Spice” and “Bath Salts”) policy. Sabet
represented ONDCP in numerous meetings and conferences, and played a key role
in the Administration’s international drug legislative and diplomatic efforts
at the United Nations.

He is also a policy consultant to numerous domestic and international
organizations through his company, the Policy Solutions Lab. His current
clients include the United Nations, where he holds a senior advisor position
at the Italy-based United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute (UNICRI) and other governmental and non-governmental organizations.

Sabet is published widely in peer-reviewed journals and books on the topics of
legalization, marijuana decriminalization, medical marijuana, addiction
treatment, drug prevention, crime and law enforcement.

He is a Marshall Scholar. He received his Ph.D. and M.S. in Social Policy at
Oxford University and a B.A. in Political Science from the University of
California, Berkeley.

  1. Bill Bennett

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image008.jpg)

Bennett was a former “drug czar” (i.e. director of the Office of National Drug
Control Policy) during the administration of President George H.W. Bush. Prior
to that he was the Secretary of Education in the Reagan administration.
Bennett is a prolific author - including two _New York Times_ Number- One
bestsellers; he is the host of the number seven ranked nationally syndicated
radio show Morning in America. He studied philosophy at Williams College
(B.A.) and the University of Texas (Ph.D.) and earned a law degree from
Harvard.

Bennett, along with former prosecutor Robert White, recently penned an op-ed
piece for the _Wall Street Journal_ calling marijuana a public health menace.
The two are also finishing a book about marijuana legalization which is due
out in February 2015.

Bennett frequently features on his radio show guests warning of the dangers of
marijuana legalization. He is concerned that while the science shows that
legalizing marijuana is not beneficial, public opinion is going in the other
direction.

Why is he involved in this? Simply put, he thinks marijuana legalization is
bad for America. The author of the acclaimed series of books about American
history called _America: The Last Best Hope_ thinks marijuana legalization
will have deleterious effect on Americans, especially the youth of America.

“Because as Jim Wilson said, drugs destroy your mind and enslave your soul,”
he told _MainStreet_.

“Medical science now proves it,” he added.

  1. **Patrick Kennedy**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image010.jpg)

The other co-founder of Project SAM is former Rhode Island Democrat
congressman Patrick Kennedy, son of Ted Kennedy. When he started SAM in Denver
in 2013, Kennedy, who has admitted past drug use, was quoted as saying, “I
believe that drug use, which is to alter the mind, is injurious to the mind …
It’s nothing that society should sanction.”

His organization seeks a third way to address the drug problem, one that
“neither legalizes or demonizes marijuana.” Kennedy does not think
incarceration is the answer. He wants to make small amounts a civil offense.
He emphasizes his belief that public health officials need to be heeded on
this issue and they are not. He predicts that, if legalized, marijuana will
become another tobacco industry.

“The thought that we will have a new legalized drug does not make sense to
me,” Kennedy said during a 2013 MSNBC interview.

  1. **Joseph Califano**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image012.jpg)

This former Carter administration U.S. Secretary of Health, Education, and
Welfare founded, in 1992, the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at
Columbia University (since 2013, it has been called CASAColumbia). He is
currently the chairman emeritus. The center has been a powerful voice for
research, fundraising and outreach on the dangers of addiction. It shines the
light, especially on the perils of marijuana for adolescents.

Recently Califano released an updated edition of his book _How to Raise a
Drug-Free Kid: The Straight Dope for Parents_. He believes an update was
needed because of the advances in science regarding youth and substance abuse
that have occurred during the past five years.

He zeroes in on marijuana in the book, which he says is more potent today than
it was 30 or 40 years ago. He points out - during an interview about the book
published on the CASAColumbia website - the hazards of “synthetic marijuana”
also known as Spice or K2. He says this is available in convenient stores and
gas stations but is so lethal it was banned in New Hampshire.

Califano stresses that parents are the bulwark against substance abuse and
addiction. He cited data during the interview that “70% of college students
say their parents’ concerns or expectations influence whether or how much they
drink, smoke or use drugs. Parental disapproval of such conduct is key to kids
getting through the college years drug free. This is the time for you to use
social media to keep in touch with your kids.”

He makes the analogy that “sending your children to college without coaching
them about how to deal with drugs and alcohol is like giving them the keys to
the car without teaching them how to drive.”

  1. **Stuart Gitlow**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image014.jpg)

Gitlow is the President of the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM),
a professional organization representing over 3,000 addiction specialist
physicians.

In 2005, he also started the Annenberg Physician Training Program in Addictive
Disease at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, NY. He is currently
executive director. He is on the faculty of both the University of Florida and
Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

About ASAM’s attitudes toward marijuana, he said:

“Our positions and policies with respect to marijuana have been developed over
many decades and have been updated based upon the latest scientific evidence.
We are firmly opposed to legalization of marijuana and reject the notion that
the plant marijuana has any medical application.”

That said, he believes anecdotal evidence supports that more research should
be conducted to deduce which parts of the marijuana plan can havemedical
value.

Why did he get involved in this?

“I didn’t get involved in this as a "crusader" or because of a specific
interest, but rather because I serve as the spokesperson for ASAM,” he told
MainStreet.com. “In fact, though, given that there is so much industry-sourced
money financing the marijuana proponents, and that the science-based
opposition has little funding at all, I recognize the need for the public to
actually hear what the facts are, particularly given the media bias and
conflict of interest in terms of being motivated by potential ad revenue.”

  1. **David Murray**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image016.jpg)

A senior fellow at the Hudson Institute, Washington D.C., Murray co-directs
the Center for Substance Abuse Policy Research. While serving previous posts
as chief scientist and associate deputy director for supply reduction in the
federal government’s Office of National Drug Control Policy. Before entering
government, Murray, who holds an M.A. and Ph.D. in social anthropology from
the University of Chicago, was executive director of the Statistical
Assessment Service and held academic appointments at Connecticut College,
Brown, Brandeis and Georgetown Universities.

What motivated him to get involved in a campaign to oppose marijuana
legalization?

“It results from a steady regress from encountering a host of social
pathologies (homelessness, failed school performance, domestic violence, child
neglect, poverty, early crime, despair and suicide) and then time and again
stumbling over a common denominator that either was a trigger or an
accelerator of that pathology - substance abuse,” Murray told _MainStreet_.
“Yet one finds as a dispassionate social analyst that the matter is either
discounted, or overlooked, or not given sufficient weight, in the efforts to
remediate the other surface manifestation pathologies,” he continued.
“Moreover, one keeps encountering a sense that there is a closet with a door
that is shut and it holds behind the door a host of explanations or guides to
understanding of our woes, yet few are willing to open that door and address
what lies behind it.”

He notes that even those who acknowledge the impact of substance abuse across
so many maladies seem to not approach the problem with an open and searching
mind. He said often one finds a ready-made narrative that serves to explain
away the impact. The more that narrative is refuted “with counter argument or
robust data indicating otherwise” the more social analysts resist or are in
denial about the inadequacy of the standard narrative.

Subsequently, people who do criticize this encounter pressure from peers
essentially telling to accept the narrative or shut up.

He mentions a good specific example can be found by encountering the reaction
to the “gateway hypothesis” regarding early marijuana exposure. The literature
in support of the gateway is quite strong he says.

“Yet everywhere the dominant response is to evade the implications,” he points
out. “Our analysts pose alternative and unlikely accountings that seem
practically Ptolemaic in their complicated denial of the obviously more simple
and more real mechanism: exposure to the drug does, in fact, increase the
likelihood of developing dependency on other, 'harder' drugs in a measurable
way.“

  1. John Walters

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image018.jpg)

He was, from December 2001 to January 2009, the director of the White House
Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) and a cabinet member during the
Bush Administration. During this time he helped implement policies which
decreased teen drug use 25% and increased substance abuse treatment and
screening in the healthcare system.

He is a frequent media commentator and has written many articles opposing the
legalization of marijuana. He points out many of the fallacies of the pro-
legalization movement. His editorials, essays, and media appearances have
refuted the claims of the _New York Times_ , pro-legalization libertarians and
others.

For example, during a July 2014 appearance on Fox News Walters responded to
the editorial boards condoning legalizing pot. Walters said when the science
is increasingly revealing the risks of marijuana the “ _New York Times_ wants
to act like it time to be ruled by Cheech and Chong.”

Walters has taught political science at Michigan State University's James
Madison College and at Boston College. He holds a BA from Michigan State
University and an MA from the University of Toronto.

  1. **Robert DuPont**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image020.jpg)

DuPont was the founding director of National Institute on Drug Abuse. He has
written more than three hundred professional articles and fifteen books
including _Getting Tough on Gateway Drugs: A Guide for the Family_ , _A Bridge
to Recovery: An Introduction to Twelve-Step Programs_ and _The Selfish Brain:
Learning from Addiction_. Hazelden, the nation 's leading publisher of books
on addiction and recovery, published, in 2005, three books on drug testing by
DuPont: Drug Testing in Drug Abuse Treatment, Drug Testing in Schools and Drug
Testing in the Criminal Justice System.

DuPont is active in the American Society of Addiction Medicine. He continues
to practice psychiatry with an emphasis on addiction and anxiety disorders. He
has been Clinical Professor of Psychiatry at the Georgetown University School
of Medicine since 1980. He is also the vice president of a consulting firm he
co-founded in 1982 with former DEA director Peter Bensinger - Bensinger,
DuPont and Associates. DuPont also founded, in 1978, the Institute for
Behavior and Health a drug abuse prevention organization.

  1. **Bertha Madras**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image022.jpg)

A professor of psychobiology for the Department of Psychiatry of Harvard
Medical School. She is in a new position at McLean Hospital, a Harvard Medical
School hospital affiliate. She was a former deputy director for the White
House Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP).

She has done numerous studies about the nature of marijuana. She is the co-
editor of _The Cell Biology of Addiction_ , as well as the co-editor of the
2014 books _Effects of Drug Abuse in the Human Nervous System_ and _Imaging of
the Human Brain in Health and Disease_.

She rejects the claims of pot proponents. For example, she states that the
marijuana chemical content is not known or controlled. She also notes that the
“effects of marijuana can vary considerably between plants” and that “no
federal agency oversees marijuana, so dose or purity of the plant and the
contaminants are not known.”

  1. **Carla Lowe**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image024.jpg)

A mother of five grown children, grandmother of nine, graduate of UC Berkeley
and former high-school teacher, Lowe got started as a volunteer anti-drug
activist in 1977 when her PTA Survey to Parents identified “drugs/alcohol” as
their priority concern. She organized one of the nation’s first
“Parent/Community” groups in her hometown of Sacramento and co-founded
Californians for Drug-Free Youth. She also chaired the Nancy Reagan Speakers’
Bureau of the National Federation of Parents for Drug-Free Youth, co-founded
Californians for Drug-Free Schools, and in 2010 founded an all-volunteer
Political Action Committee, Citizens Against Legalizing Marijuana (CALM)

She has travelled throughout the U.S. and the world speaking to the issue of
illicit drug use, primarily marijuana, and its impact on our young people. As
a volunteer consultant for the U.S. State Department and Department of
Education, she has addressed parents, students, community groups and heads of
state in Brazil, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Pakistan, Germany, Italy,
Ireland, and Australia.

CALM, is currently working with parents, law enforcement, and local community
elected officials to stop the proliferation of marijuana by banning “medical”
marijuana dispensaries and defeating the proposed 2016 ballot measure in
California that will legalize recreational use of marijuana.

She wants to go national and is part of an effort to start Citizens Against
Legalization of Marijuana-U.S.A. that will also function as a Political Action
Committee dedicated to defeating legalization efforts throughout the country.

Lowe is a strong proponent of non-punitive random student drug testing. She
believes this is the single most effective tool for preventing illicit drug
use by our youth, and will result in billions of dollars in savings to our
budget and downstream savings from the wreckage to our society in law
enforcement, health and welfare, and education.

* * *

  1. **Christian Thurstone**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image026.jpg)

He is one of a few dozen mental health professionals in America who are board
certified in general, child and adolescent, and addictions psychiatry. He is
the medical director of one of Colorado’s largest youth substance-abuse
treatment clinics and an associate professor of psychiatry at the University
of Colorado Denver, where he conducts research on youth substance use and
addiction.

According to a May 2013 interview posted on the University of Colorado
website, Thurstone was named an Advocate for Action by the White House Office
of National Drug Control Policy in October 2012 for his “outstanding
leadership in promoting an evidence-based approach to youth substance use and
addiction.”

Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper named Thurstone to a state task force convened
to make recommendations about how to implement Amendment 64, a constitutional
amendment approved by Colorado voters in November 2012 to legalize the
personal use and regulation of marijuana for adults 21 and older.

He became involved in the marijuana issue in 2009 “when a whole confluence of
events occurred that led to the commercialization of marijuana….What matters
is not so much the decriminalization; it’s the commercialization that affects
people, especially kids. …95% of the treatment referrals to Denver Health are
for marijuana. Nationwide, it’s two-thirds of the treatment referrals
according to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA).”

  1. Peter Bensinger

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image028.jpg)

Bensinger was a former DEA chief during the Ford, Carter and Reagan
administrations. He was in the vanguard opposing medical marijuana in
Illinois. He acknowledges medical marijuana as a value but he notes that it is
available as a pill or spray, so the idea of legalizing smoked marijuana for
medicinal purposes is merely a ploy.

  1. David Evans

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image030.jpg)

The executive director of the Drug Free Schools Coalition before becoming a
lawyer he was a research scientist, in the Division of Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse, New Jersey Department of Health. He was also the manager of the New
Jersey intoxicated driving program. He has written numerous articles warning
of the dangers of marijuana legalization.

  1. Pope Francis

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image032.jpg)

The new pontiff, while being hailed by many as being a liberal influence in
the Catholic Church has taken an intransigent line against marijuana
legalization. This past June the new international pop culture icon told the
31st International Drug Enforcement Conference in Rome, “No a ogni tipo di
droga (No to every type of drug).”

He was an active opponent of marijuana while a bishop in his native Argentina.
He says now that attempts to legalize drugs do not produce the desired
results.

He deplores the international drug trade as a scourge on humanity. Pope
Francis has said it is a fallacy to say that more drug legalization will lead
to less drug use.

  1. Dennis Prager

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image034.jpg)

A nationally syndicated radio talk show host in Los Angeles, Prager has used
his microphone to condemn marijuana legalization. He has asked rhetorically,
“Would you rather your pilot smoke cigarettes or pot? and “ How would Britain
have fared in World War II if Winston Churchill had smoked pot instead of
cigars?

  1. Mel and Betty Sembler

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image036.jpg)

The Semblers are longtime soldiers in the war on drugs. They co-founded, in
1976, a nonprofit drug treatment program called Straight, Inc. that
successfully treated more than 12,000 young people with drug addiction in
eight cities nationally from Dallas to Boston. They also help fund other
organizations dedicated to opposing legalizing drugs including marijuana.
Betty Sembler is the founder and Board Chair of Save Our Society From Drugs
(S.O.S.) and the Drug Free America Foundation, Inc. Both organizations work to
educate people about attempts to legalize as “medicine” unsafe, ineffective
and unapproved drugs such as marijuana,heroin, PCP and crack as well as to
reduce illegal drug use, drug addiction and drug-related illnesses and death.

  1. Seth Leibsohn

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image038.jpg)

Leibsohn is a radio host, writer, editor, policy, political and communications
expert. He is a former member of the board of directors of the Partnership for
a Drug Free America-Arizona Affiliate.

He told _MainStreet_ that he got involved in the campaign against marijuana
after seeing the effects of pot smoking on a college friend.

“One thing I noticed and never left my mind was a friend I had in college who
so very clearly, freshman year, was one of the most gifted and intelligent
thinkers and writers I had ever met," he said. " I predicted to myself and
others, he’d be the next big American author, published in _The New Yorker_ ,
books of short stories galore. But then he picked up a really habitual
marijuana smoking practice. He smoked, probably, daily. This was the mid to
late '80s. And to this day, I believe he is still a smoker….and he is a waste-
case. Lazy, never had a serious job, never published a serious piece of
writing, totally ended up opposite what I had predicted. That story never left
my mind.”

Leibsohn also noticed this was happening more and more. But the problem really
was driven home while he was the producer and co-host for the Bill Bennett
radio show, Morning in America.

“We noticed something very interesting: whenever we dealt with the issues of
drug abuse, and particularly marijuana, the phone lines lit up like no other
issue," he said. "We had doctors, we had nurses, we had truckers, we had small
businessmen, we had housewives, we had moms, we had brothers, we had teachers,
we had sisters, we had aunts, we had uncles telling us story after story of
the damage marijuana and other drugs had done to their and their loved ones
lives. It amazed me how widespread the issue is. I concluded, to myself, this
issue of substance abuse may very well be the most important and damaging
health issue in America."

He also noticed that “there just weren’t that many who seemed to give a
serious damn about it.” He said Joe Califano and Bill Bennett were about the
only ones he knew with a large microphone or following who would address the
issue. The silence in other precincts and from others was astounding to him.

“I still am amazed not more people are taking this as seriously as it should
be taken," he said. "But I know, too, that any family that has been through
the substance abuse roller coaster, needs to know they are not alone, and they
are the real experts-their stories tell the tale I wish more children and pro-
legalizers could hear. Today, I still talk, write, and research on the issue
and have joined the board of a non-profit dedicated to helping on it as well,”
he explained.

  1. Alexandra Datig

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image040.jpg)

A political advisor and consultant who has experience of more than 13 years on
issues of drug policy she was instrumental in the defeat of California
Proposition 19, The Regulate Control & Tax Cannabis Act. Datig serves on the
Advisory Board for the Coalition for a Drug Free California, the largest drug
prevention coalition in California.

She became involved in the anti-marijuana legalization movement because of her
own experiences. She was working in politics at the local and state level for
over eight years by 2009, but she also reached ten years in sobriety from a
13-year drug addiction that nearly cost her her life. When California
Proposition 19 came along, she decided “to jump in and form my own independent
campaign committee “Nip It In The Bud.”

“I began reaching out to several other committees, drug prevention groups and
law enforcement and together we built a powerful statewide coalition for which
I became one of its leading advisors and strategists,” she told _MainStreet_

“Today, I consider myself a miracle, because I was able to turn my life
around," she told _MainStreet_. "This is not something I could have done had I
not gotten sober. Having rebuilt my life in recovery, I believed that my
experience could convince voters that legalizing a drug like marijuana for
recreational use would make our roads more dangerous and, much like
cigarettes, was targeted at our youth. That legalization would cause harm to
first time users, people who suffer from depression and mental disorders and
especially people vulnerable to addiction or relapse.”

  1. Monte Stiles

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/image042.jpg)

A former state and federal prosecutor, Stiles supervised the Organized
Crime/Drug Enforcement Task Force – a group of agents and prosecutors who
investigate and prosecute high-level drug trafficking organizations, including
Los Angeles street gangs, Mexican cartels and international drug smuggling and
money laundering operations.

One of his proudest personal and career achievements was the organization and
implementation of the statewide “Enough is Enough” anti-drug campaign which
produced community coalitions in every area of Idaho. In addition to the
prosecution of drug traffickers, Monte has been a passionate drug educator and
motivational speaker for schools, businesses, churches, law enforcement
agencies, and other youth and parent organizations. He left government service
in April 2011 to devote all of his time to drug education, other motivational
speaking and nature photography.

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Political
Sector :

BY DAVID HILL — 05/27/14 08:03 PM EDT 310

THE VIEWS EXPRESSED BY CONTRIBUTORS ARE THEIR OWN AND NOT THE VIEW OF THE HILL

I was recently moderating several nights of focus groups in Denver when the
subject of marijuana suddenly and unexpectedly broke into the conversation.

At the beginning of each group I asked respondents to introduce themselves,
stating their favorite hobbies or leisure time interests, and one thing they
would change about Colorado. I’ve been doing this for decades and am used to
hearing “the usual suspects” when it comes to what respondents want to change.
Fix the traffic. Improve the schools. Stop the influx of new residents,
particularly those from California and Texas. I even got a few mentions of the
oddly standard, “I wish we had an ocean and a beach.”

But this time, in every group, someone mentioned he or she would go back on
the state’s wholesale legalization of marijuana. I probed Coloradans some on
the topic this trip, and the buyers’ remorse is palpable. People didn’t really
know what they were getting into.I wrote about the possibility of second
thoughts on marijuana previously, in early April; ordinarily I wouldn’t circle
back so quickly, but I am seeing too much evidence to ignore the growing
backlash.

It’s not just ordinary voters who now are second-guessing the move. Leaders
are wondering aloud whether they should have done more to fight against
approval of the referendum. Colorado’s mainstream civic elite, which
ordinarily and routinely organizes large coalitions to fight ballot measures
it deems bad for the state, generally chose to stand aside during the two
referenda — one on medical marijuana and the other on leisure use — leaving
the opposition to movement to conservative groups alone.

The problem with new policies enacted through the referendum process is that
there are always unintended consequences. I spotted one on this last trip to
Mile High country. Some voters now think that the marijuana trade, and the
associated tax revenue, is such a financial bonanza that it should pay for
most everything. It’s going to be a lot harder to pass any increases in
general sales or property taxes because voters will instead want pot tax
dollars to carry the burden.

It may be only a statistical margin of error quirk, but looking at the latest
CBS News polling on marijuana legalization, I am wondering if there is a
larger doubting of the wisdom of legalization.

For the first time in any time series I’ve monitored, support for legalization
actually declined in mid-May’s CBS poll.

CBS found that just 48 percent of Americans believe marijuana should be legal,
down from 51 percent in two earlier polls taken by CBS in January and
February. Given that each study interviewed samples of approximately 1,000
adults, for a 3 percent margin of error, a 4-point drop in legalization
support is just outside the margin — and more importantly, it’s a rare drop of
any magnitude in momentum for legalization. For more than a decade, every
successive poll saw rising support for marijuana. The latest CBS numbers are a
throwback to a poll the organization took in 2012. That’s a serious regression
for marijuana advocates.

Pot’s regress since January in the CBS polling is most noteworthy among the
middle-aged (45-64) population (-13 percentage points in support for
legalization) and by liberals (-9 points in support). Frankly, I am not at all
surprised by the latter. Overall, support by liberals still stands at a stout
63 percent, but if I had deeper crosstabs, I’d expect that some green liberals
with children under the age of 18 are starting to have some reservations about
pot, just as many do about tobacco.

Pollsters will be keeping a close watch on these numbers. Is the trend in
rising support for marijuana reaching a ceiling? Could there even be a growing
pushback? Could the backlash be more about health and air quality than about
conservative ideology?

_Hill is a pollster who has worked for Republican campaigns and causes since
1984._

Source:

http://thehill.com/opinion/david-hill/207342-david-hill-buyers-remorse-on-
marijuana

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA :

For decades, attorney Richard Blau focused his legal savvy on the high-stakes
business of booze. Alcohol-industry law was an attorney's dream, full of
unresolved questions and deep-pocketed players clawing their way to the top.

So when Florida's talk turned to marijuana, another storied pastime with its
own dubious history, Blau's titan of a law firm, GrayRobinson, jumped at the
opportunity. Blau now leads a special practice for clients wanting to
capitalize on medical cannabis — and bend the laws to their advantage.

"The playbook is to get in and lend a hand in crafting those rules, so they
read the way our clients want them to read," Blau said. "The powerful people
are the ones to get in on the ground floor."

Months before the state's November vote to legalize medical marijuana, some of
Florida's biggest law firms are already staking their claims to the lucrative
legal minefield of the budding weed industry.

Orlando-based GrayRobinson, which employs 101 attorneys in Tampa Bay and
nearly 300 across the state, will devote a core of its "regulated products"
group to the nuances of marijuana law.

Attorneys with Holland & Knight, a prominent firm in Tampa with more than
1,000 lawyers across the world, last week released an alert for clients on the
"legal landscape (and) complex marketplace for marijuana-related businesses."

And Akerman, the Miami-based corporate-law giant and largest law firm in the
state, recently launched a "regulated substances task force" with nearly two
dozen senior attorneys and public-policy professionals ready to advise, among
others, cultivators, private-equity groups and dispensaries.

"The shifting interplay between state and federal laws presents new challenges
and unprecedented opportunities for Akerman clients," managing partner Richard
Spees said in a statement, "and we are positioned to help them capitalize."

Groups with ostensible legal ties have filed for Florida business licenses
with names like Medical Marijuana Business Lawyers and the Cannabis Law Group,
joining a wave of "ganjapreneurs" grabbing for a piece of industry profits.

But the introduction of these powerhouse firms ups the ante, helping squash
the images of two-bit, Breaking Bad-style "Better Call Saul" legal operations
and legitimizing what could be a landslide of million-dollar corporate
disputes.

"We're not the 'pot lawyers.' This is not 'reefer madness.' It's 100 percent
professional, 100 percent legitimate . . . and we take it 100 percent
seriously," said Troy Kishbaugh, a health care specialist serving on
GrayRobinson's regulated-products group. "We have a large health care base . .
. and they want their patients to get the best care possible. And if medical
marijuana happens to be part of that medical regimen, they want to make sure
they're doing it right."

The state's biggest firms bolstered their practices this spring after Florida
lawmakers passed a "Charlotte's Web" bill legalizing a non-high-producing
cannabis strain used to treat cancer and epilepsy.

An even bigger fight comes in November, when voters could pass Amendment 2 and
legalize weed for a much broader slate of medical uses. Its prospects seem
increasingly upbeat: A Quinnipiac University poll last week found 88 percent
of Florida voters support adult medical-cannabis use.

If the vote passes, Florida could follow California in becoming America's
second-biggest medical-weed state, with around 400,000 patients spending an
average of $3,000 a year, estimates from state regulators and a national
cannabis-industry trade group show.

State regulators have several months to decide on the law's little details,
leaving a huge window for "cannabusiness" interests pushing to find an
unserved niche. The state Department of Health's Office of Compassionate Use,
which is drafting the rules, discussed at a public hearing Friday a range of
potential enterprises, from medical-cannabis testing to home delivery.

Lawyers wise to food and alcohol regulation are shoo-ins for the firms' legal-
weed practices: Many of the rules facing Big Pot, attorneys argue, could look
a lot like those governing Big Tobacco, Big Food and Big Booze.  
Joining them are lawyers with a vast range of expertise:

• Health care experts to address hospital and physician groups on how to
protect themselves while administering, storing and suggesting the use of a
drug still illegal under federal law.  
• Banking and financial gurus to advise on securing investment, handling money
and saving on taxes in what has long been an all-cash business.  
• Land use attorneys who can help resolve zoning and landlord disputes over
where growers and distributors can operate from seed to sale.  
• Even intellectual-property specialists with knowledge on how to protect and
preserve cannabis companies' strains, brands and reputations, in much the same
way consultants have long advised Budweiser or Marlboro.

For precedent, attorneys here are analyzing the legal laboratories of the 23
states, plus Washington D.C., that have legalized medical cannabis, and the
two states, Washington and Colorado, that have okayed weed for personal use.

They also are following in the footsteps of nationwide firms versed in guiding
the emerging trade. Seattle's Canna Law Group, launched by international law
firm Harris Moure in 2011, proved "profitable almost instantly," partner Dan
Harris told the Puget Sound Business Journal last year, adding, "We were
shocked at the demand." One of the group's attorneys, a young University of
Miami graduate, was voted "Marijuana Industry Attorney of the Year" in 2013 by
Dope Magazine.

For the finer details, attorneys said, firms are following their clients'
requests to lobby their way into influence. Litigation seems likely: A
proposed rule limiting Florida's medical weed to five nurseries, chosen by
lottery, has already stirred up legal wrath.  
Attorneys have likened their legal timing to representing alcohol outfits near
the sunset of prohibition, a potentially historical chance to mold law and
make nice with the grateful captains of a new industry.

But GrayRobinson's Blau, whose practice group is taking on three new clients a
week, stops short of supporting the "green rush" of small-time entrepreneurs.
He compares the early days of legal Florida weed to that of the American gold
rush, in which organized business interests, not excited ground troops, ended
up with the most to gain.

"All those individual wannabe miners thought (they'd strike it rich) when they
pushed forward to mine the Klondike … but very few emerged out of that with
anything," Blau said. "In reality, it was the established gold-mining
companies who took the ground, and made it their own."

Source: www.tampabay.com 1st August 2014

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Legal Sector,Marijuana and Medicine,USA :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/colorado-school-

cannabis.jpg)

Colorado middle schools reported a 24 percent increase in drug-related
incidents last year, according to USA Today. School-based experts tell the
newspaper they believe the jump is directly related to marijuana legalization.
Recreational sales of marijuana began on January 1, 2014.

Schools do not report which kinds of drugs are involved in the incidents, the
article notes. State legislators are now asking school districts to keep track
of which drugs they are finding.

John Simmons, the Denver Public Schools’ Executive Director of Student
Services, says schools in his city saw a 7 percent increase in drug incidents,
from 452 to 482. Almost all of the incidents were related to marijuana, he
said.

Middle schools across the state reported a total of 951 drug violations, the
highest number in a decade. School officials say while marijuana use has long
been a problem, more students are trying it now that it is more easily
available and socially accepted.

“We have seen parents come in and say, ‘Oh that’s mine, they just took it out
of my room,’ and that sort of thing,” said school resource officer Judy Lutkin
of the Aurora Police Department. “Parents have it in their houses more often,
and the kids just can take it from home.”

“Middle schoolers are most vulnerable to being confused about marijuana,” said
Dr. Christian Thurstone, attending physician for the Denver Health Adolescent
Substance Abuse Treatment program. “They think, ‘Well, it’s legal so it must
not be a problem.’”

Meg Sanders, owner of MiNDFUL, a marijuana company that operates in Colorado,
says her business is very careful not to market to children. “We feel it’s our
responsibility as a responsible business to card not just once but twice for
any recreational customer, and medical patients have to show several documents
before they can purchase marijuana,” she said.

Source: http://www.drugfree.org/join-together/jump-colorado-school-drug-cases
19th Feb. 2015

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Education,Youth :

**_Many of the Op-Eds on the subject of the legalisation or otherwise of
cannabis_** **_are written by journalists or protagonists of one or other
point of view. The_** **_following links give scientific evidence from
scientist and medics in the USA and do_** **_not support the use of
cannabis._**

**Authoritative organisations which do not support smoked pot or edibles as a
legitimate form of medication:**

  *     * **Rethinkpot.org**
  *     * **American Medical Association**
  *     * **American Cancer Society**
  *     * **National Multiple Sclerosis Society**
  *     * **American Glaucoma Society**
  *     * **American Academy of Pediatrics**
  *     * **National Institute On Drug Abuse** (NIDA)
  *     * **Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Association** (SAMHSA)
  *     * **Food and Drug Administration** (FDA)
  *     * **American Academy of Ophthalmology**
  *     * **Drug Enforcement Administration** (DEA)
  *     * **American Society of Addiction Medicine**
  *     * **Epilepsy Foundation**

Source: http://www.dbrecoveryresources.com/2015/02/medical-organisations-do-
not-support-smoked-pot-or-edibles/

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

___This excellent interview by Kevin Sabet was published in a Brazilian
newspaper and has been translated._

Legalize the use of marijuana creates another "addiction industry" and also
does not help to end trafficking, said Kevin Sabet, 35, an American expert who
joined the team of drug control of the government of Barack Obama. For him,
the politicization of "fashion theme" masks the impact of drugs on public
health, whose consumption is increasing among adolescents. to use the term
"medical marijuana" only confuses people. "We do not call the morphine
'medicinal heroin'"

In an exclusive interview with UOL , Sabet showed data from a recent survey
that will present the lecture "Impact of drug legalization", organized by the
SPDM - Paulista Association for the Advancement of Medicine. The event takes
place on Saturday (23) in Sao Paulo.

One of the cases analyzed by Sabet is Colorado, which allows both the use of
"medical marijuana" (since 2001) and recreational (starting this year). In the
state, the sale of the drug is banned for children under 21 years. Even so,
seven in ten adolescents in treatment for chemical dependency admitted to have
used medical marijuana to another person-and, on average, it occurred 50
times.

Even in Colorado, Sabet says the number of young people between 12 and 17 who
used marijuana increased from 8.15% (in 2009) to 10.47% (in 2011), well above
the national average, which is 7, 55%.

For adults in the state doubled the number of drivers who, under the influence
of marijuana, were involved in car accidents with death. The index rose from
5% in 2009 to 10% in 2011.

In the 19 American states that allow marijuana use for medical treatments,
Sabet says three in five students in their final year of high school can drugs
with "friends". Only 25% buy drugs from dealers or strangers. The margin of
error was not informed.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/a.gif)

Art / UOL

Map of legalizing marijuana in the United States

  * Medicinal and recreational use legalized

Colorado and Washington

  * Legalized medicinal use

Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Hawaii,
Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont

  * Legalization analysis

Florida and Alaska

The sociologist who studies politics for 18 years for drugs and is currently a
senior advisor to the Institute for Research of Crimes Justice and the UN
(United Nations), says the numbers are alarming. "It's the opening of a new
industry that just wants to increase the addiction of the people."

Even the use of marijuana for medical treatment is frowned upon by Sabet. "We
do not call the morphine 'medicinal heroin." Using the term' medical marijuana
'only confuses people and comes from the belief that you have to smoke to get
the benefits, "he criticizes.

Currently, he is dedicated to Project SAM - Smart Approaches to Marijuana
(Intelligent Approaches for Marijuana). The non-profit organization's mission
is to reduce the use of cannabis in the world, "without demonizing or
legalize" drugs.

Check out the full interview:

UOL - Do you agree with the legalization of marijuana for medicinal purposes
and for recreation?

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/b.jpg) | Kevin
Sabet - Often the debate is painted in white and black, as if you had to be
either in favor of higher spending or criminals in favor of legalization. I do
not agree with that. I think there are many more intelligent policies that do
not fall into this polarization.

What we're seeing in states like Colorado and Washington [where the medicinal
and recreational use of marijuana is allowed] is the inauguration of a new
industry that just wants to increase the addiction of people.

\---|---

_It is very curious that we have politicians who do not already hold more
executive positions in favor of legalization. It 's the latest fashion, it
makes them come back to the news and makes them more relevant. I do not know
in Brazil, but in the United States, when you become a former president,
you're no longer relevant _Kevin Sabet

The type of legalization that worries me is what is happening in the United
States and tends to happen in the rest of the world: industrialization and
promotion of other addictive industry.

In terms of effects, we also have to think, whether in relation to marijuana
and other drugs like cigarettes and even alcohol in the future of our
workforce. What kind of workers and students want? Of course we do not want to
promote the use of cigarettes for our students, but if you go to school and
smokes, her cognition is not impaired, you can still learn. You will not get
lung cancer tomorrow. But if marijuana is different. It impairs the person in
terms of learning, memorization, attention, motivation.

We have lived through a disaster compared to the tobacco and alcohol industry,
and I do not want to raise the pot at that level.

UOL - There are several studies cited including marijuana help cancer
patients, since contain tumor growth, stimulate appetite, reduce nausea and
relieve pain. With so many benefits, it is possible to advocate a total ban on
drugs?

Sabet - Tue drugs using substances derived from cannabis is something
promising. But we do not smoke opium to have the effects of morphine. We do
not call the morphine "medical heroin". Use the term "medical marijuana" only
confuses people and comes from the belief that you have to smoke to get the
benefits.

In the United States, the so-called "users" of this medical marijuana are in
98% of cases men between 30 and 40 years without terminal cancer. They are
also not seropositive for HIV, do not have multiple sclerosis or amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Basically, they have pain in the lumbar region. Logical
that we should treat their pain, but there are other outputs.

The impression of people is that marijuana is good because there are patients
dying of cancer who need it. But frankly, if you're dying of cancer, with six
months to live, I do not care what you're going to use [for pain].

In addition, laws are being written very broadly and in many American states,
legislation is flawed. The Colorado began selling the drug in 2008 All you
need is to be 18 years and have headaches to get marijuana.

UOL - What must we do to help patients in need of "medical marijuana?"

Sabet - We have to do special research programs that give patients access to
experimental drugs. We should not sell marijuana on the corner, in a store,
and say that is medicine, because this is not the way to act of medicine. I do
not like this politicization of medicine, the medicine should be in the
scientific field.If scientists in Brazil say tomorrow that we need to smoke
pot to get the [beneficial] effects, we need to understand why this is and
learn. But do not think that is the current case.

Let us study the components of the plant. I know it can be very good for a
politician to say that it is in favor of medical marijuana. But honestly, we
should not trust politicians talking about scientific issues [laughs]. Let's
hear scientists. And they are not telling you to smoke pot to get rid of your
cancer.

UOL - Earlier this year, Obama said that smoking marijuana is no more
dangerous than drinking alcohol, but stressed that in any case, is "a bad
idea." Do you agree with him?

Sabet - First, do not think that there is healthy this equivalence to say that
one thing is better than another because they are different. Alcohol affects
your liver, marijuana affects your lungs. Alcohol affects certain parts of
your brain, marijuana, other.

In the case of alcohol, we have a cultural acceptance. Alcohol is not
legalized because it is a success for public health. It is legal because it
has been used for thousands of years in Western culture, that's the only
reason.

In the case of marijuana, it is not used for thousands of years by the
majority of the western population and do not want to repeat the experience
[like alcohol] again.

I know far more people who drink a glass of wine with no intention of getting
drunk. I know who smoke a joint without the intention to "have a cheap". The
reason for smoking a joint is drugging. I do not drink, so would not explain
properly, but I'm not justifying do one thing and not another. There is a
cultural difference in relation to alcohol which makes the comparison with the
fake marijuana.

UOL - Our former president, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, is one of the advocates
of marijuana legalization. What do you think of politicians like him?

Sabet - It is very curious that we have politicians who no longer occupy the
executive positions in favor of legalization. It's the latest fashion, it
makes them come back to the news and makes them more relevant. I do not know
in Brazil, but in the United States, when you become a former president,
you're no longer relevant [laughs]. Nobody talks about George W. Bush, even
Bill Clinton.

It is a very simplistic approach. Visit the slums. Do you think that more
drugs will help these communities? This offers some hope to them? Not a
hopeful vision.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/c.jpg)

Marijuana causes infertility? Partially true: laboratory research showed that
marijuana can lead to a drop in the amount of sperm and cause them to move
about a bit differently, more slowly. "In real life, however, there is nothing
showing that it causes infertility among users," explains psychiatrist at the
Hospital Clinicas in Sao Paulo Mario Ivan Braun, author of "Drugs - questions
and answers" Read More _Getty Images_

UOL - If you were a candidate for president of Brazil and was asked in a
debate whether you are for or against the legalization of the drug, which
speak?

Sabet - I advocate a health-related approach to drugs in general. This means
increasing access to treatment, early intervention, training of physicians to
identify the signs of addiction. Treat all problems early, without waiting for
someone to give input in the hospital because it is using crack cocaine or
four years ago. I want you to discover the defect in the first month of use to
prevent the disease from worsening.

And I certainly would not want to start a new industry like tobacco or
alcohol, selling the drug. And I also would look at the key issues. Why are
people using crack? What happens in the community where they live? Are much
more difficult questions, but they are much more important than say if we
legalize a drug or not.

UOL - Data collected by lord over the Colorado show that the legalization of
drugs had bad consequences, especially for teenagers.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/d.jpg) |

Sabet - This happens because legalization would not eliminate the black market
trafficking. And this is the promise that we get rid of gangs. Gangs are very
happy because they now have lower prices. In Colorado, it costs $ 300 (R $
684) to buy 35 grams of marijuana legalized. With traffickers, the price is $
150 (R $ 342) for the same amount of drug. You do not go to recreational
marijuana store to pay twice the price? In addition, the sale is prohibited
for minors. If you want marijuana, which will buy? With traffickers. All these
promises that would end the trafficking and increase tax collection are not
being met. The governor of Colorado for the fifth consecutive time, decreased
the estimate of tax collection with this trade.

Junior Lake / UOL _I will not say a parent of a child suffering hundreds of
seizures per day should not use something that will help her. Trafficking or
grow marijuana in the backyard does not solve the problem, either. It is
necessary to regulate the use of cannabidiol_ Kevin Sabet

\---|---

UOL - So, how to stop drug trafficking?

Sabet - The only way would be to stop trafficking is sell the drug at cost of
production. In other words, it would be like trying to get rid of trafficking
in crack cocaine or selling the drug for pennies for each dose. From the
standpoint of public health, you do not want that. You just want to raise
taxes cigarette, you try to increase costs because the more expensive, fewer
people will want it. You may be able to get rid of some of the harms and
reduce some traffic, but not eliminate it. The output, once again, is to
reduce the number of addicts in treatment and awareness campaigns.

UOL - For adults, shows that you doubled the number of fatal accidents
involving drivers under the influence of marijuana in Colorado.

Sabet - legalization advocates could even argue that drivers "were not under
the influence of drugs", but as they were fatal accidents, tests on the
victims showed high levels of substances derived from cannabis in organisms.
Of course not every accident caused by a drunk driver occurs due to intake of
alcohol. Most likely, it could be because he sent an SMS at the time. But it
is a big risk factor.

Many teens think that driving under the influence of marijuana is safe. But I
say that it is dangerous to drive on a road where the limit is 70 km / h, so
30 km / h to 100 km / h. Even if marijuana makes you slower, it is also
dangerous. It also affects your depth perception and your reaction time.

UOL - There should be stricter laws in Colorado against these drivers?

Sabet - The issue of legalization is that you create space for a completely
new political group that will do anything to make access to drugs as easy as
possible. Then, during the campaigns of legalization they say: "do not worry,
we will oversee and regulate."The next minute, they shy away. In power, they
hold the money, will influence the advice of the small towns, giving money to
politicians to create 20 shops selling marijuana in a local community. Ie, you
have these defenders who will try to minimize all the dangers of driving under
the influence of drugs. Their message to the children, for example, is that
smoking marijuana is safer than drinking alcohol.

UOL - If legalization is not an option, which would then be proposed to reduce
the consumption of drugs?

Sabet - The question is: what do you think the worst? A legal market to reach
25-50% of the population, because it will increase the use of the drug or an
illegal market that reaches 7%? Both are bad, but I would opt for the second
scenario and work to reduce this rate.

We need better prevention and awareness, particularly for teenagers campaigns.
Over the past decade, scientific research have advanced tremendously with
regard to the effects of drugs on the adolescent brain, but at the same time,
the perception of these young people from the harmful effects of marijuana is
decreasing. This owes much to discussions of legalization.

Many people find that marijuana is not addictive, but rather addictive. And is
also associated with severe mental illness. We need more campaigns, more
research, more treatment. In the case of trafficking, we need to give more
alternatives for youth, for the sale of the drug did not show more profitable
than legitimate work. It is necessary to solve social problems.

UOL - Uruguay recently legalized the sale of the drug in the country, which
should start in November, but was postponed to 2015 This precisely because the
government is still studying efficient methods to identify the buyer.. On
occasion, José Mujica criticized how the drug has been legalized in the USA,
"anyway" and "irresponsibly that scares". Do you agree with Mujica?

Sabet - He is too smart to say it did not want to copy the state of Colorado
and Washington, because that would be a total disaster. Would not be surprised
if the sale of marijuana in Uruguay even start, or even never happen. It is
not a popular measure, the government spent a few million on campaigns trying
to convince people that this is something good, and yet 70% are against.

Rational argument is "let's stop trafficking", but again, unless you take the
drug, give marijuana to children 10 years will still be traffickers. And is
not that what you want. The president himself [Mujica] said he does not like
marijuana, is not in favor of it, just want to control it. This is a much
better approach than the American states. It is much more honest than some
guys in the USA. But still do not think Uruguayans have a viable program. They
are realizing that it is much more complicated than they thought it would be.
So, good luck to them. I am very skeptical.

UOL - For the United States, it is worrying that a Latin American country to
legalize marijuana?

Sabet - I do not know if it would be a problem, but it is strange to the
United States. The country does not want legalization, but it is happening at
the state level. The American government will simply ignore the issue. To be
honest, we only see them [and Uruguay Mujica] mentioned in the paper when the
subject is marijuana. They [Obama and Mujica] nor talked about it when they
met. So it's not a concern for the United States.

UOL - recently had here in Brazil the case of a five year old girl with severe
epilepsy that caused more than 60 seizures daily. After cannabidiol , she had
significant improvement in health status. However, the parents were
"smuggling" the substance, and were not satisfied with that. How is this
question in the USA?

Sabet - also have this problem in the United States. More than 400 children
are receiving cannabidiol in liquid form legally by the government. However,
you do not have data to show the effectiveness of the substance. If a parent
is a substance that is experimental, unproven, then fine by me accordingly. I
will not say to a parent of a child suffering hundreds of seizures per day not
to use something that will help.

But traffic or planting marijuana in the backyard does not solve the problem.
It is necessary to regulate the use of cannabidiol by pharmaceutical and
health areas.

Source: http://noticias.uol.com.br/internacional/ultimas-noticias/ 23rd August
2014

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Marijuana and
Medicine :

A pair of new studies has revealed that marijuana use could lead to abuse of
other drugs and alcohol. Experts said that these risks need to be considered
not only by doctors and patients but by policy makers as well particularly in
states where marijuana is legalized for recreational or medical use.

For the first study, which was published in the journal _Drug and Alcohol
Dependence_ , the results showed that adults who smoke marijuana have five
times increased odds of developing alcohol use disorder (AUD) compared with
their counterparts who do not smoke.

By looking at the data of more than 27,000 adults, researchers found that the
participants who did not have AUD but reported using cannabis during the first
survey were 5.4 times more likely to have an AUD three years later. The
participants who already battle with an alcohol use disorder and were using
marijuana were also found to aggravate their dependence on alcohol.

"Among adults with no history of AUD, cannabis use at Wave 1 was associated
with increased incidence of an AUD three years later relative to no cannabis
use," study researcher Renee Goodwin, from Columbia University, and colleagues
wrote. "Among adults with a history of AUD, cannabis use at Wave 1 was
associated with increased likelihood of AUD persistence three years later
relative to no cannabis use."

The second study, which was published in _JAMA Psychiatry_ and involved more
than 34,000 subjects, revealed that participants who used cannabis during the
first survey were about six times as likely to suffer from substance use
disorder after three years.

Researchers also found an increased risk for drug use disorders and nicotine
dependence among pot smokers. Although the study authors said that their
findings do not establish a cause and effect relationship between pot use and
substance abuse, they noted that there may be an overlap in brain circuitry
that influence drug use and dependence.

"Our study indicates that cannabis use is associated with increased prevalence
and incidence of substance use disorders," Carlos Blanco, from the National
Institute on Drug Abuse, and colleagues wrote. "These adverse psychiatric
outcomes should be taken under careful consideration in clinical care and
policy planning."

Source: http://www.techtimes.com/articles/135554/20160222 22nd Feb 2016

Filed under: Addiction,Alcohol,Australia,Cannabis/Marijuana :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/a.png)

The Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area released its third
annual report this week. The organization has been tracking the impact of
marijuana legalization in Colorado since the state first legalized the drug
for medical use in 2000, passed legislation to allow dispensaries beginning in
2009-which spawned a commercial marijuana industry-and legalized pot for
recreational use in 2012. The 2015 report shows that by 2013, Colorado
marijuana use was nearly double the national usage rate. The state ranked 3rd
in the nation for youth use in 2013, up from 14th in 2006; 2nd in the nation
for young adult use in 2013, up from 8th in 2006; and 5th in the nation for
adults, up from 8th in 2006.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/b.png)

Drug-related school expulsions, most of which are marijuana-related, far
exceed school expulsions for alcohol use. Note the sudden jump in drug
expulsions that began in 2009 when Colorado allowed a commercial marijuana
industry to emerge. Total school suspensions and expulsions rose from 3,736 by
the end of the 2008-2009 school year to 5,249 by the end of the 2013-2014
school year.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/c.png)

Marijuana-related traffic fatalities in Colorado also began rising with the
introduction and growth of the commercial marijuana industry in 2009. While
total State wide fatalities decreased between 2006 and 2014, marijuana-related
fatalities increased over that time.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/d.png)

Colorado marijuana-related emergency room visits increased to 18,255 in in
2014.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/e.png)

Marijuana-related hospitalizations have nearly quintupled since Colorado first
legalized marijuana for medical use. Again, note the surge starting in 2009
when growers, processors, and dispensaries were first authorized, and a
commercial industry began developing extensive marijuana products such as
edibles, vape pens, and butane hash oils (BHO) to attract new customers. BHO
has elevated THC levels to the highest seen in the nation; some contain 75
percent to 100 percent THC.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/f.png)

Although there is no data to document whether the increase in homelessness in
Denver and other Colorado cities is marijuana-related, those who provide
services to the homeless report that many say they relocated to Colorado
because of marijuana's legality.

In Colorado, marijuana is not available in about three-fourths of the state.
Of a total 321 local jurisdictions, 228 (71 percent) ban all forms of
marijuana businesses; 67 (21 percent) allow both medical and recreational
marijuana businesses; and 26 (8 percent) allow only medical or recreational
marijuana businesses.

Read report here.  
Source: www.themarijuanareport.org 16th September 2015

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Education,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Health,USA :

_By_ Kathy Gyngell _Posted_ 12th September 2014

For years the great and the good of the drug legalising world – including
members and former members of the Government’s own Advisory Council on the
Misuse of Drugs - have consistently denied that cannabis is a gateway drug or
addictive. They have downplayed its devastating consequences for adolescents.
They have derided or ignored cannabis prevention campaigners and the evidence
presented to them.

It is time for them to recant - now and publicly - for their misleading and
casual advice.

They can no longer remain in denial about the drug they have appeared so keen
to defend, to normalise and to claim is less harmful than alcohol.

Irrefutable evidence of its damaging consequences for adolescents was
published yesterday, in a new study of adolescent cannabis use , in The Lancet
Psychiatry - a study in which almost 3,800 people took part.

Its objective was to find out more about the link between the frequency of
cannabis use before the age of 17 and seven outcomes up to the age of 30, such
as completing high school, obtaining a university degree and cannabis and
welfare dependence.

The researchers found that the risks increased relative to dose, with daily
cannabis users suffering the greatest harm.

They found that teenagers who smoked cannabis daily were over 60 per cent less
likely to complete school or get a degree than those who never had. They were
also 60 per cent less likely to graduate college, seven times more likely to
attempt suicide, eight times as likely to go on and use other illegal drugs,
and 18 times more likely to develop a cannabis dependence.

To its shame, the Washington Post described these findings as ‘startling”. The
fact is that they only reflect numerous previously published studies and
surveys.

However, let’s hope that the that self-styled Global Commission on Drugs
Policy and its leading light, Sir Richard Branson, will take note that
Professor Neil McKeganeyrightly excoriated them on Tuesday for promoting the
legalisation of all currently illegal drugs.

It should be concerned and reflect on its gung-ho recommendations in light of
this catalogue of damage; and so should President Obama - who seems to think
kids smoking dope is OK. He should really be worrying for under the lax
approach of his administration cannabis use, or marijuana as Americans call
it, has risen 29 per cent in six years, that is nearly a 5 per cent increase
per year. It is difficult to detach this rise from the effective
decriminalisation of the drug in 23 states under so called medical marijuana
legislation. And the US is yet to see the full effects of the January 2014
initiation of legal marijuana in Colorado and Washington on the rest of the
nation.

Thankfully, in the UK the number of 11–15 year olds who say they'd used
cannabis in the past month (4 per cent) has been dropping consistently over
the last 13 years or so. The number significantly less than in the US where a
worrying 7 per cent of high-school seniors (aged 17-18) are daily or near-
daily users.

Richard Mattick, the study author and Professor of Drug and Alcohol Studies at
the National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, University of New South Wales,
in Australia, is right to stress: “Our findings are particularly timely given
that several US states and countries in Latin America have made moves to
decriminalise or legalise cannabis, raising the possibility that the drug
might become more accessible to young people.”

The cat is out of the bag in the US. Let’s hope here in the UK, those seeking
to normalise cannabis use, including the Lib Dems, several members of the ACMD
and a number of Government-funded charities will finally see how irresponsible
they have been and are.

Source: www.conservativewoman 12th Sept. 2013

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Education Sector,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Youth :

WASHINGTON — A new report out from the Governors Highway Safety Association
finds that driving while on drugs, even marijuana, poses a significant safety
risk on our roadways, on par with drunken driving.

Researchers found that the percentage of drivers killed who tested positive
for drugs is almost the same as those who tested positive for any alcohol — 40
percent. More than 5,000 drivers killed each year have drugs in their system
at the time of the crash.

“The proportion with drugs in their system has increased over the past several
years and now the level is about the same with alcohol in their systems,” says
Dr. Jim Hedlund, author of the report.

The report puts a special emphasis on marijuana use and its impact on driving
because lawmakers across the country are debating whether to legalize the
drug.

“The evidence is very clear that marijuana affects decision times, reaction
times and so forth. If you are using marijuana, you are at an increased risk
of being in a crash,” says Hedlund.

He is particularly concerned that lawmakers are not considering the impact of
marijuana on deadly crashes when talking about legalizing the drug. Hedlund
also says the laws on the books for drug-impaired driving need to be clearer
and more in line with drunken driving laws.

“Every state must take steps to reduce drug-impaired driving, regardless of
the legal status of marijuana,” says Jonathan Adkins, executive director of
GHSA.

“This is the first report to provide states and other stakeholders with the
information that they need. And we encourage [the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration] to issue guidance on best practices to prevent
marijuana-impaired driving. We look to the federal government to take a
leadership role in this issue similar to that of drunk driving and seat belt
use,” he adds.

The report calls on states to take several measures to address the issue head-
on. It urges states to assess the data in their region, examine and update
drug-impaired driving laws, test all drivers who are killed in a crash for
drugs and separate statistics between drunken driving from driving while on
drugs.

Source: Governors Highway Safety Association Sept.2015

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drugs and Accidents,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,USA :

_Haven Dubois, 14, died in accidental drowning on May 20, 2015, coroner says_

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/haven.jpg)

Family members hold a picture of Haven Dubois, 14, who was found in cardiac
arrest in a Regina creek on May 20, 2015. (CBC)

Richelle Dubois, the mother of 14-year-old Haven Dubois, says she is
determined to learn more about the circumstances surrounding her son's death.
"I'm not done with this until I'm satisfied that they've looked into
everything," Dubois said Wednesday following the release of a coroner's report
that looked into the May 20, 2015 death of Haven. "I need to make sure that
they've done their job properly."  
According to the report, the Regina boy was found drowned. The report said
boys who were with Haven on that day told the coroner that he suffered a bad
reaction to marijuana.  
The boy's mother Dubois has expressed concerns the death might have been
connected to gangs. Police said foul play had been ruled out. Richelle Dubois
said last fall she had waited a long time for the coroner to complete her
report on her son Haven's death. (CBC)  
Coroner Maureen Stinnen interviewed a number of boys who were with Dubois, who
said he was at school in the morning before getting into a car with friends.  
"They apparently smoked some marijuana and they indicated that Haven began
'freaking out,'" Stinnen's report said. One of the youths Stinnen interviewed
said it was Dubois's first time smoking drugs. After getting out of the car,
Dubois continued suffering ill effects and started walking away from the
school, F. W. Johnson Collegiate.

**Left alone on a bench**

"Witnesses indicate he was 'spinning in circles' with his arms crossed at his
chest," the report said. One witness said he sat for a while with Dubois on a
bench in a park, but left him alone so he could go get a skateboard and
backpack. When the boy returned, Dubois wasn't at the bench.  
A friend said he last saw Dubois walking north by the creek in the area where
his mother had discovered the body. Over the noon hour, Dubois was found face
down in about a metre of water. Efforts to resuscitate him failed.  
Dubois had no history or depression or suicidal tendencies, the coroner said.
However, a toxicology report indicated he had the active component of cannabis
in his blood.

**Reactions to marijuana vary, coroner says**

"The effect of marijuana on individuals varies considerably, from minor
effects such as general feeling of well-being, to agitation and paranoia," the
report said. "These effects are subject to dose, age and experience of the
user. Even in low doses, marijuana can precipitate a panic reaction and
irrational behaviour."  
Stinnen said the case was thoroughly investigated by the Regina police and
while "questions remain," there were no indications of foul play. She
concluded that Dubois's death was an accidental drowning with drug use a
"significant contributing factor."

**Mother seeks more information**

Richelle Dubois said Wednesday she feels she did not get enough information
from police about their investigation. "It's so easy for them to brush it
aside. It's just another dead Indian to them," Dubois said. "That's how I
feel; that we're just another Indian family."  
According to a spokesperson from the police, officers met with Dubois three
times. Dubois said the findings of the coroner, noting how marijuana can lead
some people to panic and act irrationally, provide a possible explanation for
her son's death, but she still has questions.  
"l know this isn't the end of it," she said. "This little two and a quarter
page [report] isn't the end of it." Dubois added she has made a formal request
to view police reports on the case.

Source: http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/marijuana-significant-
factor-in-haven-dubois-death-1.3392179

Filed under: Canada,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus,
babies, children and youth,Drugs and Accidents :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/oregon.jpg)

Proponents raised $7.6 million to opponents' $169,000 to legalize marijuana
for recreational use, a ratio of 45 to 1. Opponents in Alaska and Oregon could
not afford to present other viewpoints in TV commercials. Meanwhile, after
just ten months of legal marijuana, five Colorado cities passed amendments to
ban the sale of recreational marijuana within their borders. The Republican
gubernatorial challenger ran on a platform calling for the repeal of
legalization. As citizens’ anger mounts over outsiders sweeping in, getting
what they want, and leaving behind a mess for taxpayers to clean up, we are
likely to see more of that.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/alaska.jpg)

**Alaska Legalizes Recreational Marijuana** -You might think the 23 states
that have legalized marijuana were responding to citizen demand. You would be
wrong. The Drug Policy Alliance and the Marijauna Policy Project, their
funders George Soros and the late Peter Lewis, a by-now burgeoning marijuana
industry, and an estimated $200 million are behind the drive to legalize
marijuana. Imagine a Congress where all 435 Representatives and 100 Senators
belong to just one party, and you can begin to understand how one-sided
marijuana initiatives have been.

Source: TheMarijuanaReport.org Nov. 2014

Big Business made a lot of money out of selling tobacco products - and it took
many years before the link between smoking and cancer were accepted. Big
Pharma make a lot of money from selling pharmaceutical drugs. Big Business
Mark II intends to make a lot of money out of selling marijuana (cannabis)
products – regardless of the research that now shows this substance is not
harmless.

The graphics above show just how much money was spent by the proponents of
drug legalisation compared to the amounts that those who oppose legalisation
were able to muster from grass roots supporters. It is not surprising that so
many of the American public were hoodwinked into voting for easier access to
drugs – beginning with marijuana but eventually all currently illegal
substances.

There was much misinformation, errors of omission and emphasis on ‘ individual
freedoms’ – and no information about scientific research showing the dangers –
particularly to young people – of using marijuana.

Already there are signs of discontent in many places with legalised marijuana
– more driving accidents, more instances of children being made ill from
consuming what appeared to be sweets but was in reality marijuana packaged as
a candy or chocolate bar …..how long will it be before the

Pandora’s Box can be tightly closed ?

National Drug Prevention Alliance November 2014

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA :

**Xcel Energy utility officials say lighting companies working with cannabis
growers are testing LED lamps that require less electricity**

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/xcel.jpg)

_DENVER, CO - DECEMBER 02: Denver Fire Department Lieutenant, Tom Pastorius,
does an inspection of a Denver marijuana grow operation, December 02, 2014.
Local government officials from Denver to smaller cities and rural hamlets say
the pivotal first-year rollout went smoothly in most cases. (Photo by RJ
Sangosti/The Denver Post)_

GOLDEN — Surging electricity consumption by Colorado's booming marijuana
industry is sabotaging Denver's push to use less energy — just as the White
House perfects a Clean Power Plan to cut carbon pollution.

Citywide electricity use has been rising at the rate of 1.2 percent a year,
and 45 percent of that increase comes from marijuana-growing facilities,
Denver officials said Wednesday.

Denver has a goal of capping energy use at 2012 levels. Electricity is a big
part of that.

The latest Xcel Energy data show cannabis grow facilities statewide, the bulk
of which are in Denver, used as much as 200 million kilowatt hours of
electricity in 2014, utility officials said. City officials said 354 grow
facilities in Denver used about 121 million kwh in 2013, up from 86 million
kwh at 351 facilities in 2012.

"Of course we want to grow economically. But as we do that, we'd like to save
energy," city sustainability strategist Sonrisa Lucero said.

She and other Denver officials joined 30 business energy services and
efficiency leaders seeking U.S. Department of Energy guidance Wednesday at a
forum in Golden. Energy Undersecretary Franklin Orr said feds will promote
best practices and provide technical help through an Office of Technology
Transitions.

"It's a big issue for us," Lucero told Orr. "We really do need some assistance
in finding some good technology."

Orr said he tried to figure out "how we would address that to Congress."

When the EPA later this summer unveils the Clean Power Plan for state-by-state
carbon cuts and installation of energy-saving technology, utilities are
expected to accelerate a shift away from coal-generated electricity toward
cleaner sources, such as natural gas, wind and solar.

Until they can replace more coal-fired plants, the nation's utilities
increasingly are trying to manage demand by, for example, offering rebates to
customers who conserve electricity.

Colorado for years has been encouraging cuts in carbon emissions by requiring
utilities to rely more on renewable sources.

Yet electricity use statewide has been increasing by 1 percent to 2 percent a
year, due in part to population growth, said Jeffrey Ackermann, director of
the Colorado Energy Office.

The rising electricity demand means more opportunities to save money by using
energy more efficiently , Ackermann said. "We're not going to compel people to
reduce their usage. … But we're going to try to bring efficiency into the
conversation."

Colorado's marijuana sector, in particular, is growing rapidly, relying on
electricity to run lights that stimulate plant growth, as well as air-
conditioning and dehumidifiers. The lights emit heat, raising demand for air
conditioning, which requires more electricity.

"How do you capture their attention long enough to say: Hey, if you make this
investment now, it could pay back in the future," Ackermann said, referring to
possibilities for better lights.

Southwest Energy Efficiency Project director Howard Geller said new adjustable
light-emitting diode, or LED, lights have emerged that don't give off heat.
Companies installing these wouldn't require so much air-cooling and could cut
electricity use, Geller said.

Lighting companies are working with pot companies to test the potential for
LED lamps to reduce electricity use without hurting plants, Xcel spokesman
Mark Stutz said. Xcel is advising companies on how much electricity different
lights use, he said.

Denver officials currently aren't considering energy-efficiency rules for the
industry, said Elizabeth Babcock, manager of air, water and climate for the
city. Marijuana-growing facilities in 2013 used 1.85 percent of total
electricity consumed in Denver.

"We see many opportunities in all sectors," Babcock said. "Energy efficiency
lowers the cost of doing business, and there are lots of opportunities to cut
energy waste in buildings, transportation and industry."

Source: www.denverpost.com 7th January 2015

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Social Affairs,USA :

There has been a lot of talk recently about marijuana legalization —
increasing tax revenue for states, getting nonviolent offenders out of the
prison system, protecting personal liberty, possible health benefits for those
with severe illnesses. These are good and important conversations to have, and
smart people from across the ideological spectrum are sharing their
perspectives.

But one key dimension of the issue has been left out of the discussion until
now: the marketing machine that will spring up to support these now-legal
businesses, and the detrimental effect this will have on our kids.

Curious how this might work? Look no further than Big Tobacco. In 1999, the
year after a massive legal settlement that restricted certain forms of
advertising, the major cigarette companies spent a record $8.4 billion on
marketing. In 2011, that number reached $8.8 billion, according to the
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. To put it into context, the auto industry
spent less than half of that on advertising in 2011, and car ads are
everywhere.

At the same time, despite advertising bans, these notoriously sneaky tobacco
companies continue to find creative ways to target kids. Data from the 2011
National Survey on Drug Use and Health found that the most heavily marketed
brands of cigarettes were also the most popular among people under 18.

This is not a coincidence, and gets to the very core of Big Tobacco's
approach: Hook them young, and they have a customer for life. Why do we think
the legal marijuana industry will behave differently from Big Tobacco? When
the goal is addiction, all bets are off.

In Colorado, where there are new rules governing how legal marijuana is
advertised in traditional media, there are still many opportunities to market
online and at concerts, festivals and other venues where kids will be present.
Joe Camel might be retired, but he's been replaced by other gimmicks to get
kids hooked — like snus and flavored cigarettes. The marijuana industry is
following suit by manufacturing THC candies, cookies, lollipops and other
edibles that look harmless but aren't. Making marijuana mainstream will also
make it more available, more acceptable and more dangerous to our kids.

Addiction is big business, and with legal marijuana it's only getting bigger.

Not surprisingly, Big Tobacco is also getting on the marijuana bandwagon.
Manufacturers Altria and Brown & Williamson have registered domain names that
include the words "marijuana" and "cannabis." Imagine how much they will spend
peddling their new brand of addiction to our kids. We cannot sit by while
these companies open a new front in their battle against our children's
health.

Why is this an issue? There is a mistaken assumption that marijuana is
harmless. It is not. Marijuana use is linked with mental illness, depression,
anxiety and psychosis. It affects parts of the brain responsible for memory,
learning, attention and reaction time. Developing brains are especially
susceptible to all of the negative effects of marijuana and other drug use. In
fact, poison control centers in Colorado and Washington state have seen an
increase in the number of calls regarding marijuana poisoning. This isn't a
surprise — with legal marijuana comes a host of unintended consequences.

I've spent the past several years after leaving Congress advocating for a
health care system that treats the brain like it does any other organ in the
body. Effective mental health care, especially when it comes to children, is
critically important.

Knowing what we now know about the effects of marijuana on the brain, can we
really afford to ignore its consequences in the name of legalization? Our No.
1 priority needs to be protecting our kids from this emerging public health
crisis. The rights of pot smokers and the marijuana industry end where our
children's health begins.

I'm not alone in my concerns about this trend toward legalization. Even
Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper has said that marijuana legalization in his
state was "reckless" and reaffirmed his opposition to it during his campaign
for re-election. He also said he will "regulate the heck" out of it. For that,
I applaud his leadership and courage.

Alaska, Oregon and the District of Columbia have legalization ballot measures
up for a vote this fall. I hope common sense will prevail, and they choose a
better path than making addiction the law of the land.

At the end of the day, legalizing and marketing marijuana is making drug use
acceptable and mainstream. Just as Big Tobacco lied to Americans for decades
about the deadly consequences of smoking, we can't let "big marijuana" follow
in its footsteps, target our kids and profit from addiction.

Patrick J. Kennedy is a former United States representative from the state of
Rhode Island.

Source: http://www.npr.org/2014/10/30/360217001/kennedy-are-we-ready-for-big-
tobacco-style-marketing-for-marijuana

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Political Sector,USA :

AS THE LEGAL AND MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA BECOMES MORE COMMONPLACE, OFFICIALS
ARE STRUGGLING TO DETERMINE AND ENFORCE SAFE LEVELS OF IMPAIRMENT.

Determining how intoxicated someone is can be quite a difficult task. For
alcohol consumption, a substance that the body excretes in a quick, linear
fashion, we can measure the amount of metabolic by-products present in the
blood using a breathalyzer, or directly measure ethanol levels with a blood
test.

Although the issue is somewhat complicated by differing tolerances, research
conducted throughout the 20th century showed that nearly everyone loses their
ability to drive safely above certain blood alcohol levels.

In the US, medical marijuana is legal in 29 states and adult recreational use
is legalized in eight. Widespread popularity of this psychoactive drug seems
to necessitate a similar method for measuring whether or not someone is too
high to drive.

Actually creating a “weed breathalyzer” or other marijuana field sobriety
test, however, is fraught with scientific complications. According to a
commentary published in Trends in Molecular Medicine, the main psychoactive
compound in marijuana, THC, not only lingers in the body inconsistently, it
also has unpredictable cognitive effects between users.

Early medical studies implied that THC could be detected in the blood for
approximately six hours after smoking. Yet subsequent work by the article’s
co-author, Marilyn Huestis, found that behavioral changes and motor
impairments may last 6-8 hours after smoking despite near zero blood levels
after just 2.5 hours.

Even if THC blood levels could accurately judge impairment, taking blood
samples after a suspicious accident is likely to be fruitless for law
enforcement.

“[Blood levels decline by] 74 percent in the first 30 minutes, and 90 percent
by 1.4 hours,” said Huestis to Wired. “And the reason that's important is
because in the US, the average time to get blood drawn [after arrest] is
between 1.4 and 4 hours.”

So why do people continue to feel stoned long after the drug is gone from the
blood? Unlike ethanol, a hydrophilic molecule, THC doesn’t like hanging out in
the water-based blood plasma and rapidly distributes into the cells of
lipophilic fatty tissues, organs, and the brain.

“In fact, individual experiences reflect two different levels of drug ‘high,’”
the article states. “..Namely a low ‘high’ effect in the absorption phase
during cannabis inhalation, and a much higher effect later during the
distribution phase owing to the lag time for full distribution of the active
THC to the site of action – in this case, the brain.”

Furthermore, the body does not metabolize all the THC absorbed by body tissues
at the time of smoking, vaping, or eating; the excess is slowly broken down
over days to weeks. Heavy cannabis users will develop a THC tolerance due to
this chronic, low-level exposure.

Consequently, occasional users and heavy users may feel wildly different
effects from consuming the same dose of THC, preventing determination of a
universal, safe dosage cut-off for drivers. A national poll from 2017 suggests
that half of Americans are unconcerned by the prospect of stoned drivers on
the roads, but law enforcement officials in many US states have drug-impaired
driving laws that they intend to enforce. So, what tools should they use?

Huestis, who is also a senior investigator at the National Institute on Drug
Abuse, does not support a legal driving limit for marijuana. She believes
that, currently, well-trained police officers are best-suited for recognizing
signs of impairment. Meanwhile, researchers such as herself are working to
identify biomarkers that are more representative of the drug's cognitive
effects than blood THC. Ideally, these can then be measured using rapid non-
invasive tests.

Another interesting prospect: Researchers at University of California San
Diego are recruiting participants for a trial to develop an iPad-based
cannabis-specialized field sobriety test. Volunteers will randomly receive
marijuana joints at various THC concentrations, then complete driving
simulations and undergo experimental impairment assessments.

_Source: http://www.iflscience.com/health-and-medicine/why-is-it-so-hard-to-
test-for-marijuana-intoxication/ January 2018_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Drug use-various
effects,Social Affairs :

One in five Canadians between 15 and 24 years of age reports daily or almost
daily use of cannabis prior to legalization. They see it as “much safer than
alcohol and tobacco” and “not as dangerous as drunk driving.”

Author 1. Paul W Bennett

Research Associate in Education, Saint Mary’s University

_Disclosure statement

Paul W Bennett does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding
from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has
disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment._

_Partners

The Conversation UK receives funding from Hefce, Hefcw, SAGE, SFC, RCUK, The
Nuffield Foundation, The Ogden Trust, The Royal Society, The Wellcome Trust,
Esmée Fairbairn Foundation and The Alliance for Useful Evidence, as well as
sixty five university members.  
_

One of the enduring myths about marijuana is that it is “harmless” and can be
safely used by teens.

Many high school teachers would beg to disagree, and consider the legalization
of marijuana to be the biggest upcoming challenge in and around schools. And
the evidence is on their side.

As an education researcher, I have visited hundreds of schools over four
decades, conducting research into both education policy and teen mental
health. I’ve come to recognize when policy changes are going awry and bound to
have unintended effects. As Canadian provinces scramble to establish their
implementation policies before the promised marijuana legalization date of
July 2018, I believe three major education policy concerns remain unaddressed.

These are that marijuana use by children and youth is harmful to brain
development, that it impacts negatively upon academic success and that
legalization is likely to increase the number of teen users.

**‘Much safer than alcohol’  
**  
Across Canada, province after province has been announcing its marijuana
implementation policy, focusing almost exclusively on the control and
regulation of the previously illegal substance. This has provoked fierce
debates over who will reap most of the excise tax windfall and whether
cannabis will be sold in government stores or delegated to heavily regulated
private vendors.

All of the provincial pronouncements claim that their policy will be designed
to protect “public health and safety” and safeguard “children and youth” from
“harmful effects.”

Still, one in five young people between 15 and 24 years of age, according to a
recent national study, report daily or almost daily use of cannabis.

They also see marijuana as “much safer than alcohol and tobacco” and “not as
dangerous as drunk driving.”

Few either know about or seem concerned over the clear linkage between heavy
use and early-onset psychosis.

**Early-onset paranoid psychosis  
**  
So what does the evidence say? First, heavy marijuana use can, and does,
damage brain development in youth aged 13 to 18. A 2015 Canadian Centre on
Substance Abuse study confirmed the direct link between cannabis use and loss
of concentration and memory, jumbled thinking and early onset paranoid
psychosis.

One of the leaders in the medical field, Dr. Phil Tibbo, initiator of Nova
Scotia’s Weed Myths campaign targeting teens, has seen the evidence, first
hand, of what heavy use can do as director of Nova Scotia’s Early Psychosis
Program. His brain research shows that regular marijuana use leads to an
increased risk of developing psychosis and schizophrenia and effectively
explodes popular and rather blasé notions that marijuana is “harmless” to
teens and “recreational use” is simply “fun” and “healthy.”

Damaging to academic performance Second, marijuana negatively impacts
neurocognitive performance in teens and users perform more poorly in
quantitative subjects requiring precision — like mathematics and senior
science.

In 2017, Dutch researchers Olivier Marie and Ulf Zolitz found that the
academic performance of Maastricht University students increased substantially
when they were no longer legally permitted to buy cannabis. The effects were
stronger for women and low performers and academic gains were larger for
courses needing numerical or mathematical skills.

Third, legalization of marijuana is likely to increase the number of teen
users. Research from Oregon Research Institute conducted in 2017 showed that
teenagers who were already using marijuana prior to legalization increased
their frequency of use significantly afterwards. Research from New York
University, published in 2014, indicated that many high school students
normally at low risk for marijuana use (e.g., non-cigarette-smokers, religious
students, those with friends who disapprove of use) reported an intention to
use marijuana if it were legal. Medical researchers and practitioners have
warned us that legalization carries great dangers, particularly for vulnerable
and at-risk youth between 15 and 24 years of age.

**Age of restriction**

Marijuana legalization policy across Canada is a top-down federal initiative
driven largely by changing public attitudes and conditioned by the current
realities of the widespread use of marijuana, purchased though illicit means.

Setting the age of restriction, guided by the proposed federal policy
framework, has turned out to be an exercise in “compromise” rather than one
focused on heeding the advice of leading medical experts and the Canadian
Medical Association (CMA). In a 2016 submission to the government, the CMA
argued that 25 would be the ideal age for legal access to marijuana, as the
brain is still developing until then, but that a lower minimum age of 21
should be considered — to discourage children from purchasing marijuana from
organized crime groups.

The report argued that: “Marijuana use is linked to several adverse health
outcomes, including addiction, cardiovascular and pulmonary effects (e.g.,
chronic bronchitis), mental illness, and other problems, including cognitive
impairment and reduced educational attainment. There seems to be an increased
risk of chronic psychosis disorders, including schizophrenia, in persons with
a predisposition to such disorders.” In fact, the minimum age for purchasing
and possessing marijuana is going to be age 18 in Alberta and Quebec, and 19
in most other provinces. Getting it “out of high schools” was a critical
factor in bumping it up to age 19 in most provinces.

Every Canadian province is complying with the federal legislation, but — in
our federal system – it’s “customized” for each jurisdiction.

The Canadian Western provinces — Alberta, British Columbia and Saskatchewan
—have opted for regulating private retail stores, while Ontario and the
Maritime provinces (Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and P.E.I.) are expanding their
liquor control commissions to accommodate retail sales of cannabis. High
school teachers, as of September 2018, may be battling a spike in marijuana
use and greater peer pressure to smoke pot on the mistaken assumption that it
is “harmless” at any age.

**Clamping down in schools**

For high school principals and staff, this will be a real test.

By September 2018, the old line of defence that using marijuana is illegal
will have disappeared. Recreational marijuana will be more socially
acceptable. The cannabis industry will be openly marketing its products. High
school students who drive to school will likely get caught under new laws
prohibiting motor vehicle use while impaired by drugs or alcohol. Fewer
students are likely to abstain when it is perfectly legal to smoke pot when
you reach university, college or the workplace. We have utterly failed, so
far, in getting through to the current generation of teens, so a much more
robust approach is in order.

“Be firm at the beginning” is the most common sage advice given to beginner
teachers. Clamping down on teen marijuana use during and after school hours
will require clarity and firm resolve in the year ahead — and the support of
engaged and responsible parents.

Legalization of recreational marijuana is bound to complicate matters for
Canadian high schools everywhere. Busting the “Weed Myths” should not be left
to doctors and health practitioners. Pursuing research-based, evidence-
informed policy and practice means getting behind those on the front lines of
high school education.

_Source: https://theconversation.com/marijuana-at-school-loss-of-
concentration-risk-of-psychosis-90374 January 25th 2018_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Education,Health :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/a-5.jpg)

The percentage of drivers testing positive for marijuana or other illegal
drugs is increasing, according to a new report. In 2013 and 2014, 15.1 percent
of drivers tested positive for drugs, up from 12.4 percent in 2007.

The findings come from the Governors Highway Safety Association. The group
found 38 percent of people who died in auto accidents in 2013 and were tested
had detectable levels of potentially impairing drugs – both legal and illegal
– in their system. That percentage is almost the same as those testing
positive for alcohol, CNN reports.

The most common drugs detected were marijuana (34.7 percent) and amphetamines
(9.7 percent), which includes nasal decongestants and drugs to treat attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder.

“Alcohol-impaired driving is still a big deal, but we have paid more attention
to it than to drug-impaired driving and it’s time to pay more attention to
drug-impaired driving,” said report author James Hedlund. He notes drunk
driving has been decreasing as drugged driving increases.

He noted one reason for the rise in drugged driving could be that “marijuana
use is increasing, driven in parts by the states that legalized marijuana for
medicinal and recreational use, and the second is that prescription painkiller
use has gone up substantially.”

The report found 6.9 percent of people killed in auto accidents had
hydrocodone in their system, while 3.6 percent had detectable levels of
oxycodone, 4.5 percent had benzodiazepines (found in anti-anxiety and anti-
depression drugs), and 4.5 percent had cocaine.

“Alcohol is the deadliest drug we have by practically any metric…and alcohol
in combination with [marijuana] is particularly malignant,” Dr. Gary
Reisfield, professor of psychiatry at the University of Florida, told CNN.

The report recommends that states train law enforcement officers to recognize
the physical and behavioral signs associated with different substances.

Source: www.drugfree.org 1st October 2015

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drugs and Accidents,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts :

The Food and Drug Administration has issued warning letters to “high CBD” hemp
oil vendors, stating that their products are unapproved drugs that often don’t
contain any active ingredient.

A list of firms that were issued warning letters for marketing “unapproved
drugs for the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of
diseases” was posted on the FDA’s website to warn consumers about these mostly
hemp-derived products. Capsules, dog treats, e-liquids and oils all claiming
to have CBD tested either negative or very low for cannabinoids.

Many of these companies claim on their websites that their products are
completely legal because they are made from hemp and don’t have any
psychoactive properties. The truth is they exist in a legal vacuum as long as
they don’t market their products as drugs, which is why the FDA has stepped
in.

The Industrial Hemp Farming Act of 2013 amended the Controlled Substances Act
(CSA) to exclude industrial hemp from the definition of “marijuana,” loosening
the restrictions on strains of Cannabis sativa that are very low in THC. This
has facilitated cultivation of hemp in the U.S., but a great deal of hemp
still gets imported (1,138 metric tons in 2011) everyday from China, Canada
and the EU. Before 2013, essentially all the hemp used for its fiber and seed
was imported and regulated by the DEA. Since the Marijuana Tax of 1937, it has
been legal to cultivate hemp with a DEA license, but the tight restrictions
meant almost no one did it.

Cannabis sativa that is low in THC may still contain CBD, so whole-plant
extracts of hemp grown for industrial purposes could make a product semi-rich
in CBD, if done correctly. A cheap extraction process like steam distillation
done on a sample of plant material that is mostly stalks and leaves might
extract some CBD, but it can also extract unsafe pesticides and toxins
absorbed from the soil.

Cannabis thrives in toxic soils and accumulates heavy metals, so the soils it
grows in needs to be carefully selected and tested for pollutants. If grown in
another country, especially one with lax environmental regulations, hemp
products might be highly contaminated.

Source: http://www.hightimes.com/ 7th March 2015

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/a-3.jpg)

**PHOENIX (December 18) --** ****New state data from the U.S. Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration shows that Colorado now leads the
nation in marijuana use across all age levels and, most disturbingly, in the
12-17 and 18-25 age categories. Marijuana legalization advocates have
persistently claimed that marijuana use will not rise with legalization, and
that legalization will have little bearing on under-age use. This latest data
from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services proves otherwise.

“Sadly for Colorado’s youth, the data now substantiates the theory that
increased availability leads to increased use -- despite being assured the
contrary by legalization advocates. Arizonans should pay close attention,"
said Seth Leibsohn, chair of Arizonans for Responsible Drug Policy. "In
Colorado, teen marijuana use has not only increased since legalization, it is
now the highest in the nation -- more than 73 percent higher than the national
average. For those who recommended a 'wait-and-see' approach based on
Colorado's experience, the results are in and they are not good. It should be
crystal clear, in Arizona and any other state considering legalizing
marijuana, that going down the same path would be devastating to our youth and
our communities."

“According to this data, Colorado is not only number one for marijuana use but
also ranks near the top in the nation in its use of other illicit drugs," said
Sheila Polk, vice chair of Arizonans for Responsible Drug Policy. "Serious
peer-reviewed science warns us that marijuana does significant harm to the
developing adolescent brain, causes impaired memory and judgment, lowers IQ
and increases school drop-out rates. It is unconscionable to unleash this
harmful drug on Arizona’s youth.”

###

**About Arizonans for Responsible Drug Policy**

The Arizonans for Responsible Drug Policy PAC was formed to actively oppose
any initiative that would legalize the recreational use of the drug marijuana
in the state of Arizona. Visit www.arizonansforresponsibledrugpolicy.org for
more information.

Source: Press Release 18th Dec 2015 melissa@axiompublicaffairs.com

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA,Youth :

**A lack of guidance from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency frustrated
Colorado 's efforts to decide how to handle pesticides and pot.**

State regulators have known since 2012 that marijuana was grown with
potentially dangerous pesticides, but pressure from the industry and lack of
guidance from federal authorities delayed their efforts to enact regulations,
and they ultimately landed on a less restrictive approach than originally
envisioned.

Three years of e-mails and records obtained by The Denver Post and dozens of
interviews show state regulators struggled with the issue while the cannabis
industry protested that proposed limits on pesticides would leave their
valuable crops vulnerable to devastating disease.

Last year, as the state was preparing a list of allowable substances that
would have restricted pesticides on marijuana to the least toxic chemicals,
Colorado Department of Agriculture officials stopped the process under
pressure from the industry, The Post found.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/a-2.jpg)

_DENVER, CO - AUGUST 19: Lucas Targos the head grower at L'Eagle sprays the
marijuana plants in their cultivation room on Wednesday August 19, 2015. They
spray with neem oil which helps combat the spider mites and mildew. He sprays
the plants every 7-10 days. This was the last spraying before they go into the
flowering stage. Targos was an organic food farmer before working with
marijuana. (Photo by Cyrus McCrimmon/The Denver Post )_

"This list has been circulated among marijuana producers and has been met with
considerable opposition because of its restrictive nature," wrote Mitch
Yergert, the CDA's plant industry director, shortly after the April 2014
decision. "There is an inherent conflict with the marijuana growers' desire to
use pesticides other than those" that are least restrictive.

Another year passed before regulators publicly released a draft list of
pesticides allowed on marijuana plants — a broader, less restrictive list than
initially proposed. That only occurred after the city of Denver began
quarantining plants over concerns that pesticides posed a health hazard.

The marijuana industry "was the biggest obstacle we had" in devising any
effective pesticide regulation, said former Colorado agriculture commissioner
John Salazar.

"We were caught between a rock and a hard spot," he said. "Anything we wanted
to allow simply was not enough for that industry."

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, which regulates pesticides, offered
the state little advice about what to do because marijuana is an illegal crop
under federal law.

"We tried to work with the EPA, to figure out what to do, but we got nothing,"
Salazar said.

With little federal guidance and no science to know which pesticides might be
safe for consumers, the department made pesticide inspections a low priority,
records show.

"Our current policy is to investigate complaints related to MJ (marijuana),
otherwise focus on higher priorities," Laura Quakenbush, the CDA's pesticide
registration coordinator, wrote to a colleague in a December 2012 e-mail.

Critics say the state bowed to industry's influence.

"Colorado has given the marijuana industry way too much power, way too much
control over the political process," said Kevin Sabet, co-founder of Smart
Approaches to Marijuana, a group that opposed legalizing marijuana.

"Regulators are trusting the industry and saying, 'Show us how to regulate
you.' They're putting their trust in the industry," said Samantha Walsh, a
lobbyist who has represented marijuana-testing labs and the unions
representing workers at cannabis cultivation facilities.

"There's been foot-dragging in much of the industry," she said. "It's a
failure of the government to step in and institute these practices."

State officials say it was important to take into account industry concerns.

"CDA felt there was a need to further explore all possibilities of how best to
regulate and identify what pesticides could be legally used on marijuana.
During this process, we believe we have identified a better way forward than
what we originally proposed in April of 2014," Yergert told The Post.

The agency is just now preparing for regular inspections of marijuana growers
using pesticides, Yergert said, something it already does for other commercial
users such as crop-dusting businesses. In July, the CDA began visiting
marijuana businesses for "compliance assistance" that focuses on education and
training.

And last week, Yergert said, the agency began a new rule-making process to
formalize the list of pesticides growers can use.

**Heavy-hitting pesticides**

Marijuana and pesticides hit CDA's radar in 2012 when a former employee of the
Kine Mine, then a medical marijuana dispensary in Idaho Springs, complained to
the state of not being given protective clothing to spray growing plants.

CDA inspectors found two heavy-hitting pesticides — Floramite and Avid — were
used on dozens of cannabis plants.

The CDA cited the business with violating a pesticide's label restrictions.
The state was unable to do more because it had not yet determined which
pesticides could and could not be used on cannabis in Colorado.

As commercial grow operations spread after recreational pot sale became legal
in 2014, complaints continued to flow. Sales of recreational and medical
marijuana reached nearly $700 million last year and topped $540 million
through July. There are 600 pot-growing licenses in Denver alone.

"I think everyone thought marijuana growers were a bunch of organic growers
who would never use pesticides on pot, but that's definitely not the case,"
said Mowgli Holmes, a molecular geneticist at Phylos Bioscience and board
member of the Cannabis Safety Institute in Oregon. "A lot of this pesticide
use is new and driven by commercial pressures."

When large numbers of cannabis plants are grown indoors and in close
proximity, they are vulnerable to mites and powdery mildews, which can destroy
a crop quickly.

To date, there have been 24 inquiries into pesticide complaints involving
marijuana businesses, CDA officials said.

Another early complaint came in 2012 when a consumer said a popular cannabis
leaf wash for killing bugs claimed to be "99.9999%" water that worked because
of an ionic charge.

A state lab found it actually contained high levels of "pyrethrin, a plant-
based insecticide that requires EPA registration," wrote Quakenbush, the CDA's
pesticide registration coordinator.

Officials determined that because the product label did not say that it
contained a pesticide, they lacked authority over its use, according to
e-mails. The state referred the mislabelling problem to the EPA for
investigation, and the state did not look further into the issue.

But the case led state inspectors to send several e-mails to the EPA seeking
guidance on how to handle the emerging pesticide problem. Officials also asked
whether pesticides allowed on tobacco would suffice. The state received no
response, according to e-mails the state provided.

The federal agency responded in an e-mail to The Post that "over the past
several years, the U.S. EPA has had interactions with representatives from the
Colorado Department of Agriculture on this issue" but provided no details.

**Health impact**

Colorado initially wanted to do as New Hampshire did, allowing only the least
harmful pesticides to be used in marijuana cultivation.

Those included neem, cinnamon and peppermint oils — products so nontoxic that
federal registration is not required and no tolerance level is necessary for
their residues.

By restricting cannabis growers to those products, Colorado could adapt its
rules over time as more information became known about the health impact of
chemical residues from pesticides.

Before the sale of recreational pot became legal in 2014, "a majority in the
industry's underground didn't have very sophisticated practices and were using
lots of toxic things they shouldn't have on a regular basis," said Devin
Liles, who runs The Farm cultivation facility in Boulder.

In April 2014, the CDA laid out the issue: "For food crops, a tolerance (of
pesticide residues) must be established. No tolerances have been established
for marijuana because they are not recognized as a legal 'agricultural crop.'
"

Put simply, many pesticides that the marijuana industry was already using —
some of them allowed by the EPA on food crops — were to be off the table.

Small, informal working group meetings were held in March and April. Liles
said other members of a group on which he participated immediately were
worried.

"Some operations were really concerned because what they were using was now on
the chopping block," he said, "and they didn't know if it would become more
restrictive later."

The proposed rule was published, and a meeting during which stakeholders could
speak was scheduled for that May.

"The Colorado Department of Agriculture does not recommend the use of any
pesticide not specifically tested, labeled and assigned a set tolerance for
use on marijuana because the health effects on consumers are unknown," the
proposed rule said.

Then in late April 2014, soon after CDA issued the proposed rule — and
following two meetings where officials heard the industry's reaction — the
agency pulled the plug on its rule-making process.

"The termination will allow the agency more time to meet with the
representative group of stakeholders and further review the impacts of the
proposed rule," according to the portion of the Colorado secretary of state's
website where the hearings are tracked.

"We continued to have conversations without having any resolution," Ron Carle
ton, CDA's former deputy commissioner, said in an interview. "The industry was
of the opinion they needed the same kind of access to pesticides that other
growers were using, that this low-level stuff wouldn't do it."

CDA and the marijuana industry continued to wrangle. That June, CDA shared
copies of an early, broadened draft list of approved pesticides with at least
one industry group.

"The list never meant much because it was always in draft form, never
formalized or finalized, and rule-making never occurred," Michael Elliott,
executive director of the Marijuana Industry Group, told The Post in an
e-mail.

At a CDA meeting with businesses in December, Elliott said growers were
frustrated because they did not believe the state was giving them the tools
necessary to fight the problems they faced.

"We need clean product, and we have a huge list of things to test for and
failure could literally shut down a business," he said.

Meanwhile, CDA continued its policy of not checking to see what pesticides
marijuana growers were using unless someone complained.

"To date, CDA has not actively sought to inspect and enforce the provisions of
the (Colorado) Pesticide Applicator's Act on marijuana producers," Yergert,
CDA's plant industry director, wrote in a memo for a meeting in December. The
Pesticide Applicator's Act is the state's authority to enforce EPA pesticide
laws.

The delays had Yergert worried that CDA's inaction could be problematic.

"The last thing that I want is somebody to get sick and they say it was due to
pesticide use" and that the state knew about it, he said at the December
meeting with industry representatives. "None of us wants to be in front of
that train."

**Turning up the heat**

While state regulators and the industry debated how pesticides should be
regulated, Denver was about to turn up the heat.

Denver firefighters conducting routine safety inspections of marijuana
growhouses in early 2014 discovered some growers were burning sulphur as a
fumigant to kill mites. Firefighters say that's a fire hazard.

Once stopped from using the dangerous substance, the growers turned to
pesticides, and firefighters noticed cabinets full of odd-sounding chemicals.

"They will do something to protect these million-dollars worth of plants,"
said Lt. Tom Pastorius. "We stopped one issue with the sulphur. But that just
led to a whole different issue."

The city's environmental health department responded by quarantining about
100,000 plants in March after application logs showed pesticides they knew
little about. City health officials met with CDA and learned of the agency's
draft list of pesticides it said were OK to use.

The meeting prompted the state to release the list publicly. It was the first
time growers say they were fully aware of what they could and could not use.

"At that time, we didn't want to put the list out," said John Scott, CDA's
pesticide program manager. "We were still working on the rule itself."

But once Denver had quarantined the plants, "we felt like it couldn't wait,"
Scott said.

Pesticides on the list have labels so broadly written that the state
determined their use on marijuana is permissible. However, CDA also says it
does not recommend their use because no one knows whether the pesticides are
safe when used on marijuana.

Three of the growers whose plants were quarantined fought back in court, suing
the city for allegedly overextending its authority. Pesticides, the businesses
argued, were the purview of CDA, not the city.

The industry also turned to the Colorado legislature and had a last-minute
amendment designed to stop Denver's enforcement added to a bill about
marijuana tax revenues, according to documents and interviews.

It's not the only example of marijuana growers looking toward the Capitol for
help. Also during the last session, several legislators tried but failed to
pass a law that would have removed pesticides entirely from the list of
ingredients on marijuana product packages.

The enforcement amendment, which ensured that pesticide oversight of marijuana
growers would stay with the state, was tacked on from the Senate floor on the
day before it adjourned.

"The worry was that communities could basically ban the use of some pesticides
based on emotional responses rather than factual ones," said Sen. Jerry
Sonnenberg, R-Sterling, the amendment's sponsor. "It was to codify that the
state was in charge, not Denver, not any city."

The impetus for his amendment, Sonnenberg said, came primarily from
conversations with three lobbyists who records show are with the Marijuana
Industry Group.

Sonnenberg's re-election committee had accepted about $1,000 in contributions
from the three since 2010, according to state campaign finance records. In
that time, he's accepted about $1,800 from all marijuana-related contributors,
records show. All contributions Sonnenberg received since 2010 totaled
$49,900, according to state filings.

More broadly, the industry has spent at least $421,000 on lobbying on various
cannabis-related issues this year, state reports show. In contrast, utility
giant Xcel Energy has spent $230,640, according to the company. The city
eventually won in court, but the amendment passed as well. Subsequent
enforcement actions by Denver occurred at the retail level, far from where
plants are actually covered in pesticides and where CDA's pesticide authority
extended.

The city declined to comment on the legislature's action.

"What was most frustrating about what happened in Denver is that the city went
from not participating in the statewide conversation and doing absolutely
nothing to placing holds on businesses," Elliott at MIG said in an interview.
"We would have appreciated having them involved in the state process and
perhaps having worked out more local solutions instead of coming down quickly
with holds."

Elliott paused, then offered: "That said, I understand why they reacted the
way they did. They identified a safety issue and took action. Very little has
been going on on this issue on a statewide level."

Source: **_The Denver Post_** _4 th Oct. 2015_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,USA :

Comments below from David Evans Esq., a lawyer and special adviser to the Drug
Free America Foundation, re the suggestion that marijuana could assist in
treating opiate addiction.

WHAT ARE THE PHYSICAL AND BEHAVIORAL ADVERSE EFFECTS OF USING “MEDICAL”
MARIJUANA WHILE IN OPIATE TREATMENT?

Memory defect (short and long term) - how are they to remember compliance
issues and new problem solving? Masks other mental health issues – anxiety,
PTSD, Bipolar

Marijuana use impacts the brain, creates a delay in learning skills to NOT
have substance use in life.

In order for change to occur, person must acknowledge loss of control - how
can someone do this when control is still lost with marijuana?

Changes in coordination, mood swings, memory/learning problems

Marijuana use deters the return to normal brain functioning and the continued
drive for more substances and stimuli in the pleasure seeking area of the
brain.

Marijuana use is A-motivational – knocks out drive and ambition

Continued use maintains Arrested Development – low emotional maturity – the
maturity level is stumped when start using substances

Recovery – means not using drugs

THC suppresses neurons in information processing system of the hippocampus,
the part of the brain that is crucial for learning memory and integration of
sensory experiences with emotions and motivations. Learned behaviors, which
depend on the hippocampus, deteriorate after chronic exposure

· Because marijuana use impacts learning a person falls behind in accumulating
intellectual, job, or social skills. This can directly translate to need for
more treatment both with intensity and length

Users have trouble sustaining and shifting their attention in and registering,
organizing and using information.

Increase risk of motor vehicle/work accidents

For more detailed information log on to a paper in Support of the UN Drug
Conventions: The Arguments Against Illicit Drug Legalisation and Harm
Reduction also by David Evans.

_Source:
https://nationalallianceformarijuanaprevention.files.wordpress.com/2011/12/2009-un-
drug-conventions-the-argument-against-legaliztion.pdf_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Treatment and Addiction :

Public Health and Safety Communities Applaud Move

DOJ Decision Will Dry Up Money To Marijuana Industry

(January 4, 2018 - Alexandria, VA) - The Department of Justice will announce
today it will rescind lax marijuana policy guidance to US Attorneys (the so-
called "Cole Memo") and instead allow US Attorneys to exercise discretion in
going after marijuana cases. The new memo will not call for arresting users or
others with low-level involvement in marijuana, but instead makes investing in
the marijuana industry a risky move.

"This is a good day for public health. The days of safe harbor for multi-
million dollar pot investments are over," said Kevin A. Sabet, a former Obama
Administration drug policy adviser who is now head of the anti-legalization
group Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM). "DOJ's move will slow down the rise
of Big Marijuana and stop the massive infusion of money going to fund pot
candies, cookies, ice creams, and other kid-friendly pot edibles. Investor,
banker, funder beware."

The Cole Memo and its compliance was blasted by the nonpartisan Government
Accountability Office (GAO) in a 2016 report. The lead GAO author stated that
DOJ "has not documented its plan for monitoring the effects of the state
marijuana legalization." A recent poll also found that when voters had more
choices than just legalization or prohibition, support for legalization fell
by 30%. Most voters were comfortable with laws removing criminal penalties for
use but not legalizing sales, which the Cole Memo permitted.

"The Cole Memo had been waived around by money-hungry pot executives for
years, searching for legitimacy among investors and banks," remarked former
Congressman Patrick J. Kennedy, a SAM Honorary Advisor. "It's time we put
public health over profits. This is a sensible move that now must be followed
up with action so we can avoid a repeat of the nightmare of Big Tobacco."

"Marijuana, along with alcohol and tobacco, are the three drugs we need to
stop our youth from trying," said Dr. Robert DuPont, the first Director of the
National Institute on Drug Abuse and second White House drug czar. "DOJ is
doing the right thing by putting a stop to this wink and nod policy of
allowing marijuana legalization."

Corinne Gasper, who lost her daughter Jennifer to a driver high on marijuana,
stated, "All too often, marijuana has been seen as benign. An industry not
unlike Big Tobacco has downplayed its harms, aided by laws allowing officials
to look the other way. For the sake of so many families, I hope those days are
now over."

SAM, a non-profit organization founded by a former member of Congress and a
former Obama Administration drug policy advisor, applauded the news. SAM's
Science Advisory board consists of more than a dozen top researchers in the
field of marijuana policy ranging from institutions such as Harvard and Johns
Hopkins.

Dr. Stuart Gitlow, the former President of the American Society of Addiction
Medicine, stated, "This is the right move by DOJ. To protect public health, we
must choke the large amounts of funding spent by Big Marijuana to hook kids on
highly potent THC products."

Justin Luke Riley, the Denver-based leader of the Marijuana Accountability
Coalition stated, "Recovery from addiction is so much harder when you are
bombarded with the kind of pot commercialization we see here in Colorado. DOJ
should be applauded for trying to put a stop to the shameless promotion and
advertising that is killing our community."

Ron Brooks, the former head of the National Narcotics Officers Association
Coalition, stated, "This is the kind of leadership that will save lives. For
too long law enforcement has been handcuffed by vague and unenforced policy
guidance."

Will Jones, a DC-resident who is fighting for social justice in minority
communities commented, "Since the Cole Memo was released, the pot industry has
relentlessly opened more pot shops in poorer, communities of color. Arrests
are even higher now in many jurisdictions than before legalization."

"Focusing enforcement resources on incarcerating low-level, nonviolent
offenders will always be wrong and counterproductive," said Kevin Sabet,
President of SAM. "But there is an urgent need for Federal officials to
reassert targeted control over an exploding industry that is undermining
public health and safety in our communities.

This is a major blow to an industry that is corrupting our politics and lying
to voters in a steadfast pursuit to put profit over public health and safety.
Today's policy change will undoubtedly extend a chilling effect we have seen
on marijuana legalization initiatives across the nation this year, and -
hopefully - encourage lawmakers to stop and look at what science tells us
about the unintended consequences of legal marijuana.

Like the tobacco industry before it, well-heeled lobbyists from the marijuana
industry have been touting marijuana commercialization as the panacea for
every contemporary challenge we face in America, but the truth is, the health
and safety costs caused by the commercialization of cannabis are outweighing
any tax revenues collected."

_Source: Press Release from SAM: info@learnaboutsam.org. 4th January 2018_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Legal Sector :

There’s no future for salmon in Northern California’s Emerald Triangle.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/a-1.jpg)

On California’s northern coast are three counties that marijuana _aficionados_
call the Emerald Triangle. In their view, the growers there have perfected a
strain of _cannabis_ that has high potency and consistently high quality.
Result: There are many growers, most tending their crops in remote corners of
these mountainous, heavily wooded counties.

This produces serious environmental damage. In Humboldt County where the
largest amount of Emerald Triangle marijuana is grown, the sheriff’s office
conducted an aerial survey and counted 4,000 visible outdoor grows, nearly all
of them illegal. (California was the first of 22 states to permit medical use
of marijuana, so some grows were established to serve users who have permit
cards.)

The illegal grows are usually carved out of forest land (often national
forests or acreage owned by timber companies). Typically, the growers clear-
cut the trees on the land they want to use, then bulldoze it to their
specifications. Next, they divert a nearby stream to provide the one to six
gallons required daily by each plant. They then fertilize the plants, causing
runoff. This is followed by a generous dose of rat poison.

The upshot: The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service a week ago declared that stream
diversion by marijuana plantations was robbing the rivers that the streams
feed of enough cool water for Coho salmon to breed, thus threatening their
survival. California’s north coast is big salmon country, for both sport and
commercial fishing. The declaration earned banner headlines in the local
press.

This week the USFWS said that it was considering seeking a “Threatened” status
for the fisher, a native cousin to the weasel. Many fishers have been dying
after ingesting the rat poison put out by marijuana planters.

Disruption of the soil for planting the crop and for cutting roads to some of
the remote locations causes runoff that silts the area’s rivers—another
preventable threat to the already endangered native salmon and steelhead.

In the area, a multi-agency task force has raided, on average, one marijuana
plantation a week since January 2013. The biggest one, in August this year,
yielded 10,000 plants; most have had several hundred. The plants are
destroyed. The “harvest” often yields cash, weapons, and, sometimes other
drugs (although multi-drug hauls tend to found in in-town dealer houses).

In addition to the cost of the raids, “grows” on public land require public
resources to clean up and restore the affected area.

Environmentalists in the three counties are quick to run to the battlements
and declare all-out war any time the state Transportation Department sets out
to widen a highway. With the regular pot plantation raids, however, they are
as silent as mice. Occasionally, one will opine in an interview that the
problem would go away if marijuana were made legal. This outcome seems
unlikely. Large companies might buy up some tracts for growing (along with
getting the necessary permits and paying taxes); however, not every small
grower will be able to compete; hence, the likelihood they would feed a black
market, selling to heavy users at below-market prices. Thus, one problem would
yield to another.

Source: American spectator 9th October 2014  
www.drugwatch.org

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Social Affairs :

_Summary:_

_Several studies have demonstrated that the primary active constituent of
cannabis, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, induces transient psychosis-like
effects in healthy subjects similar to those observed in schizophrenia.
However, the mechanisms underlying these effects are not clear. A new study
shows that this active ingredient increases random neural activity, termed
neural noise, in the brains of healthy human subjects. The findings suggest
that increased neural noise may play a role in the psychosis-like effects of
cannabis._

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/a.jpg)

Cannabis. Credit: © olyas8 / Fotolia

Several studies have demonstrated that the primary active constituent of
cannabis, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (∆9-THC), induces transient psychosis-
like effects in healthy subjects similar to those observed in schizophrenia.
However, the mechanisms underlying these effects are not clear.

A new study, published in the journal _Biological Psychiatry,_ reports that
∆9-THC increases random neural activity, termed neural noise, in the brains of
healthy human subjects. The findings suggest that increased neural noise may
play a role in the psychosis-like effects of cannabis.

"At doses roughly equivalent to half or a single joint, ∆9-THC produced
psychosis-like effects and increased neural noise in humans," explained senior
author Dr. Deepak Cyril D'Souza, a Professor of Psychiatry at Yale School of
Medicine.

"The dose-dependent and strong positive relationship between these two
findings suggest that the psychosis-like effects of cannabis may be related to
neural noise which disrupts the brain's normal information processing," added
first author Dr. Jose Cortes-Briones, a Postdoctoral Associate in Psychiatry
at Yale School of Medicine.

The investigators studied the effects of ∆9-THC on electrical brain activity
in 24 human subjects who participated in a three-day study during which they
received two doses of intravenous ∆9-THC or placebo in a double-blind,
randomized, cross-over, and counterbalanced design.

If confirmed, the link between neural noise and psychosis could shed light on
the biology of some of the symptoms associated with schizophrenia.

"This interesting study suggests a commonality between the effects on the
brain of the major active ingredient in marijuana and symptoms of
schizophrenia," stated Dr. John Krystal, Editor of Biological Psychiatry. "The
impairment of cortical function by ∆9-THC could underlie some of the cognitive
effects of marijuana. Not only does this finding aid our understanding of the
processes underlying psychosis, it underscores an important concern in the
debate surrounding medical and legalized access to marijuana."

Source: http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015 3 Dec.2015

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana :

Abstract

* * *

To present a summary of current scientific evidence about the cannabinoid,
cannabidiol (CBD) with regard to its relevance to epilepsy and other selected
neuropsychiatric disorders. We summarize the presentations from a conference
in which invited participants reviewed relevant aspects of the physiology,
mechanisms of action, pharmacology, and data from studies with animal models
and human subjects. Cannabis has been used to treat disease since ancient
times. Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) is the major psychoactive ingredient
and CBD is the major non-psychoactive ingredient in cannabis. Cannabis and
Δ9-THC are anticonvulsant in most animal models but can be proconvulsant in
some healthy animals.

The psychotropic effects of Δ9-THC limit tolerability. CBD is anticonvulsant
in many acute animal models, but there are limited data in chronic models. The
antiepileptic mechanisms of CBD are not known, but may include effects on the
equilibrative nucleoside transporter; the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor
GPR55; the transient receptor potential of vanilloid type-1 channel; the
5-HT1a receptor; and the α3 and α1 glycine receptors. CBD has neuroprotective
and anti-inflammatory effects, and it appears to be well tolerated in humans,
but small and methodologically limited studies of CBD in human epilepsy have
been inconclusive.

More recent anecdotal reports of high-ratio CBD:Δ9-THC medical marijuana have
claimed efficacy, but studies were not controlled. CBD bears investigation in
epilepsy and other neuropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety,
schizophrenia, addiction, and neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy.
However, we lack data from well-powered double-blind randomized, controlled
studies on the efficacy of pure CBD for any disorder. Initial dose-
tolerability and double-blind randomized, controlled studies focusing on
target intractable epilepsy populations such as patients with Dravet and
Lennox-Gastaut syndromes are being planned. Trials in other treatment-
resistant epilepsies may also be warranted.

Source: **Epilepsia** **Volume 55** , **Issue 6** , **pages 791–802** , **June
2014**

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine :

The truth is it can indeed mean trouble, especially for young people.

These days, it’s become fairly square to criticize marijuana and its rush
toward legalization. Twenty-three states have condoned the drug in some form,
with four permitting recreational use, and Massachusetts is set to vote on
permitting it next year. The proposed federal CARERS Act of 2015 would let
states legalize medical marijuana without federal interference and demote pot
from a Schedule I drug — one with high abuse potential — to Schedule II. The
path toward nationwide decriminalization is looking unobstructed.

But underscoring the incredible momentum to legalize marijuana is the
misconception that the drug can’t hurt anybody. It can, especially young
people.

The myth that marijuana is not habit-forming is constantly challenged by
physicians. “There’s no question at all that marijuana is addictive,” Dr.
Sharon Levy tells me. She is the director of the Adolescent Substance Abuse
Program at Boston Children’s Hospital, one of a few programs designed to pre-
emptively identify substance use problems in teens. At least 1 in 11 young
adults who begin smoking will develop an addiction to marijuana, even more
among those who use the more potent products that are entering the market.

Levy speaks of an 18-year-old patient who had started smoking marijuana
several times a day in 10th grade, dropped out of high school, and been
stealing money from her parents. “She and her family were at their wits’ end
trying to find appropriate treatment in a health care system that doesn’t
consider addiction to marijuana a serious problem,” Levy says. “We are simply
not prepared for the fallout of marijuana legalization.”

Such perspectives have been obfuscated by those who might gain from
legalization. “People strongly defend marijuana because they don’t want
legalization to be derailed,” says Jodi Gilman, an assistant professor at
Harvard Medical School with the Center for Addiction Medicine.

An insistence on the banality of the drug is especially dangerous among
younger smokers, a population with an epidemic level of pot use. According to
the most recent National Survey on Drug Use and Health, the use of tobacco and
alcohol among 12-to-17-year-olds has fallen in the past year, but habitual use
of marijuana among those 12 and up is increasing. “If you go into a high
school and ask the classroom, ‘Are cigarettes harmful? Is alcohol harmful?’
every kid raises their hands,” Gilman says. “But if I ask, ‘Is marijuana
harmful?’ not a hand goes up.”

To bring balance to a narrative driven by pro-legalization campaigns, Gilman
and others are interested in leveraging data to show pot’s real effects. Last
year, Gilman published research on 18-to-25-year-olds that showed differences
in the brain’s reward system between users and non-users. (“I got a lot of
hate mail after that,” Gilman says.) And data supporting the hazards keep
accumulating. Recently Gilman found that in a group of college students,
smokers had impaired working memory even when not acutely high.

Physician concern for marijuana’s acceptance isn’t because doctors are a
stodgy bunch — their scepticism is rooted in science and in history. In the
1950s, nearly half of Americans smoked tobacco, a level of adoption that
rendered its health hazards invisible. Meanwhile, the corporate forces that
drove cigarette smoking to its ascendancy actively subverted those that
governed public health.

While marijuana has not been definitively shown to cause cancer or heart
disease, its harmful cognitive and psychological effects will take time to
capture in studies. The underlying biochemistry at work suggests deeply
pathologic consequences. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in marijuana attaches to
receptors in the brain that subtly modulate systems ordinarily involved in
healthy behaviors like eating, learning, and forming relationships. But THC —
which has been increasing in potency in legal products being sold in places
like Colorado — throws the finely tuned system off balance.

“Smoking pot turns the volume on this system way, way up,” says Jonathan Long,
a research fellow at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.

Each hit of THC rewires the function of this critical cognitive system: Early
evidence in mice has shown that repeated exposure to THC causes these
receptors to disappear altogether, blunting the natural response to positive
behaviors and requiring higher doses to achieve the same effect. Marijuana
exploits essential pathways we’ve evolved to retrieve a memory, to delicately
regulate our metabolism, and to derive happiness from everyday life.

Medical science at its best operates independently of forces that drive the
market and its associated politics. It was science that eventually curtailed
the power of Big Tobacco and prevented nearly 800,000 cancer deaths in the
United States between 1975 and 2000. As marijuana marches toward the same
legal status as cigarettes, its potential hazards will require equal attention
by science. The argument here isn’t whether marijuana should be legal. There
are champions on either side of that debate. Instead, should the drug become
widely available, it’s to our detriment to blindly consider marijuana’s
legalization a victory worthy of celebration. We must be cautious when
societal shifts can affect health, especially among our most vulnerable
populations.

Source: http://www.bostonglobe.com/magazine/2015/10/08/can-please-stop-
pretending-marijuana-harmless/MneQebFPWg79ifTAXc1PkM/story.html

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA :

**_The only thing green about that bud is its chlorophyll._**

_—By_ **_Josh Harkinson_** _,_ **_Brett Brownell_** _, and_ **_Julia Lurie_**

| March/April 2014 Issue _of Mother Jones_

You thought your pot came from environmentally conscious hippies? Think again.
The way marijuana is grown in America, it turns out, is anything but
sustainable and organic. Check out these mind-blowing stats, and while you're
at it, read Josh Harkinson's feature story, "The Landscape-Scarring, Energy-
Sucking, Wildlife-Killing Reality of Pot Farming."

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/a.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/b.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/c.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/d.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/e.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/f.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/g.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/h.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/i.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/j.png)
![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/k.png)

_Sources:_ _Jon Gettman (2006)_ _, US Forest Service (California outdoor grow
stats include small portions of Oregon and Nevada),_ _Office of National Drug
Control Policy_ _, SF Public Utilities Commission,_ _Evan Mills (2012)_ _._

UPDATE: Beau Kilmer of the RAND Drug Policy Research Center argues that the
government estimates of domestic marijuana production used in this piece and
many others are in fact too high. Kilmer's research, published last week,
suggests that total US marijuana consumption in 2010 (including pot from
Mexico) was somewhere between 9.2 and 18.5 million pounds.

Source: https://www.motherjones.com/environment/2014/03/marijuana-pot-weed-
statistics-climate-change/

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Social Affairs,USA :

For more than four decades, marijuana has been synonymous with Jamaica. It was
traditionally associated with the Rastafarian community in Jamaica and is
regarded as a herb of religious significance by the Rastafarians and is widely
used as a sacrament in their religious ceremonies.

However, the use of marijuana has transcended its traditional use from that of
a sacrament for Rastafarians and it is now being used as a recreational drug
in mainstream society. It has assumed both cultural and religious significance
and is regarded as a harmless "holy herb" that bestows wisdom on its users.

Marijuana has permeated the society to such an extent that the taboo once
associated with its use has her diminished, and this has led to it being more
available. As a result of such availability, the "weed" is easily accessible
and can be found in the palms of many of the countries' youth (12 to 19 years
old), especially those in the lower socioeconomic communities.

With the amendments to the Dangerous Drugs Act decriminalising the use and
possession of small quantities of marijuana, it is projected that more youth
will be using the drug.

Given Jamaica's history with marijuana use and it's so, called powers of
wisdom, persons are unwilling to accept the fact that this herb can have any
ill affect on one's mental health, and persons who admit to suffering ill
effects from its use are seen as weak.

This policy seeks to address the effect marijuana usage has on the mental
health of adolescents and outlines options for preventing marijuana usage and
reducing ganja- related harms.

THE PROBLEM FACING JAMAICA

1) Smoking marijuana increases the risk of mental disorders such as depression
and schizophrenia in adolescents.

2) The decriminalising of small quantities of marijuana will only serve to
increase the availability and usage of marijuana among the nation's youth,
resulting in increased ganja-related mental illnesses.

3) The focus on marijuana is largely on the criminal justice perspective.
However, there is insufficient attention being placed on the issue of health,
especially the mental health of young persons who consume the drug.

4) Marijuana is the most commonly used drug in Jamaica. Some of the active
ingredients in marijuana have been shown to be harmful to the user. they can
induce hallucinations, change thinking, and cause delusions.

5) The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNDOC) reports that the
majority of marijuana users in Jamaica are between the ages of 13-25 years,
implying that marijuana use is occurring in the most productive years of
individuals' lives.

6) The World Health Organisation (WHO) and (others) have reported that the
most prevalent disorder in Jamaica is schizophrenia, which has been increasing
yearly between 2009 and 2013. These studies have also highlighted the
connection with early usage of marijuana and the increase in mental illness.

7) The National Secondary Schools Survey (2013) conducted islandwide from a
sample of 3,365 grades 8, 10, 11, and 12 students, revealed the following:

a) 43.2% reported that marijuana was the easiest illicit drug to access.

b) One in five students who were current marijuana users were at high risk for
marijuana misuse

c) Age of first use of marijuana was 12.9 years

d) 30.8% reported that drugs(including marijuana) were available at their
school

e) 50.4% believed that drugs, including marijuana were available near school.
Students who believed that drugs were available reported significantly higher
use than those who did not believe drugs were available in and around school.

The American Psychiatric Association (APA) is opposed to the use of marijuana.
Its position is based the following on:

i. There is no current scientific evidence that marijuana is in any way
beneficial for the treatment of any psychiatric disorder. In contrast, current
evidence supports, at minimum, a strong association of cannabis use with the
onset of psychiatric disorders. Adolescents are particularly vulnerable to
harm, given the effects of cannabis on neurological development.

ii. The use of marijuana/ganja in young people has been examined in many major
studies worldwide. Results on the findings of these studies have differed.
Some have found little or no association between marijuana use and mental
disorders. Others have found deleterious effects of marijuana usage on mental
health.

iii. Longitudinal studies conducted in New Zealand and Denmark suggest that
the effects on the brain caused by marijuana probably explains higher rates of
psychose.

The findings highlighted above suggest that the effects on the brain caused by
marijuana usage can lead to mental disorders.

OPTIONS

a) A public education/media campaign (digital, print, radio, and TV) to
develop and disseminate effective drug information for youth, parents, and
caregivers. At the core of the strategy is essential information about the
harmful effects of marijuana use.

i. To bring awareness to the fact that the teen brain continues to develop to
age 25, therefore, it is vitally important that teens refrain from marijuana
use as this use will affect brain development.

ii. Once youth perceive that marijuana use is harmful and risky, marijuana use
dramatically declines.

iii. The longer a child delays drug use, addiction and substance abuse
disorders are significantly reduced.

b) Teach life skills and drug-refusal skills focusing on critical thinking,
communication, and social competency. This strategy will take on the following
options:

i. Engaging families to strengthen these skills by setting rules, clarifying
expectations, monitoring behaviour, communicating regularly, providing social
support, and modelling positive behaviours.

ii. Encouraging social bonding and caring relationships, with people holding
strong standards against substance abuse in families, schools, peer groups,
mentoring programmes, religious and spiritual contexts, and structured
recreational activities.

The campaign will have an enhanced focus on marijuana use and abuse. In
addition to new national-level prevention and demand reduction messaging, the
education-media campaign will work directly with communities to amplify the
effects of the campaign and to encourage youth participation in the initiative
through the help of on-the-ground partner organisations such as uniform
groups, youth clubs, and national non-profit organisation devoted solely to
the education and development of young people through policy and programme
creation.

Since marijuana use has become ingrained in Jamaica's social and cultural
psyche, then any policy directed at marijuana reduction must be geared at
behaviour modification.

Public education campaigns, whether they are used as a drug-prevention or
health-promotion tool, tend to be based on their ability to affect behavioural
change.

They have been successfully applied to the reduction of tobacco use and the
promotion of road safety and have shown moderately positive results in a
number of areas, including the promotion of healthier nutrition, physical
activity, participation in screening for breast and cervical cancer, disease
prevention, and other health related concerns.

EXPECTED OUTCOMES

i. First 12 months - 42 per cent improvement in perception of risks of
marijuana use by both youth and adults; 50 per cent improvement in the
disapproval rates of marijuana use by 12 to 19 year-olds;

ii.Year 3-4 - 70 per cent decrease in marijuana use by youth ages 12 to 19
years; 30 per cent decline in ganja-related mental illnesses.

iii. Year 5-7 - 91 per cent reduction in marijuana use by youth ages 12-19
years old; 75 per cent decline in ganja-related mental illnesses.

Despite the best efforts, some teens will use drugs invariably. Legislative
and law enforcement methods offer an alternative to prevent and/or reduce
adolescent marijuana usage. At the core of this option are the following
strategies:

i. Mandatory counselling and treatment for adolescent found using marijuana.

ii. Mandated community service if adolescent continues to offend.

iii. Mandated prison sentence after the offender has done community service on
two previous occasions.

Marijuana is the most widely consumed illicit (pre-decriminalisation in some
nation states) drug. It is targeted in one way or another by most prevention
interventions. However, few interventions have targeted marijuana
specifically. Prevention is typically delivered in the context of wider
informational activities and shares a platform with prevention for other
substances such as other illicit drugs, alcohol, and tobacco. This policy will
be geared specifically at marijuana.

The recommended option of a public education campaign marijuana prevention and
reduction programme offers the best alternatives for achieving the stated
objectives of the policy.

  * This is a heavily edited presentation by Sophia Simpson-Wickham who recently completed an MSc in International Public and Development Management in the Department of Government, UWI, Mona. Feedback: mozzass@hotmail.com or editorial 

_Source: http://jamaica-gleaner.com/article/news/20171210/target-ganja-babies-
urgent-focu_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Health,Others (International News) :

As part of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s ongoing efforts to protect
consumers from health fraud, the agency today issued warning letters to four
companies illegally selling products online that claim to prevent, diagnose,
treat, or cure cancer without evidence to support these outcomes. Selling
these unapproved products with unsubstantiated therapeutic claims is not only
a violation of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, but also can put
patients at risk as these products have not been proven to be safe or
effective. The deceptive marketing of unproven treatments may keep some
patients from accessing appropriate, recognized therapies to treat serious and
even fatal diseases.

The FDA has grown increasingly concerned at the proliferation of products
claiming to treat or cure serious diseases like cancer. In this case, the
illegally sold products allegedly contain cannabidiol (CBD), a component of
the marijuana plant that is not FDA approved in any drug product for any
indication. CBD is marketed in a variety of product types, such as oil drops,
capsules, syrups, teas, and topical lotions and creams. The companies
receiving warning letters distributed the products with unsubstantiated claims
regarding preventing, reversing or curing cancer; killing/inhibiting cancer
cells or tumours; or other similar anti-cancer claims. Some of the products
were also marketed as an alternative or additional treatment for Alzheimer’s
and other serious diseases.

“Substances that contain components of marijuana will be treated like any
other products that make unproven claims to shrink cancer tumours. We don’t
let companies market products that deliberately prey on sick people with
baseless claims that their substance can shrink or cure cancer and we’re not
going to look the other way on enforcing these principles when it comes to
marijuana-containing products,” said FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D.
“There are a growing number of effective therapies for many cancers. When
people are allowed to illegally market agents that deliver no established
benefit they may steer patients away from products that have proven, anti-
tumour effects that could extend lives.” The FDA issued warning letters to
four companies – Greenroads Health, Natural Alchemist, That’s Natural!
Marketing and Consulting, and Stanley Brothers Social Enterprises LLC – citing
unsubstantiated claims related to more than 25 different products spanning
multiple product webpages, online stores and social media websites. The
companies used these online platforms to make unfounded claims about their
products' ability to limit, treat or cure cancer and other serious diseases.
Examples of claims made by these companies include:

· “Combats tumour and cancer cells;”

· “CBD makes cancer cells commit ‘suicide’ without killing other cells;”

· “CBD … [has] anti-proliferative properties that inhibit cell division and
growth in certain types of cancer, not allowing the tumour to grow;” and

· “Non-psychoactive cannabinoids like CBD (cannabidiol) may be effective in
treating tumours from cancer – including breast cancer.”

Unlike drugs approved by the FDA, the manufacture of these products has not
been subject to FDA review as part of the drug approval process and there has
been no FDA evaluation of whether they work, what the proper dosage is, how
they could interact with other drugs, or whether they have dangerous side
effects or other safety concerns. The FDA has requested responses from the
companies stating how the violations will be corrected. Failure to correct the
violations promptly may result in legal action, including product seizure and
injunction.

“We have an obligation to provide caregivers and patients with the confidence
that drugs making cancer treatment claims have been carefully evaluated for
safety, efficacy, and quality, and are monitored by the FDA once they’re on
the market,” Commissioner Gottlieb added. “We recognize that there’s interest
in developing therapies from marijuana and its components, but the safest way
for this to occur is through the drug approval process – not through
unsubstantiated claims made on a website. We support sound, scientifically-
based research using components derived from marijuana, and we’ll continue to
work with product developers who are interested in bringing safe, effective,
and quality products to market.”

This latest action builds on the more than 90 warning letters issued in the
past 10 years, including more than a dozen this year, to companies marketing
hundreds of fraudulent products making cancer claims on websites, social media
and in stores. Additionally, the FDA recently took decisive action to prevent
the use of a potentially dangerous and unproven treatment used in ‘stem cell’
centers targeting vulnerable cancer patients. The FDA encourages health care
professionals and consumers to report adverse reactions associated with these
or similar products to the agency’s MedWatch program.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
promotes and protects the public health by, among other things, assuring the
safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines
and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency
also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply,
cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation,
and for regulating tobacco products.

_Source:
https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm583295.htm_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine,Political Sector :

Millions of people use cannabis as a medicine. That’s not based on clinical
evidence, nor do we know which of the hundreds of compounds in the plant is
responsible for its supposed effects. Elizabeth Finkel reports.

LAST YEAR DEDI MEIRI, A CANNABIS RESEARCHER AT THE TECHNION, ISRAEL’S OLDEST
UNIVERSITY, RECEIVED A “BEFORE AND AFTER” VIDEO OF AN AUTISTIC BOY.

The before showed the boy helmeted, hands tied behind his back, butting his
head against a wall. The after showed him calmly sitting at a table,
sketching. The difference: two drops of cannabis oil administered below the
tongue. The video had been sent to Meiri by Abigail Dar, an Israeli champion
for the use of cannabis in children with autism.

Early this year it was a different story. Over the course of a day, Meiri’s
lab received a stream of phone calls from Dar: a few autistic children had
gone berserk after receiving their two drops of oil.

Meiri, who is primarily a cancer researcher, received the video and the calls
because he has, reluctantly, become one of Israel’s cannabis experts. “Even
now I am reluctant to tell people I work on medical cannabis,” he says. “I am
not pro-cannabis; I think 90% is placebo.”

But Israel is in the grip of a vast medical experiment. Cannabis has taken
hold here to treat a startling range of medical conditions. Not just familiar
things like anorexia and pain in cancer patients but autism, Crohn’s disease,
Tourette’s syndrome, epileptic seizures, multiple sclerosis, arthritis,
diabetes and more. With close to 30,000 users in a population of eight
million, Meiri says “everyone knows someone who is being treated with
cannabis”. While there is a semblance of orderly medicine, with doctors
prescribing cannabis oil from eight registered growers, no one can say just
what, exactly, is responsible for the apparent responses.

A cannabis plant is a pot-pourri of more than 500 chemicals whose abundance
varies greatly across different genetic strains and according to growth
conditions – they’re not cultivars so much as chemovars. The medicinal effect
may depend on tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the chemical that gives you the
high, or cannabidiol (CBD), which is thought to reduce inflammation and pain,
or a hundred other “cannabinoids” unique to the plant with their own medicinal
profile.

Bottom line: with dozens of varieties grown under different conditions,
Israeli patients are receiving quite different medicinal concoctions.

Israel’s predicament is tame by comparison to the United States. Here it is
the Wild West. Federal sheriffs outlaw medical research on the plant while
cannabis cowboys peddle chemovars (varying in their content of THC and CBD)
for cures and profit. In the 29 US states that have legalised medical
cannabis, dispensaries that resemble something out of a Harry Potter tale sell
candies, cookies, oils, ointments and joints to an estimated 2.3 million
Americans. As to their exact medical benefits and risks, no one knows. This is
medieval medicine – akin to boiling willow bark to treat headache. It is also
great business – the North American market for legal cannabis products grew
30% in 2016, with sales topping $US6.7 billion.

Israel’s medical cannabis mess is a lot easier to deal with. To help address
it, Meiri’s laboratory of Cancer Biology and Cannabinoid Research is
conducting a reverse clinical trial. While patients using medical cannabis
fill in a monthly questionnaire, the ranks of analytical machines bursting out
of Meiri’s lab create chemical fingerprints of the cannabis extracts patients
are using. The idea is to try to link individual cannabis compounds to the
patient response.

It is an approach that’s “two or three rungs down” from the ideal of
randomised placebo-controlled clinical trials (RCTs), says Donald Abrams, an
oncologist at the University of California, San Francisco, who prescribes
cannabis as a palliative for patients with cancer. “But, if well done and
there’s a strong effect, observational studies like these are invaluable.”

Israel is also one of the few places in the world pushing forward with gold-
standard RCTs. But given that dozens of cannabis strains are already being
used for a ballooning number of conditions, RCTs seem like a finger in the
dyke.

Countries like Australia, where the federal government legalised medical
cannabis in October 2016, are entering this brave new world with trepidation.
“Because there has been no proper research, we’re now at a difficult
crossroads,” says University of Melbourne pharmacologist James Angus, who
chairs the federal government’s advisory council on the medical use of
cannabis. “Our health workforce has no guidelines or experience in
prescribing, and patients are demanding it. We’ve run out of time.”

The Promised Land may well be the world’s best bet for deliverance from the
medical cannabis mess.

Anecdotes on the medical use of cannabis go back to mythical Chinese emperor
Shen Neng in 2700 BCE. More piquant references can be found in ancient Roman,
Greek and Indian texts. Or just google.

Thousands of years on from Shen Neng, it seems we still don’t have a great
deal more than anecdotes to go on. As a report from the US National Academies
of Science in January 2017 states: “Despite increased cannabis use and a
changing state-level policy landscape, conclusive evidence regarding the
short- and long-term health effects – both harms and benefits – of cannabis
use remains elusive.”

While the medical uses of the opium poppy, a vastly more dangerous plant, are
well understood, cannabis has remained stuck in a no man’s land. It had been
part of the US pharmacopeia till the 1930s, as an alcohol-based tincture,
until the federal government effectively outlawed its possession and sale
through the Marijuana Tax Act. More draconian penalties followed. It is still
demonised by federal law as a ‘Schedule 1’ drug with no medical use, lumped in
the same category as heroin, LSD and ecstasy. Yet as a quick online search
will show, the plant is lauded for a seemingly inexhaustible list of curative
properties.

In the past two decades the disparity between evidence and anecdotes has grown
extreme. Despite a majority of states (beginning with California in 1996)
having legalised cannabis to treat medical conditions, federal restrictions on
research remained ironclad. So researchers have great difficulty studying
whether such medical uses have any basis in science. “What we have is a
perfect storm,” says Daniele Piomelli, a neurobiologist at the University of
California, Irvine.

Piomelli has been researching cannabis as best as he can. To comply with the
mandates of the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), his precious store of
50 milligrams of THC must be kept in a locked safe, in a locked cool room, in
a locked lab. “Any person on the street can go to a dispensary and for $10
obtain cannabis,” he says. “But if we bring it into the university we risk
being raided by the FBI and DEA. We live in a schizophrenic state.”

Even when researchers have gained permission to do research, the cannabis can
only be supplied by one authorised lab, at the University of Mississippi. The
lab has been growing the same variety for decades, one that bears little
resemblance to the chemovars now available through dispensaries.

In San Francisco, Abrams tried valiantly in the 1990s to set up a clinical
trial to test the claims of dying AIDS patients that smoking weed outperformed
their anti-nausea drugs. After more than a year trying to get permission from
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the penny finally dropped; the agency,
as he often tells journalists, sees itself as the National Institute “on” Drug
Abuse, not “for” Drug Abuse. So the January report of the National Academies
of Science was hardly a surprise. The document, based on reviewing 10,000
publications, found “modest” evidence for the effectiveness of cannabis to
treat nausea and vomiting in adults undergoing chemotherapy, for chronic pain,
and to alleviate spasms in multiple sclerosis. It did not, however, deliver a
verdict for a long list of illnesses including epilepsy, inflammatory bowel
disease, Parkinson’s Disease, post-traumatic stress, anxiety, insomnia and
cancer. “For these conditions, the report states, “there is inadequate
information to assess their effects.”

But bits of information are trickling through. In May, a report in the New
England Journal of Medicine offered evidence that an oily, strawberry-
flavoured formulation of pure cannabidiol (made by British company GW
Pharmaceuticals) could reduce the severity of seizures in children with a rare
form of epilepsy known as Dravet’s syndrome. Of the 120 youngsters recruited,
60 received cannabidiol and 60 received only a strawberry-flavoured oil, the
placebo. Three of the treated group achieved complete remission from their
seizures while in 40% of those treated, the frequency of seizures was reduced
by half. But 27% of the placebo group also saw a halving in their seizure rate
and there were significant side effects amongst the treated group. “It’s not a
magical drug”, explains Ingrid Scheffer, a paediatric neurologist at the
University of Melbourne and co-author of the study. But she points out the
sometimes exasperated parents of her patients have a different view. “The
attitude is, ‘it’s obvious you fuddy duddy, just give it to us’.”

Most of the 400 pages in the hefty NAS tome report on the adverse effects of
cannabis, like a raised risk of schizophrenia or road accidents or chronic
cough. This, says Piomelli, reflects what researchers obtained funding for:
“There is a bias towards the null hypothesis – that cannabis causes harm.”
Those harms exist, he agrees. “But society is asking for answers about its
benefits, and that’s not a question that researchers have been able to
answer.”

Israel staked its claim in the field of cannabis research back in the 1960s.
It was the beginning of the pot-smoking hippy revolution. But no one actually
knew what the psychoactive ingredient of pot was.

Raphael Mechoulam, a chemist at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, saw an
opportunity. In 1964 he was the first to link pot’s mind-altering effects to
THC. His research flourished in a regulated but permissive environment: his
chief source of cannabis was the local police station. His group also isolated
the natural equivalents of cannabis made by the brain, using pigs (with great
difficulty, given the researchers were in Jerusalem). In 1992 they identified
anandamide, the so-called bliss molecule, and in 1995 its more prosaically
named partner, 2-arachidonoyl glycerol or 2 AG. These brain-made counterparts
of THC are known as endocannabinoids.

Meanwhile the Israeli public began to clamour for medical cannabis. Just as in
San Francisco, the AIDS epidemic had put medical cannabis on the radar.
Mirroring the experience of Donald Abrams, immunologist Zvi Bentwich also
witnessed the anti-nausea and pain-relieving effects that smoking cannabis had
on his AIDS patients. While anti-retroviral drugs would mercifully bring the
raging AIDS epidemic in both countries under control, the clamour for the
palliative use of cannabis by cancer patients grew, aided by the internet.

Israel’s government obliged but with strict regulation. Patients, supported by
a letter from a physician, could obtain a medical cannabis permit from the
ministry of health. Growers needed a licence. One of the first companies to
gain one, in 2007, was Tikun Olam. As patient numbers grew, it began to
collect information about their responses. In 2015 Bentwich, who also heads
the Centre for Emerging Tropical Diseases and AIDS at Ben Gurion University,
joined Tikun Olam to lead a formal clinical trials program. “If the medical
community is to accept cannabis, that depends on carrying out large reliable
clinical trials,” he says. “In the US, as well as in most European countries,
that is still extremely difficult.”

So far Israel is leading the pack. It is the only country, for instance, to
have published the results of a randomised double blind study on the use of
cannabis by Crohn’s disease patients. Timna Naftali, a gastroenterologist at
Meir Medical Centre, carried out the trial after discovering several patients
were self-medicating with cannabis. “They had reduced their medication and not
suffered flare ups,” she says. “It was very intriguing.”

In her trial, 21 patients were assigned randomly to a group that smoked THC-
rich cannabis cigarettes twice a day for eight weeks or to a group that smoked
cannabis free of THC and other cannabinoids. The results, published in
Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology, showed that in 10 of 11 patients
with Crohn’s disease who smoked the THC-rich cigarettes, there were
“significant clinical benefits”. One criticism was that perhaps patients
merely felt better due to the euphoric effects of cannabis, so Naftali is
repeating the trial, leaving it to an endoscopist to decide. This time 50
patients are receiving an oil, containing a 4:1 ratio of cannabidiol to THC.
“As a doctor, I’m not happy about telling patients to smoke,” Naftali says.
Another trial that tested a pure extract of cannabidiol was ineffective.
“Perhaps it was the low dose,” Naftali muses. “There’s also a claim you have
to have it in combination.” Perhaps it is a case of what Mechoulam has dubbed
the “entourage effect” – the consequence of a mysterious biological synergy
between cannabis compounds.

Another world-first trial under way in Israel is testing the effects of
cannabis on youngsters with autism. Given cannabis can trigger psychotic
behaviour, it is surprising to think it would be a candidate for a condition
where psychotic behaviour is often part of the problem. But a third of
autistic children also suffer from seizures.

When paediatric neurologist Adi Aran, at Jerusalem’s Shaare Zedek Medical
Centre, prescribed cannabis for the seizures of autistic children, their
parents reported dramatic results. Children who never spoke began speaking,
and writing for the first time. To verify these anecdotal results, he is
running a trial on 120 youngsters, aged 5 to 21 years. Some receive whole
cannabis oil containing, amongst other things, a 20:1 ratio of cannabidiol to
THC; others receive a purified extract containing only cannabidiol and THC; a
final group receive a placebo, an identically flavoured oil. All will undergo
a ‘washout’ period, where they are gradually weaned off their oil.

In principle, most doctors would like to see the results of numerous such
trials before prescribing cannabis. However, parents like Abigail Dar disagree
with this approach. “A parent like me with a complicated child doesn’t have
the luxury of principles,” she says. Her son, Yuval, now in his early
twenties, is severely autistic, and was once so prone to violent outbreaks she
could not be alone with him. “Yuval tried over a dozen anti-psychotic
medications since he was 12 years old to treat symptoms

like endless anxiety, restlessness, violent outbreaks or, as we call it, ‘life
in the shadow of hell’. They only made him more agitated and aggressive.”

Dar managed to get a medical cannabis prescription for Yuval in 2015. Though
autism did not count as one of Israel’s qualifying conditions, the health
ministry finally granted permission as a ‘mercy treatment’. “It was a life-
changer from the very first day,” according to Dar. “He hasn’t exhibited a
single self-injurious behaviour or outburst in the last 14 months. He is
calmer, more attentive and communicative. He smiles more.”

Dar has carried out her own careful experimentation for what works for her
son, using chemovars that vary in their CBD-to-THC ratio. As far as she is
concerned, placing Yuval in a randomised, placebo-controlled, washout trial
would be immoral. “With suffering kids you don’t take it away,” she says. “I
tell parents to stay away; it’s not in favour of kids.”

Instead, through a collaboration with Meiri’s lab, she is pushing to gather
the data already being generated. “We have 200 kids and adults with severe
autism we are guiding through strains and dosages to find out what works. We
track them with questionnaires: we look at things like violent outbreaks,
sleep and appetite. The idea eventually is to go global. It will give us some
small amount of knowledge on how to treat autism.”

It’s not just desperate cases like Dar that make cannabis a poor fit for the
box of a RCT. Abrams sees no need for more trials when it comes to treating
pain or nausea in patients with cancer. Nor is he alarmed by the range of
products sold in dispensaries. “I don’t consider it to be that dangerous,
compared to the pharmaceutical agents we already prescribe,” he says. “I have
many patients that were weaned off opiates thanks to cannabis.” He points out
that in the US, 90 people die each day from overdoses of opiates, in many
cases prescribed to treat chronic pain [LINK:
https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic/index.html].

Mieri never imagined his CV would one day include heading a laboratory for
cannabis research. In early 2015, after four years at the Ontario Cancer
Institute, he was all set to return to cancer research.

Then he noticed a curious publication from a Japanese research group that
reported a cannabis extract blocked the ability of human breast cancer cells
to spread in a culture dish. What pricked Meiri’s interest was that the
extracts appeared to be scrambling the cell’s internal scaffolding – his
particular area of expertise.

Meiri repeated the experiment on different types of cancer cells. He found the
cannabis extract was just as potent as some chemotherapy drugs. But it was
another finding that really captured his interest: the effectiveness of the
extract depended on the cannabis variety and the grower.

As the son of a strawberry farmer, he understood exactly what he was seeing.
“Strawberries taste different in the morning and afternoon,” he explains. He
was seeing the effects of a cocktail of different chemicals.

Which of these chemicals were responsible for the anti-cancer effect? To find
out, Meiri bought a machine for high-performance liquid chromatography, a
technique to separate and identify parts of a mixture. Soon he was a de facto
guru. A grant from a philanthropist in 2016 marked a point of no return.

‘The plural of anecdote is not data’ is an oft-quoted medical aphorism. But
anecdotes can’t be ignored either. Meiri is acquiring quite a collection. On
one occasion, he was contacted by the father of a seven-year-old whose
seizures had returned after being free of them for nearly a year. The father,
wanting to know why the oil had stopped working, sent samples to Meiri. When
the scientist analysed them, he found they were just olive oil. “It was a data
point,” he says, “showing that the effects of cannabis extract were real.”

Then there was the disastrous day he learned that several autistic kids taking
cannabis oil had gone berserk. “Tali, we have a situation,” he recalls telling
the head of the project. All the extracts the children were taking had the
same 20:1 ratio of CBD to THC. But looking at the chemical profiles, it was
clear the offending medication carried at least five different compounds. “It
doesn’t provide the answers,” he says. “It shows where to begin searching.”

There is no simple way out of the cannabis mess. With much of the world
clamouring to use cannabis as a cure for all manner of ailments, and an
exploding cannabis industry that is happy to push that demand along, it is
crucial to establish just how real its clinical benefits and harms are –
especially for children.

The medical establishment ideally needs randomised clinical trials, such as
those Israel is admirably pushing ahead with. “I would say the Israelis have
taken the lead,” Abrams says.

But 30,000 users in Israel and millions in the US aren’t waiting for such
results. Some, like Abigail Dar, are too desperate. Others are wedded to their
own trial-and-error experiments with different chemovars.

Another complicating factor is that the diabolically complex chemistry of the
cannabis plant is too overwhelming to sort out through individual RCTs.
Researchers are still scratching at the surface of a potential treasure trove
of medicines that appear to act synergistically. The list of conditions to try
them against appears never-ending. The number of trials needed to test each
combination against each condition seems mindboggling.

The database collated by Meiri and his clinical collaborators is now being
prepared for publication. It should help link the pot-pourri of chemicals
inside cannabis to its clinical effects. It may be second-tier science, but it
appears to be one of the best strategies for navigating a path out of the haze
that still envelops medical cannabis.

Conflict of interest statement. Elizabeth Finkel is a member of the scientific
advisory board of AUSiMED, which raises funds to support scientific
collaborations between Australia and Israel.

_Source: Cosmos 76 - Spring 2017 _

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine,Others (International
News) :

**“No One Has Died of an Overdose”**

This remains the most outrageous claim of the pro-legalization movement. It is
not only dangerously misleading, it is a slap in the face to the families who
have lost children, spouses and parents. Everyone admits that people are dying
in traffic crashes because of stoned drivers, and that some people have died
in butane hash oil explosions, but too many people are turning a blind eye to
the other deaths caused by what can only be called an overdose. Tachycardia –
a racing heart – is a common, well-known side effect of using marijuana. So is
increased blood pressure. A growing body of evidence, here and in other
countries, is revealing that marijuana has caused previously overlooked deaths
through heart attack and stroke. In Colorado last fall, an 11-month-old infant
brought to the ER after being exposed to marijuana died from an inflamed heart
muscle (myocarditis) caused by the exposure.

Marijuana can also overwhelm the emotional centers of the brain causing
paranoia, delusions, and acute psychosis. The National Academy of Sciences
(NAS) report released last January states, “There is substantial evidence of a
statistical association between cannabis use and the development of
schizophrenia or other psychoses, with the highest risk among the most
frequent users.” (The Health Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids, Chapter
Highlights NAS 2017)

Emergency rooms in Colorado reported a 44 percent increase in marijuana-
related visits between 2012 and 2014. Many of these were cases of acute
psychosis, particularly in young men, who had to be restrained to keep from
harming themselves or others.

**Other evidence of marijuana overdose**

A growing body of evidence indicates that marijuana is not just associated
with suicide but can be a causative factor. The NAS report cited above found
an “Increased incidence of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts with a
higher incidence among heavier users” and an “Increased incidence of suicide
completion.” One of the studies they listed found a seven-fold increase in
risk for suicide even after controlling for a prior history of mood disorders.

In 2014, a young man in Colorado either jumped or unwittingly tumbled to his
death from a fourth-floor balcony during a psychotic outburst. In July this
year, a Vermont father clutching his son to his chest jumped out of a fourth-
floor window shortly after smoking marijuana. He said it was God who made him
jump.

When a drug drives all sense of reality from your brain, it’s an overdose. In
marijuana’s case, these overdoses can and do lead to death.

_Dean Whitlock is a freelance writer whose book, Finn’s Clock, a historical
fantasy will be coming this fall in paperback. www.deanwhitlock.com.Read the
full article in Vermont Digger. Also read why Vermont physicians propose
caution with legalization.

Source: http://www.poppot.org/2017/10/18/truth-deaths-by-marijuana-overdose/ _

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Drugs and
Accidents,Health :

Washington’s pot is a bit more potent than the national average. And the
state’s teens are more likely to smoke marijuana than young people nationwide.

Although we have the same problems with marijuana as we do with liquor abuse,
no blockbuster conclusions came from a recent report on Washington’s marijuana
universe.

But a couple of somewhat unexpected environmental wrinkles from Washington’s
marijuana industry — both legal and illegal — also emerge in the second annual
look at the state’s experience since passage of a 2012 initiative allowing
recreational pot sales.

Marijuana growers and processors use 1.63 percent of the state’s electricity,
which is a lot, according to the report by the Northwest High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Area — a combined effort by several federal, state and local
government agencies. By way of comparison, all forms of lighting — in homes,
commercial buildings and manufacturing — account for just 7 to 11 percent of
electrical consumption nationally. Or, as the report puts it, the power is
enough for 2 million homes.

The high power consumption stems from the heat lamps and the accompanying air
conditioning for indoor marijuana growing operations. “They are exceedingly
energy-consumptive,” said Steven Freng, manager for prevention and treatment
for the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area.

The carbon footprint, according to the report, equals that of about 3 million
cars.

And illegal pot growers siphoned off 43.2 million gallons of water from
streams and aquifers during the 2016 growing season — water that tribes,
farmers and cities would otherwise use as carefully as possible, in part to
protect salmon.

Sixty percent of Washington’s illegal pot was grown on state-owned land in
2016\. That’s because black-market growers tend to worry about gun-toting
owners on private lands, according to Freng and Luci McKean, the
organization’s deputy director. The black-market operations use the water
during a roughly 120-day growing season.

Marijuana purchases have boomed in Washington. Legal marijuana sales were
almost $1 billion in fiscal year 2016 and were on track to be about $1.5
billion in fiscal 2017, which ended June 30. As of February, the state had
1,121 licensed producers, 1,106 licensed processors and 470 licensed
retailers.

What Washington’s marijuana users are getting is above average in potency.
According to the report, nationwide marijuana products average a THC
percentage of 13.2 percent, while Washington state’s THC average percentage
was 21.6 percent.

Teen use of marijuana has grown slightly. Depending on how the numbers are
crunched, marijuana use among Washington’s young adults and teens ranges from
2 to 5 percent above the national average. Five percent of Washingtonians age
18-to-25 use pot daily, slightly above the national average, the report said.

According to a survey cited in the report, 17 percent of high school seniors
and 9 percent of high school sophomores have driven within three hours after
smoking pot.

Adult use before driving is still a fuzzy picture. A third of Washingtonians
arrested for driving under the influence had THC, the active ingredient in
marijuana, in their bloodstreams. One study found an increase in dead drivers
with THC above the legal limit in their blood from 7.8 percent in 2013 to 12.8
percent in 2014.

“Adults still don’t understand the effects of impairment behind the wheel of a
car,” Freng said.

McKean said that one major unknown is marijuana-laced edibles, which
authorities believe have become a significant factor in THC-impaired drivers,
but has not been studied enough to provide solid numbers.

Another major unknown, McKean and Freng said, is how marijuana consumption
contributes to emergency room and hospital cases because the state hospitals
have not agreed to release that data to government officials.

_Source: http://crosscut.com/2017/10/washingtons-pot-industry-not-
environmentally-friendly-marijuana/_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Drugs and
Accidents,Economic,Environment,Social Affairs,USA :

Legalising marijuana can lead to increased use of the drug, according to a
French study that looked at consumption levels in two US states and Uruguay in
the midst of a debate over France's narcotics laws.

The study conducted by France's National Institute of Higher Security and
Justice Studies and the French Observatory for Drugs and Drug Addiction
examined data from Washington and Colorado, which in 2012 became the first two
US states to legalise marijuana for recreational use.

Like several US studies on the subject it noted that legalisation in the
states had not increased marijuana use among teenagers, "which nonetheless
remains at a high level."

Among adults, however, marijuana use had increased, particularly among
over-25s, the French researchers found.

But in Uruguay, which in July became the first country to legalise marijuana
nationwide, "all the indicators of use have risen", including among teens, the
study showed.

In the two American states, the legalisation had led to a "significant"
increase in the number of people admitted to hospital with suspected cannabis
poisoning, particularly tourists, it added.

On the economic front, it found that sales of recreational marijuana in
Colorado and Washington had steadily increased, reaching $1 billion a year in
each case.

State tax receipts from the sales had surpassed taxes on cigarettes, the
report said, while noting that legalisation had not stamped out marijuana
trafficking.

In Uruguay, trafficking was driven by the huge gap between demand and legal
production, which accounted for just 10 to 20 percent of marijuana use.

In the American states, by contrast, the black market was being fuelled by the
higher cost of over-the-counter marijuana, the report concluded.

The researchers acknowledged, however, that legalisation of marijuana had
eased the caseload of the police and judiciary.

In France, marijuana use is a crime punishable by up to a year in prison and a
fine of 3,750 euros ($4,400). President Emmanuel Macron has proposed easing
the penalty to an on-the-spot fine.

_Source: https://medicalxpress.com/news/2017-10-legalising-marijuana-
french.html_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Europe,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

**Abstract**

IMPORTANCE:

Over the last 25 years, illicit cannabis use and cannabis use disorders have
increased among US adults, and 28 states have passed medical marijuana laws
(MML). Little is known about MML and adult illicit cannabis use or cannabis
use disorders considered over time.

OBJECTIVE:

To present national data on state MML and degree of change in the prevalence
of cannabis use and disorders.

DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS, AND SETTING:

Differences in the degree of change between those living in MML states and
other states were examined using 3 cross-sectional US adult surveys: the
National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey (NLAES; 1991-1992), the
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC;
2001-2002), and the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related
Conditions-III (NESARC-III; 2012-2013). Early-MML states passed MML between
NLAES and NESARC ("earlier period"). Late-MML states passed MML between NESARC
and NESARC-III ("later period").

MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES:

Past-year illicit cannabis use and DSM-IV cannabis use disorder.

RESULTS:

Overall, from 1991-1992 to 2012-2013, illicit cannabis use increased
significantly more in states that passed MML than in other states
(1.4-percentage point more; SE, 0.5; P = .004), as did cannabis use disorders
(0.7-percentage point more; SE, 0.3; P = .03).

In the earlier period, illicit cannabis use and disorders decreased similarly
in non-MML states and in California (where prevalence was much higher to start
with). In contrast, in remaining early-MML states, the prevalence of use and
disorders increased.

Remaining early-MML and non-MML states differed significantly for use (by 2.5
percentage points; SE, 0.9; P = .004) and disorder (1.1 percentage points; SE,
0.5; P = .02). In the later period, illicit use increased by the following
percentage points: never-MML states, 3.5 (SE, 0.5); California, 5.3 (SE, 1.0);
Colorado, 7.0 (SE, 1.6); other early-MML states, 2.6 (SE, 0.9); and late-MML
states, 5.1 (SE, 0.8). Compared with never-MML states, increases in use were
significantly greater in late-MML states (1.6-percentage point more; SE, 0.6;
P = .01), California (1.8-percentage point more; SE, 0.9; P = .04), and
Colorado (3.5-percentage point more; SE, 1.5; P = .03).

Increases in cannabis use disorder, which was less prevalent, were smaller but
followed similar patterns descriptively, with change greater than never-MML
states in California (1.0-percentage point more; SE, 0.5; P = .06) and
Colorado (1.6-percentage point more; SE, 0.8; P = .04).

CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE:

Medical marijuana laws appear to have contributed to increased prevalence of
illicit cannabis use and cannabis use disorders. State-specific policy changes
may also have played a role. While medical marijuana may help some, cannabis-
related health consequences associated with changes in state marijuana laws
should receive consideration by health care professionals and the public.

_Source: JAMA Psychiatry. 2017 Jun 1;74(6):579-588. doi:
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.0724._

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,Marijuana and
Medicine :

For a long time, those in medicine and the law have been concerned about a
link between cannabis and violence.

This has been largely dismissed by the pro-drugs lobby as an association, not
proof of a cause. The difference is important to scientific enquiry, as
revealed by a telling example given recently by Professor Robert Pickard, a
former government advisor.

He says the rise in deaths of hedgehogs on the roads since the end of World
War II mirrors the rise in television sales, but it would be daft to suggest
that TVs are killing hedgehogs: it’s an association, not a cause.

The evidence linking cannabis and violent crime is compelling: regular use of
the drug doubles the risk of a psychotic episode or schizophrenia. And time
and again, courts hear how people have become psychotic after smoking cannabis
and, in the grips of paranoia and delusions, have murdered someone. The
gallery of victims should shame those in the liberal elite who insist there’s
no definitive evidence of cause and effect.

But a new study has now provided just this. Researchers followed 1,100
patients for a year after discharge from a psychiatric hospital and those who
used cannabis were two-and-a-half times more likely to be violent.

So now there’s clear proof of a causative link, have we witnessed a volte-face
from the pro-cannabis lobby? Of course we haven’t, because it was never really
about the science.

They want to smoke cannabis, and as soon as science brings doing this into
question, they simply brush it aside. Particularly frustrating are the smug,
ageing hippies who claim that because they’re still here, it must be fine.
They look back on a youth spent smoking spliffs with pathetic, misplaced
nostalgia, and fail to realise that, not only did plenty of people not make it
through the Sixties and Seventies unscathed, but the super-strong cannabis of
today is almost an entirely different product.

How many more lives must be ruined before the pro-drugs lobby admit they got
it wrong?

_Source: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-4957554/An-uncomfortable-
truth-not-life-worth-living.html#ixzz4uppapuW9_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Drug use-various effects
:

**Objective:**

The authors sought to determine whether cannabis use is associated with a
change in the risk of incident nonmedical prescription opioid use and opioid
use disorder at 3-year follow-up.

**Method:**

The authors used logistic regression models to assess prospective associations
between cannabis use at wave 1 (2001–2002) and nonmedical prescription opioid
use and prescription opioid use disorder at wave 2 (2004–2005) of the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Corresponding analyses
were performed among adults with moderate or more severe pain and with
nonmedical opioid use at wave 1. Cannabis and prescription opioid use were
measured with a structured interview (the Alcohol Use Disorder and Associated
Disabilities Interview Schedule–DSM-IV version). Other covariates included
age, sex, race/ethnicity, anxiety or mood disorders, family history of drug,
alcohol, and behavioral problems, and, in opioid use disorder analyses,
nonmedical opioid use.

**Results:**

In logistic regression models, cannabis use at wave 1 was associated with
increased incident nonmedical prescription opioid use (odds ratio=5.78, 95%
CI=4.23–7.90) and opioid use disorder (odds ratio=7.76, 95% CI=4.95–12.16) at
wave 2. These associations remained significant after adjustment for
background characteristics (nonmedical opioid use: adjusted odds ratio=2.62,
95% CI=1.86–3.69; opioid use disorder: adjusted odds ratio=2.18, 95%
CI=1.14–4.14). Among adults with pain at wave 1, cannabis use was also
associated with increased incident nonmedical opioid use (adjusted odds
ratio=2.99, 95% CI=1.63–5.47) at wave 2; it was also associated with increased
incident prescription opioid use disorder, although the association fell short
of significance (adjusted odds ratio=2.14, 95% CI=0.95–4.83). Among adults
with nonmedical opioid use at wave 1, cannabis use was also associated with an
increase in nonmedical opioid use (adjusted odds ratio=3.13, 95%
CI=1.19–8.23).

**Conclusions:**

Cannabis use appears to increase rather than decrease the risk of developing
nonmedical prescription opioid use and opioid use disorder.

_Source:
http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/abs/10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.17040413_

Filed under:
Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Heroin/Methadone,Marijuana and
Medicine,USA :

NEW REPORT BY NATIONAL FAMILIES IN ACTION RIPS THE VEIL OFF THE MEDICAL
MARIJUANA INDUSTRY

Research Traces the Money Trail and Reveals the Motivation Behind Marijuana as
Medicine

  * Tracking the Money That’s Legalizing Marijuana and Why It Matters documents state-by-state financial data, exposing the groups and the amount of money used either to fund or oppose ballot initiatives legalizing medical or recreational marijuana in 16 U.S. states.
  * NFIA report reveals three billionaires—George Soros, Peter Lewis and John Sperling—who contributed 80 percent of the money to medicalize marijuana through state ballot initiatives during a 13-year period, with the strategy to use medical marijuana as a runway to legalized recreational pot.
  * Report shows how billionaires and marijuana legalizers manipulated the ballot initiative process, outspent the people who opposed marijuana and convinced voters that marijuana is medicine, even while most of the scientific and medical communities say marijuana is not medicine and should not be legal.
  * Children in Colorado treated with unregulated cannabis oil have had severe dystonic reactions, other movement disorders, developmental regression, intractable vomiting and worsening seizures.
  * A medical marijuana industry has emerged to join the billionaires in financing initiatives to legalize recreational pot.

**Atlanta, Ga.** (March 14, 2017)—A new report by National Families in Action
(NFIA) uncovers and documents how three billionaires, who favour legal
recreational marijuana, manipulated the ballot initiative process in 16 U.S.
states for more than a decade, convincing voters to legalize medical
marijuana. NFIA is an Atlanta-based nonprofit organization, founded in 1977,
that has been helping parents prevent children from using alcohol, tobacco,
and other drugs. NFIA researched and issued the paper to mark its 40th
anniversary.

The NFIA study, Tracking the Money That’s Legalizing Marijuana and Why It
Matters, exposes, for the first time, the money trail behind the marijuana
legalization effort during a 13-year period. The report lays bare the strategy
to use medical marijuana as a runway to legalized recreational pot, describing
how financier George Soros, insurance magnate Peter Lewis, and for-profit
education baron John Sperling (and groups they and their families fund)
systematically chipped away at resistance to marijuana while denying that full
legalization was their goal.

The report documents state-by-state financial data, identifying the groups and
the amount of money used either to fund or oppose ballot initiatives
legalizing medical or recreational marijuana in 16 states. The paper unearths
how legalizers fleeced voters and outspent—sometimes by hundreds of times—the
people who opposed marijuana.

Tracking the Money That’s Legalizing Marijuana and Why It Matters illustrates
that legalizers lied about the health benefits of marijuana, preyed on the
hopes of sick people, flouted scientific evidence and advice from the medical
community and gutted consumer protections against unsafe, ineffective drugs.
And, it proves that once the billionaires achieved their goal of legalizing
recreational marijuana (in Colorado and Washington in 2012), they virtually
stopped financing medical pot ballot initiatives and switched to financing
recreational pot. In 2014 and 2016, they donated $44 million to legalize
recreational pot in Alaska, Oregon, California, Arizona, Nevada, Massachusetts
and Maine. Only Arizona defeated the onslaught (for recreational marijuana).

**Unravelling the Legalization Strategy: Behind the Curtain** In 1992,
financier George Soros contributed an estimated $15 million to several groups
he advised to stop advocating for outright legalization and start working
toward what he called more winnable issues such as medical marijuana.

At a press conference in 1993, Richard Cowen, then-director of the National
Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, said, “The key to it [full
legalization] is medical access. Because, once you have hundreds of thousands
of people using marijuana medically, under medical supervision, the whole scam
is going to be blown. The consensus here is that medical marijuana is our
strongest suit. It is our point of leverage which will move us toward the
legalization of marijuana for personal use.”

Between 1996 and 2009, Soros, Lewis and Sperling contributed 80 percent of the
money to medicalize marijuana through state ballot initiatives. Their
financial contributions, exceeding $15.7 million (of the $19.5 million total
funding), enabled their groups to lie to voters in advertising campaigns,
cover up marijuana’s harmful effects, and portray pot as medicine—leading
people to believe that the drug is safe and should be legal for any use.

Today, polls show how successful the billionaires and their money have been.
In 28 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, voters and, later, legislators
have shown they believe marijuana is medicine, even though most of the
scientific and medical communities say marijuana is not medicine and should
not be legal. While the most recent report, issued by the National Academies
of Sciences (NAS), finds that marijuana may alleviate certain kinds of pain,
it also finds there is no rigorous, medically acceptable documentation that
marijuana is effective in treating any other illness. At the same time,
science offers irrefutable evidence that marijuana is addictive, harmful and
can hinder brain development in adolescents. At the distribution level, there
are no controls on the people who sell to consumers. Budtenders (marijuana
bartenders) have no medical or pharmaceutical training or qualifications.

One tactic used by legalizers was taking advantage of voter empathy for sick
people, along with the confusion about science and how the FDA approves drugs.
A positive finding in a test tube or petri dish is merely a first step in a
long, rigorous process leading to scientific consensus about the efficacy of a
drug. Scientific proof comes after randomized, controlled clinical trials, and
many drugs with promising early stage results never make it through the
complex sets of hurdles that prove efficacy and safety. But marijuana
legalizers use early promise and thin science to persuade and manipulate
empathetic legislators and voters into buying the spin that marijuana is a
cure-all.

People who are sick already have access to two FDA-approved drugs, Dronabinol
and Nabilone, that are not marijuana, but contain identical copies of some of
the components of marijuana. These drugs, available as pills, effectively
treat chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and AIDS wasting. The NAS
reviewed 10,700 abstracts of marijuana studies conducted since 1999, finding
that these two oral drugs are effective in adults for the conditions described
above. An extract containing two marijuana chemicals that is approved in other
countries, reduces spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. But there is no
evidence that marijuana treats other diseases, including epilepsy and most of
the other medical conditions the states have legalized marijuana to treat.
These conditions range from Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Crohn’s
disease to Hepatitis-C, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and even sickle
cell disease.

**Not So Fast – What about the Regulations?**

Legalizers also have convinced Americans that unregulated cannabidiol, a
marijuana component branded as cannabis oil, CBD, or Charlotte’s Web, cures
intractable seizures in children with epilepsy, and polls show some 90 percent
of Americans want medical marijuana legalized, particularly for these sick
children. In Colorado, the American Epilepsy Society reports that children
with epilepsy are receiving unregulated, highly variable artisanal
preparations of cannabis oil recommended, in most cases, by doctors with no
training in paediatrics, neurology or epilepsy. Young patients have had severe
dystonic reactions and other movement disorders, developmental regression,
intractable vomiting and worsening seizures that can be so severe that their
physicians have to put the child into a coma to get the seizures to stop.
Because of these dangerous side effects, not one paediatric neurologist in
Colorado, where unregulated cannabidiol is legal, recommends it for these
children.

Dr. Sanjay Gupta further clouded the issue when he produced Weed in 2013, a
three-part documentary series for CNN on marijuana as medicine. In all three
programs, Dr. Gupta promoted CBD oil, the kind the American Epilepsy Society
calls artisanal. This is because not one CBD product sold in legal states has
been purified to Food and Drug Administration (FDA) standards, tested, or
proven safe and effective. The U.S. Congress and the FDA developed rigid
processes to review drugs and prevent medical tragedies such as birth defects
caused by thalidomide. These processes have facilitated the greatest advances
in medicine in history.

“By end-running the FDA, three billionaires have been willing to wreck the
drug approval process that has protected Americans from unsafe, ineffective
drugs for more than a century,” said Sue Rusche, president and CEO of National
Families in Action and author of the report. “Unsubstantiated claims for the
curative powers of marijuana abound.” No one can be sure of the purity,
content, side effects or potential of medical marijuana to cause cancer or any
other disease. When people get sick from medical marijuana, there are no
uniform mechanisms to recall products causing the harm. Some pot medicines
contain no active ingredients. Others contain contaminants. “Sick people,
especially children, suffer while marijuana medicine men make money at their
expense,” added Ms. Rusche.

**Marijuana Industry – Taking a Page from the Tobacco Industry** The paper
draws a parallel between the marijuana and tobacco industries, both built with
the knowledge that a certain percentage of users will become addicted and
guaranteed lifetime customers. Like tobacco, legalized marijuana will produce
an unprecedented array of new health, safety and financial consequences to
Americans and their children.

“Americans learned the hard way about the tragic effects of tobacco and the
deceptive practices of the tobacco industry. Making another addictive drug
legal unleashes a commercial business that is unable to resist the opportunity
to make billions of dollars on the back of human suffering, unattained life
goals, disease, and death,” said Ms. Rusche. “If people genuinely understood
that marijuana can cause cognitive, safety and mental health problems, is
addictive, and that addiction rates may be three times higher than reported,
neither voters nor legislators would legalize pot.” NDPA recommends readers to
read the whole report Tracking the Money That’s Legalizing Marijuana and Why
It Matters

_Source: www.nationalfamilies.org. 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Health,Social Affairs,USA :

· Trials on mice found THC - which causes the 'high' in weed, can induce
seizures

· The same was shown for JWH-018 - the main part of the synthetic cannabis
spice

· Japanese researchers have described their findings are being 'quite
important'

· Skunk, made mostly of THC, dominates the illegal British market of marijuana

Smoking super-strength cannabis or spice may trigger life-threatening
seizures, researchers have warned.

Trials on mice showed seizures can be induced by both THC - which causes the
'high' in marijuana, and JWH-018 - the main component of spice. The rodents
also suffered from a shortness of breath and impaired walking after being
given both compounds, the scientists discovered.

Japanese researchers warned the results should act as a wake-up call, given
how widely high-potency and synthetic weed is used.

The findings contradicts pro-cannabis campaigners who have long argued that
cannabis can help to tackle seizures and highlighted research which shows weed
can prevent and control seizures in epileptic patients.

However, lead researcher Dr Olga Malyshevskaya, based at the University of
Tsukuba, said the latest findings show cannabis is not a soft drug and warned
of its dangers.

She said: 'Our study is quite important. Unaware of the particularly severe
effect by those cannabinoids, people see marijuana as a soft drug, without
dangerous health effects.'

She added: 'It is critically important for health-care professionals and
policy makers to be aware of the serious adverse effects, as shown in this
report. Clinicians in the emergency departments should always suspect seizure
activity in patients who have a history of cannabinoid intoxication.

WHAT IS THC?

THC is found in all forms of cannabis, but is abundant in skunk - a super-
strength form of the drug that dominates Britain's illegal market.

Some 80 per cent of what is available on the streets is believed to be skunk,
which is created by growers aiming to make the most potent strain of the drug
possible in order to maximise their profits.

They remove high amounts of CBD from the plant, allowing the modified herb to
contain only THC. It is unsure how much THC was in the strain of cannabis used
in the new study.

Over the years, a host of previous research has pointed to a link between the
popular recreational drug and mental health conditions. Last October,
University College London researchers found that skunk may be twice as
addictive as normal strains of cannabis.

Similar health concerns have been raised about synthetic cannabis spice, which
can slump users and turn them into 'zombies'.

It was previously known as a legal high before it was banned last year
following a surge in its use. Now it has reached epidemic levels in prison.

'The number of clinical cases involving marijuana intoxication has been
steadily increasing due to increase in cannabis potency over the last two
decades.'

What do other experts think?

Ian Hamilton, a cannabis researcher at York University, cautioned the results,
which are published in Scientific Reports.

He told MailOnline: 'We don't know if people who use cannabis are using
something as potent as this.' For the study, researchers measured the brain
activity of the mice after giving them both compounds and recorded them.

Research that claims to show cannabis can control seizures

The findings contradict a body of research which shows weed can prevent and
control seizures in epileptic patients. Campaigners have long argued that
cannabis has the opposite effect to the new findings and can help to tackle
seizures.

Researchers have previously suggested that CBD - the other compound in
cannabis which produces no 'high', binds to a receptor in the brain that calms
down the electrical activity in the brain which causes a seizure.

First Briton to be prescribed liquid cannabis oil on the NHS

Their case was strengthened when an 11-year-old on the brink of death from a
severe form of epilepsy made an 'incredible' recovery from taking marijuana.

Billy Caldwell, from Castlederg, Northern Ireland, made headlines in April
when he became the first Briton to be prescribed such a drug on the NHS.

And 10 months since he was first given the liquid cannabis oil, he hasn't had
any seizures. He used to suffer up to 100 a day.

THE MAN WHO SUFFERS SEIZURES FROM SYNTHETIC CANNABIS

The news comes just a week after DailyMail.com reported on a disturbing video
which shows a man from Des Moines, Iowa, having a seizure as an effect of
years smoking synthetic marijuana.

Coby O'Brien-Emerick, 27, has experienced chronic seizures every three months
for the past five years, putting him in the hospital for weeks on end.

In the video uploaded in December, Coby is seen on the floor convulsing for
about nine minutes while paramedics are being called.

The father-of-two told Dailymail.com he asked for his seizure to be recorded
in order to understand the severity of it.

The video was posted to YouTube by his mother-in-law to warn others about the
dangerous effects of smoking synthetic marijuana .

_Source: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-4917100/Smoking-super-
strength-cannabis-trigger-seizures.html 26 Sept. 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,Others
(International News) :

2015 will be remembered as the year legalization hit bumps most supporters
never anticipated.

For pro-health advocates that oppose marijuana legalization, it was a year of
fantastic victories! Here are the top 10:

**10\. Big Marijuana is Real — and People are Writing About It.**

When we started talking about Big Marijuana in 2013, many people laughed.
Could marijuana even be compared with Big Tobacco in any credible way? But
now, that’s ancient history. Several articles - even in legalization-friendly
blogs like this one - mention the term. And the term is not just rhetoric —
the most senior federal legalization lobbyist in the country resigned in
protest because, in his words, “industry was taking over the legalization
movement.” Not only was that heroic of him, it was historic for us.

**9\. Continuing Positive Press Coverage of Groups Opposing Legalization.**

With the exception of some very pro-pot columnists, this year represented one
in which our side was represented just a little bit better than in the past. A
profile of SAM was featured in the International Business Times, and other
articles continued to broadcast our message to new audiences.

With the hiring of a new Communications Director in 2016, you can bet we won’t
let up on this next year.  
**  
8\. Several States Resisted Full-Blown Legalization.**

We entered 2014 after setbacks in Alaska and Oregon; but we stuck to winning
messages and formed coalitions in a bloc of New England states that were all
under attack in the early part of 2015. From Maine to Massachusetts to New
Hampshire to Rhode Island, our partners and affiliates fought back —- and not
one state legalized via legislature as the legalizers had promised. We’ll be
taking this momentum into 2016.

**7\. Lawyering Up.**

**** Many of our friends made strong statements in court — “Colorado and other
states cannot legalize in the face of federal law,” they argue. Of course we
know they are right, and we know that regardless of legal outcomes the
statement they sent was loud and clear. (We’re also happy that the Justice
Department, in its opposition to the suit, solely argued against it on
procedural grounds — they did not substantively come out in favor of
legalization to the Solicitor General). The plaintiff’s bar should take
notice—just like Big Tobacco became a big target for lawsuits, Big Marijuana
and those who sell the drug will, too.

**6\. Marijuana Stores Banned in California, Washington, Colorado, Oregon,
Michigan, and Elsewhere.**

Despite legalization in some states, we know that local ordinances are one of
the key strategies to keeping marijuana out of communities. The majority of
towns in most weed-friendly states have indeed banned stores altogether. Even
in Detroit, up to half of Detroit’s roughly 150 medical marijuana dispensaries
could close following a Detroit City Council vote to approve a restrictive
zoning ordinance. We will keep pushing hard for more bans in 2016.  
**  
5\. Legalizers Made No Gains in Congress This Year**.

For the past decade, it seemed that every year we lost a little more in
Congress. Not in 2015. Despite the most aggressive lobbying effort yet by pro-
marijuana folks, they made no progress on key provisions:

· They wanted to give tax breaks to pot shops—just like Big Tobacco lobbies to
lower taxes on cigarettes.

  * They wanted to allow pot businesses to leverage Wall Street money through the banking system.
  * They wanted to stop the Justice Department from enforcing the law in states with legalized recreational marijuana.
  * They wanted to give pot to our most vulnerable citizens to “treat” PTSD — even though science says marijuana makes PTSD, as well as other mental illness, worse.
  * They wanted Washington, DC, to become a mecca for Big Marijuana.

And we won - on every issue.

**4\. Continued Support from ONDCP, DEA, and NIDA**.

2015 was a transitional year for key federal drug policy agencies. A new ONDCP
Director was appointed — and even though we are still waiting for the Obama
Administration to enforce federal law, it is clear where Director Botticelli’s
heart is. Right after getting into office, the Director sat down with me for a
one-to-one on-the-record interview where he blasted legal pot. And only a few
weeks ago, he was featured on 60 Minutes talking about the harms of marijuana
and the harms of the industry.

Additionally, we saw the appointment of a new DEA Administrator — this time
from the FBI. Administrator Rosenberg has been an excellent leader by moving
to support legitimate medical research over faux claims of “medical”
marijuana.

And we continue to receive support from NIDA Director Nora Volkow, who
headlined SAM’s summit last year, for her unwavering support of public health
above profits.

**3\. Real Progress on Researching the Medical Components of Marijuana.**

**** I’m proud that SAM took a bold stand this year to defend the legitimate
research of medical components of marijuana. And our ground-breaking report
paid off. The federal government has already adopted two of the report’s
provisions — eliminating the Public Health Service review and getting rid of
onerous CBD handling requirements. We will continue to fight for legitimate
marijuana research, and to separate it from faux medicine-by-ballot-
initiative.

**2\. No States Legalized “Medical” Marijuana in 2015.**

This is a big one, given where the country is on the “medical” marijuana
issue. No state legalized the drug for medical purposes this year, despite
several tries in key states. Even in Georgia, where legalizers have been
emboldened by a few pot-friendly legislators, a government-convened panel
voted to follow science and impose sensible restrictions on the drug.

**1\. Ohio!**

Of course, the victory in Ohio tops the field. Despite being outspent 12-to-1,
our affiliates and partners brought us a huge victory in November. We plan to
build on this for 2016, but we need your help.

Despite the nonstop talking point of “inevitability,” we know that the 8% of
Americans who use pot don’t speak for 92% of Americans that don’t want to see
Big Tobacco 2.0, don’t want to worry about another drug impairing drivers on
the road, and don’t want to think about keeping things like innocuous-looking
“pot gummy bears” away from their kids. We know that the pot lobby will work
hard for things like not only full-blown legalization in several more states
next year, but also things like on-site pot smoking “bars” (they are really
proposing these in Alaska and Colorado as we speak) and an expansion of pot
edibles.

In 2016, let’s nip Big Marijuana in the bud.

Source: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/kevin-a-sabet-phd/top-10-antimarijuana-
lega_b_8879338.html

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Political
Sector,USA :

_Legalisation of cannabis is likely to lack priority for this new government._

There is one benefit to MMP, it is that the whackier campaign ideas tend to
perish in the coalition negotiation process.

That hasn't entirely been the case this time, the worst example being the
Green Party's promise to initiate a referendum on the subject of legalising
cannabis (by 2020).

This would seem to be a case of a party formulating policy in the hope that it
will garner votes as opposed to genuinely believing it will be beneficial.
That view is reinforced by Green leader James Shaw's assurance last week that
he had never smoked cannabis, adding the illuminating comment, "It isn't good
for you, is it?"

_" We know that cannabis is a carcinogenic, as is tobacco. Unlike tobacco,
however, it is also linked, beyond dispute, with mental illness and poor
academic achievement."_

Too right it isn't. There is enough evidence to support that to stupefy an
entire nation, which makes it all the more extraordinary that he would not
only propose a referendum in the first place, but would stick to his guns when
it came to striking a deal with Labour.

All the more extraordinary because Mr Shaw's party is one of the leading
lights in the drive to make New Zealand tobacco-free by 2025. (Presumably the
term smoke-free is now redundant).

If all goes according to his plan, a substance that harms the physical health
of the user will disappear just in time to be replaced by another substance
that does even more damage, physically, emotionally and intellectually, than
tobacco ever has.

We know that cannabis is a carcinogenic, as is tobacco. Unlike tobacco,
however, it is also linked, beyond dispute, with mental illness and poor
academic achievement. From there it can be held accountable for reducing the
user's ability to find employment, and everything that goes with that,
including poverty, for themselves and their dependents.

The drive for legalisation has taken a turn (for the worse) this time around
because of strident appeals to recognise its medicinal benefits. It might well
dull pain - it certainly dulls most of the user's senses - but there is a
undoubtedly deliberate blurring of the lines by the drug's supporters between
medicinal cannabis, which does not include its mind-altering properties, and
the 'benefits' to be gained by allowing its cultivation/possession and
consumption in the traditional manner.

People have long waxed eloquent about cannabis as a pain killer, usually from
the dock as they are in the process of being sentenced for growing the stuff.
If personal experience of that is anything to go by, its fans tend to show all
the signs of long-term use, which might make them happy but has reduced their
role in society to that of passengers.

It might well be true that cannabis does not represent any great threat to the
physical or mental health of a middle-aged dope smoker who indulges on an
occasional basis. The same cannot be said for those who start young, and
there, Mr Shaw, lies the rub.

We have been told for years, most often by the National Organisation for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws (Norml - there's an oxymoron for you) that
legalisation would of course need to be accompanied by strict controls that
would keep it out of the hands of young people.

That assurance has been given to the writer on numerous occasions, but no one
has ever been able to explain how any such measures would stand any chance of
success, given our experience with tobacco and alcohol.

Neither of those substances may be legally purchased or used by minors, but
both are. No one in this country has yet been able to devise controls that
prevent that, and the same, inevitably, will apply to cannabis. Prove to us
that you have cracked that, Mr Shaw, and people might start listening to you.

The best reason for not legalising cannabis was offered to this newspaper some
years ago by a teacher at Kaitaia College. He said the college was home to any
number of bright, determined, ambitious young people who knew what they wanted
to do with their lives, and had mapped out exactly how they were going to
achieve their ambitions.

They knew that even a minor cannabis conviction would nobble those ambitions,
and for that reason alone wouldn't touch the stuff with a barge pole.

No one the writer knows has ever come up with a better reason for not
legalising it. And no one will. If it is legalised future generations of
bright, ambitious young people will assuredly dabble in it, to their (and our)
cost.

Even if they don't succumb to regular use it will rob them, to some degree, of
their potential, to a far greater degree than flirting with alcohol or tobacco
ever would.

We don't hear Mr Shaw, or anyone else, suggesting that our children should
have greater access than they already do to alcohol and tobacco, for good
reason. How they can be prepared to countenance access to cannabis defies
explanation.

Perhaps Mr Shaw's political interest in this issue outweighs any concern he
might have for future generations. Perhaps the legalising of cannabis has such
appeal to his voter base that he can accept the inevitable collateral damage.
Hopefully he is in a very small minority, and will remain so.

And don't buy the hoary old story that our prisons are full of people who
wouldn't be there if cannabis was legal. Those who insist that this is true
have either been doing too much personal research into the 'benefits' of
sucking on cannabis cigarette all day or are deliberately trying to deceive.

No one is in jail in this country today purely because they have been caught
using cannabis. One or two might be there because they were caught growing or
dealing it on a substantial scale, but possession of cannabis, whatever the
law might say, is no longer an imprisonable offence in this country, and
hasn't been for a very long time.

There will be some who are in jail on convictions that include possession of
cannabis, but it won't have been the drug that put them behind bars. They will
have offended in other ways. To say that people are in jail because of
personal possession is a blatant lie.

Some elements of the current debate are certainly worth pursuing, including
that drug addiction in general should be regarded as a health issue rather
than a criminal matter. And there is no doubt that drug treatment facilities
are woefully inadequate. But again, this is where the pro-cannabis logic
collapses.

We know the harm cannabis does; we know it leads to dependence on much harsher
chemical substances; we know that people who become addicted, to whatever
substance, are unlikely to get the help they need to get off it. And we know
that the damage done, by cannabis and other drugs, is permanent. Dead brain
cells don't grow back.

Yet here we are talking about legalising it. It makes no sense whatsoever to
even consider it. A handful of people might genuinely believe that it will
ease their pain, or, in medical form, will reduce the severity of some far
from common conditions (again, the use of medical marijuana is a separate
issue), but legalising cannabis for all and sundry will not benefit society in
any imaginable way.

There can be absolutely no question that legalising cannabis will, in fact, do
enormous harm, and any politician who is unaware of that, or is prepared to
trade that harm for electoral success, has no place in Parliament.

Source:http://www2.nzherald.co.nz/northland-
age/opinion/news/article.cfm?c_id=1503399&objectid=11938825-

Filed under: Canada,Cannabis/Marijuana,DRUG POLITICS,Political Sector :

There is current research into the probable genotoxicity of marijuana and this
has been likened to the harm to the foetus in the womb from the drug
Thalidomide in the 1960’s.

In the annals of modern medicine, it was a horror story of international
scope: thousands of babies dead in the womb and at least 10,000 others in 46
countries born with severe deformities. Some of the children were missing
limbs. Others had arms and legs that resembled a seal’s flippers. In many
cases, eyes, ears and other organs and tissues failed to develop properly. The
cause, scientists discovered by late 1961, was thalidomide, a drug that,
during four years of commercial sales in countries from Germany to Australia,
was marketed to pregnant women as a miracle cure for morning sickness and
insomnia.

The tragedy was largely averted in the United States, with much credit due to
Frances Oldham Kelsey, a medical officer at the Food and Drug Administration
in Washington, who raised concerns about thalidomide before its effects were
conclusively known. For a critical 19-month period, she fastidiously blocked
its approval while drug company officials maligned her as a bureaucratic
nitpicker. Dr. Kelsey, a physician and pharmacologist later lauded as a
heroine of the federal workforce, died Aug. 7 at her daughter’s home in
London, Ontario. She was 101. Her daughter, Christine Kelsey, confirmed her
death but did not cite a specific cause.

Dr. Kelsey did not single-handedly uncover thalidomide’s hazards. Clinical
investigators and health authorities around the world played an important
role, as did several of her FDA peers. But because of her tenacity and
clinical training, she became the central figure in the thalidomide episode.

In July 1962, The Washington Post directed national attention on the matter —
and on Dr. Kelsey — with a front-page article reporting that her “scepticism
and stubbornness … prevented what could have been an appalling American
tragedy.” [From 1962: ‘Heroine’ of FDA keeps bad drug off the market].

The global thalidomide calamity precipitated legislation signed by President
John F. Kennedy in October 1962 that substantially strengthened the FDA’s
authority over drug testing. The new regulations, still in force, required
pharmaceutical companies to conduct phased clinical trials, obtain informed
consent from participants in drug testing, and warn the FDA of adverse
effects, and granted the FDA with important controls over prescription-drug
advertising.

As the new federal law was being hammered out, Kennedy rushed to include Dr.
Kelsey in a previously scheduled White House award ceremony honouring
influential civil servants, including an architect of NASA’s manned
spaceflight program.“In a way, they tied her to the moonshot in showing what
government scientists were capable of,” said Stephen Fried, a journalist who
investigated the drug industry in the book “Bitter Pills.” “It was an act of
incredible daring and bravery to say we need to wait longer before we expose
the American people to this drug.”

Dr. Kelsey became, Fried said, “the most famous government regulator in
American history.”

‘I was the newest person there and pretty green’

Dr. Kelsey had landed at the FDA in August 1960, one of seven full-time
medical officers hired to review about 300 human drug applications per
year.The number of women pursuing careers in science was minuscule, but Dr.
Kelsey had long been comfortable in male-dominated environments. Growing up in
Canada, she spent part of her childhood in an otherwise all-boys private
school. She had two daughters while shouldering the demands of medical school
in the late 1940s.

In Washington, she joined a corps of reform-minded scientists who, although
not yet empowered by the 1962 law that required affirmative FDA approval of
any new drug, demanded strong evidence of effectiveness before giving their
imprimatur.At the time, a drug could go on the market 60 days after the
manufacturer filed an application with the FDA. If the medical officer
determined that the submission was incomplete, the drug company could provide
additional information, and the clock would start anew.

Meanwhile, pharmaceutical drug companies commonly supplied doctors with new
drugs and encouraged them to test the product on patients, an uncontrolled and
dangerous practice that relied almost entirely on anecdotal evidence.
Thalidomide, which was widely marketed as a sedative as well as a treatment
for pregnancy-related nausea during the first trimester of pregnancy, had
proven wildly popular in Europe and a boon for its German manufacturer, Chemie
Grünenthal.

By the fall of 1960, a Cincinnati-based drug company, William S. Merrell, had
licensed the drug and began to distribute it under the trade name Kevadon to
1,200 U.S. doctors in advance of what executives anticipated would be its
quick approval by the FDA.The government later estimated that more than 2.5
million tablets were given to about 20,000 patients, several hundred of whom
were pregnant.

The Merrell application landed on Dr. Kelsey’s desk within weeks of her
arrival at the agency. “I was the newest person there and pretty green,” she
later said in an FDA oral history, “so my supervisors decided, ‘Well, this is
a very easy one. There will be no problems with sleeping pills.’ ” Immediately
the application alarmed her. Despite what she called the company’s “quite
fulsome” claims, the absorption and toxicity studies were so incomplete as to
be almost meaningless.

Dr. Kelsey rejected the application numerous times and requested more data.
Merrell representatives, who had large potential profits riding on the
application, began to complain to her bosses and show up at her office, with
respected clinical investigators in tow, to protest the hold-up. Dr. Kelsey’s
FDA superiors backed her as she conducted her research. By February 1961, she
had found more evidence to support her suspicions, including a letter in the
British Medical Journal by an English doctor who reported that his patients on
thalidomide experienced a painful “tingling” in the arms and feet.

Dr. Kelsey also discovered that, despite warnings of side effects printed on
British and German drug labels, Merrell had not notified the FDA of any
adverse reactions. Another reason for her concern was that the company had
apparently done no studies on pregnant animals. At the time, a prevailing view
among doctors held that the placental barrier protected the foetus from what
Dr. Kelsey once called “the indiscretions of the mother,” such as abuse of
alcohol, tobacco or illegal drugs. Earlier in her career, however, she had
investigated the ways in which drugs did in fact pass through the placenta
from mother to baby.

While Dr. Kelsey stood her ground on Kevadon, infant deaths and deformities
were occurring at an alarming rate in places where thalidomide had been sold.
The development of seal-like flippers, a condition known as phocomelia that
previously affected an estimated 1 in 4 million infants, began to crop up by
the dozens in many countries.

Clinical investigators, because of a variety of complications including spotty
tracking systems, only belatedly made the link to thalidomide. Grünenthal
began pulling the drug from the market in Germany in late 1961. Health
authorities in other countries issued warnings. Merrell waited until March
1962 to withdraw its U.S. application. By then, at least 17 babies were born
in the United States with thalidomide-related defects, according to the FDA

**Influence beyond thalidomide**

Dr. Kelsey might have remained an anonymous bureaucrat if not for the front-
page story in The Post. The newspaper had received a tip about her from
staffers working for Sen. Estes Kefauver, a Tennessee Democrat who had been
stalled in his years-long battle with the pharmaceutical industry to bolster
the country’s drug laws. The coverage of Dr. Kelsey gave her — and Kefauver —
a lift. As thousands of grateful letters flowed in to Dr. Kelsey from the
public, the proposed legislation became hard to ignore or to water down. The
new law was widely known as the Kefauver-Harris Amendments.

“She had a huge effect on the regulations adopted in the 1960s to help create
the modern clinical trial system,” said Daniel Carpenter, a professor of
government at Harvard University and the author of “Reputation and Power,” a
definitive history of the FDA. “She may have had a bigger effect after
thalidomide than before.”

In 1963, Dr. Kelsey was named chief of the FDA’s investigational drug branch.
Four years later, she was named director of the new Office of Scientific
Investigations, a position she held until 1995. She spent another decade,
until her retirement at 90, working at the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research. In that role, she advised the director of its compliance office
on scientific and medical issues and analyzed historical drug review issues.

According to historians of the FDA, she was instrumental in establishing the
institutional review boards — a cornerstone of modern clinical drug
development — that were created after abusive drug testing trials were exposed
in prisons, hospitals and nursing homes. For decades, Dr. Kelsey played a
critical role at the agency in enforcing federal regulations for drug
development — protocols that were credited with forcing more rigorous
standards around the world.

**Name mistaken for a man’s**

Frances Kathleen Oldham was born near Cobble Hill, on Vancouver Island,
British Columbia, on July 24, 1914. Her father was a retired British army
officer, and her mother came from a prosperous Scottish family. The young
“Frankie,” as she was called, grew up exploring the woods and shorelines,
sometimes bringing home frogs for dissection. At McGill University in
Montreal, she studied pharmacology — the effects of drugs on people — and
received a bachelor’s degree in 1934 and a master’s degree in 1935.

A McGill professor urged her to apply for a research assistant job at the
University of Chicago, where pharmacology professor Eugene Geiling accepted
her without an interview. Geiling, who had mistaken the names Frances for the
masculine Francis, addressed her by mail as “Mr. Oldham.”

“When a woman took a job in those days, she was made to feel as if she was
depriving a man of the ability to support his wife and child,” Dr. Kelsey told
the New York Times in 2010. “But my professor said: ‘Don’t be stupid. Accept
the job, sign your name and put “Miss” in brackets afterward.’ ”

In Chicago, she helped Geiling investigate the 107 deaths that occurred
nationwide in 1937 from the newly marketed liquid form of sulfanilamide, a
synthetic antibacterial drug used to treat streptococcal infections. In tablet
form, it had been heralded as a wonder-drug of the age, but it tasted
unpleasant.Because the drug was not soluble in water or alcohol, the chief
chemist of its manufacturer, S.E. Massengill Co. of Bristol, Tenn., dissolved
the sulfanilamide with an industrial substance that was a chemical relative of
antifreeze. He then added cherry flavouring and pink colouring to remedy the
taste and appearance.

Massengill rushed the new elixir to market without adequately testing its
safety. Many who took the medicine — including a high number of children —
suffered an agonizing death. At the time, the FDA’s chief mandate, stemming
from an obsolete 1906 law, was food safety. At the agency’s request, Geiling
joined the Elixir Sulfanilamide investigation and put Dr. Kelsey to work on
animal testing of the drug. She recalled observing rats as they “shrivelled up
and died.”

Amid national outrage over Elixir Sulfanilamide, Congress passed the Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938, legislation that vastly expanded federal
regulatory oversight over drugs and set a new benchmark for drug safety before
marketing. Massengill’s owner ultimately was fined a maximum penalty of
$26,000 for mislabelling and misbranding; by technical definition, an elixir
contains alcohol.

**‘We need to take precautions’**

Dr. Kelsey received a doctorate from Chicago in 1938, then joined the faculty.
In 1943, she wed a pharmacology colleague, Fremont Ellis Kelsey. After
graduating from Chicago’s medical school in 1950, Frances Kelsey taught
pharmacology at the University of South Dakota medical school and was a fill-
in doctor at practices throughout the state. She also became a U.S. citizen
before arriving in Washington in 1960 when her husband was hired by the
National Institutes of Health. He died in 1966 after a heart attack.

Survivors include their daughters, Susan Duffield of Shelton, Wash., and
Christine Kelsey of London, Ontario; a sister; and two grandchildren. Dr.
Kelsey moved to Ontario from suburban Maryland in 2014.

Babies who suffered from the effects of thalidomide and survived grew up with
a range of impairment. Some required lifelong home care. Others held jobs and
were not severely hindered by their disabilities. Many legal settlements were
reached between drug companies and the victims of thalidomide, and new claims
continue to surface. Grünenthal formally apologized to victims of thalidomide
in 2012.

The drug, however, never disappeared entirely. Researchers have investigated
thalidomide’s effects on H.I.V. and Crohn’s disease and have conducted
clinical trials for on its use for rheumatoid arthritis and macular
degeneration, a leading cause of blindness.

In 1998, the FDA approved the drug for the treatment of lesions from leprosy.
In 2006, thalidomide was cleared for use with the medicine dexamethasone for
certain cases of multiple myeloma, a cancer of the bone marrow.

The agency enforced strict safeguards, including pregnancy testing, for such
new uses. “We need to take precautions,” Dr. Kelsey told an interviewer in in
2001, “because people forget very soon.”

_Source:https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/frances-
oldham-kelsey-heroine-of-thalidomide-tragedy-dies-at-101/2015/08/07_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Health,Medical Studies :

Researchers at Western University have found a way to use pharmaceuticals to
reverse the negative psychiatric effects of THC, the psychoactive chemical
found in marijuana. Chronic adolescent marijuana use has previously been
linked to the development of psychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia, in
adulthood. But until now, researchers were unsure of what exactly was
happening in the brain to cause this to occur.

"What is important about this study is that not only have we identified a
specific mechanism in the prefrontal cortex for some of the mental health
risks associated with adolescent marijuana use, but we have also identified a
mechanism to reverse those risks," said Steven Laviolette, professor at
Western's Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry.

In a study published online today in Scientific Reports the researchers
demonstrate that adolescent THC exposure modulates the activity of a
neurotransmitter called GABA in the prefrontal cortex region of the brain. The
team, led by Laviolette and post-doctoral fellow Justine Renard, looked
specifically at GABA because of its previously shown clinical association with
schizophrenia.

"GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter and plays a crucial role in regulating
the excitatory activity in the frontal cortex, so if you have less GABA, your
neuronal systems become hyperactive leading to behavioural changes consistent
with schizophrenia," said Renard.

The study showed that the reduction of GABA as a result of THC exposure in
adolescence caused the neurons in adulthood to not only be hyperactive in this
part of the brain, but also to be out of synch with each other, demonstrated
by abnormal oscillations called 'gamma' waves. This loss of GABA in the cortex
caused a corresponding hyperactive state in the brain's dopamine system, which
is commonly observed in schizophrenia.

By using drugs to activate GABA in a rat model of schizophrenia, the team was
able to reverse the neuronal and behavioural effects of the THC and eliminate
the schizophrenia-like symptoms.

Laviolette says this finding is especially important given the impending
legalization of marijuana in Canada. "What this could mean is that if you are
going to be using marijuana, in a recreational or medicinal way, you can
potentially combine it with compounds that boost GABA to block the negative
effects of THC."

The research team says the next steps will examine how combinations of
cannabinoid chemicals with compounds that can boost the brains GABA system may
serve as more effective and safer treatments for a variety of mental health
disorders, such as addiction, depression and anxiety.

_Source: The Marijuana Report.Org, Sept. 2017_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Youth :

by Elizabeth Stuyt, MD

For the past 27 years, working as an addiction psychiatrist, I have struggled
with big industries that push their products more for their financial gain
rather than the best interests of the clients they serve. The most
disconcerting piece occurs when physicians or other treatment providers or
governmental entities appear to be influenced by big industry, touting the
party line and minimizing any downsides to the product. I have experienced
this with the tobacco industry, the pharmaceutical industry and now with the
marijuana industry.

It is clear to me that wherever it happens, the push to legalize medical
marijuana is simply a back-door effort, by industry, to legalize retail
marijuana. However, the lack of any regulations on the potency of THC in
marijuana or marijuana products in Colorado has allowed the cannabis industry
to increase the potency of THC to astronomical proportions, resulting in a
burgeoning public health crisis.

The potency of THC in currently available marijuana has quadrupled since the
mid-1990s. The marijuana of the 1980s had <2% THC, 4.5% in 1997, 8.5% in 2006
and by 2015 the average potency of THC in the flower was 17%, with
concentrated products averaging 62% THC.

Sadly, the cannabidiol (CBD) concentrations in currently available marijuana
have remained the same or decreased. CBD is the component of marijuana that
appears to block or ameliorate the effects of THC. Plants that are bred to
produce high concentrations of THC cannot simultaneously produce high CBD.
Higher-potency THC has been achieved by genetically engineering plants to
product more THC and then preventing pollination so that the plant puts more
energy into producing cannabinoids rather than seeds. This type of cannabis is
referred to as sinsemilla (Spanish for without seed). (It has also been
referred to as “skunk” due to its strong smell.)

In my view, this is no different than when the tobacco industry increased the
potency of nicotine by genetically engineering tobacco plants to produce more
nicotine and then used additives like ammonia to increase the absorption of
nicotine. Industry’s efforts to increase the potency of an addictive substance
seem to be done purely with the idea of addicting as many people as possible
to guarantee continued customers. This certainly worked for the tobacco
industry. And we have increasing evidence that high potency THC cannabis use
is associated with an increased severity of cannabis dependence, especially in
young people.12

Although marijuana has been used for thousands of years for various medical
conditions, we have no idea if the benefit comes from the THC or CBD or one of
the other multiple cannabinoids present in marijuana, or a combination. And we
have no idea how much is needed or how often. Most of the research indicates
that it is likely the CBD that is more helpful but we obviously need research
on this. There is no evidence that increasing the potency of THC has any
medical benefits. In fact, a study on the benefits of smoked cannabis on pain
actually demonstrated that too high a dose of THC can cause hyperalgesia –
similar to what is seen with high dose opiates – meaning that the person
becomes more sensitive to pain with continued use. They found that 2% THC had
no effect on pain, 4% THC had some beneficial effects on chronic pain and 8%
resulted in hyperalgesia.3

The discovery of the “active component” in marijuana that makes it so
desirable is a fairly recent phenomenon. THC and CBD were first discovered in
1963 in Israel.4

Because cannabis was made a DEA schedule I drug in 1970, very little research
has been done on cannabis in the United States and most of the indications for
medical marijuana have very little good research backing up the use. The
chemical that is made by the body and fits the receptor which accommodates THC
was discovered in 1992.5

The researcher named the chemical anandamide which means “supreme joy” in
Sanskrit. However, it turns out that the endocannabinoid system plays a very
significant role in brain development that occurs during childhood and
adolescence. It controls glutamate and GABA homeostasis and plays a role in
strengthening and pruning synaptic connections in the prefrontal motor cortex.
The consequences of using the high potency THC products during this period,
especially without the protective benefits of CBD, are multifaceted and
include disturbance of the endocannabinoid system, which can result in
impaired cognitive development, lower IQ and increased risk of psychosis.

There is also evidence that marijuana use contributes to anxiety and
depression. A very large prospective study out of Australia tracked 1600 girls
for 7 years and found that those who used marijuana every day were 5 times
more likely to suffer from depression and anxiety than non-users.6

Teenage girls who used the drug a least once a week were twice as likely to
develop depression as those who did not use. In this study, cannabis use prior
to age 15 also increased the risk of developing schizophrenia symptoms.

While there definitely are people who can use marijuana responsibly without
any untoward effects, similar to how some people can drink alcohol responsibly
and not have any problems, there are people who are very sensitive to the
effects of THC, and its use can precipitate psychosis. The higher the potency
of THC the more likely this may happen and we have no idea how to predict who
will be affected. In one of the first double blind randomized placebo
controlled trials on smoked cannabis (maximum of 8% THC) for the treatment of
pain, a cannabis naïve participant had a psychotic reaction to the marijuana
in the study and this then required that all future study participants have
some experience with smoking marijuana.7

This kind of makes it difficult to have “blind” unbiased participants.

A 2015 study out of London analyzed 780 people ages 18-65, 410 with first
episode psychosis and 370 healthy controls, and found that users of high
potency (“skunk-like”) cannabis (THC > 15%) are three times as likely to have
a psychotic episode as people who never use cannabis, and the risk is fivefold
in people who smoke this form of the drug every day.89 There was no
association of psychosis with THC levels < 5%. Most of the marijuana in the
U.S. is of the high-THC variety. Many retailers in Colorado sell strains of
weed that contain 25 percent THC or more.

Sadly, Colorado has now joined several other states in approving PTSD as an
indication for the use of medical marijuana. Marijuana does not “treat” PTSD
any more than benzodiazepines or opiates “treat” PTSD. All these addictive
drugs do is mask the symptoms, allowing the person to continue life unaffected
by the memory of the trauma. However, the psychological trauma is never
resolved and the individual has to continue to use the substance in order to
cope. This sets the individual up for the development of addiction to the
substance or the use of other addictive substances. There is absolutely no
good research to support the use of marijuana for PTSD, and there is
observational data that this would be a bad idea unless this use was supported
by a lot more (and better-designed) longitudinal research.

In an excellent longitudinal, observational study from 1992 to 2011, 2,276
Veterans admitted to specialized VA treatment programs for PTSD had their
symptoms evaluated at intake and four months after discharge.10

They found that those who never used marijuana or quit using while in
treatment had the lowest levels of PTSD symptoms, while those who continued to
use or started using marijuana after treatment had worse symptoms of PTSD.
Those who started using the drug during treatment had higher levels of violent
behavior too.

Those of us working in the trenches in Colorado are seeing the downsides of
what our governor has called “one of the great social experiments of the 21st
century.” Emergency room physicians are seeing a significant increase in
people experiencing consequences from marijuana use since it was legalized.
One such physician wrote a very poignant piece about his experience returning
to his home town of Pueblo, Colorado where he is now practicing.11

His experiences are totally supported by the Rocky Mountain High Intensity
Drug Trafficking Report, volume 4 from September 2016 which documents
significant increases in marijuana related emergency department visits (49%)
and hospitalizations related to marijuana (32%) compared to rates prior to
retail legalization. This report also documents significant increases in the
use of marijuana by youth, with Colorado youth “past month marijuana use” for
2013/2014 being 74% higher than the national average, compared with 39% higher
in 2011/2012.

In Pueblo, Colorado, where I practice, it has developed into a perfect storm.
According to the Healthy Kids Colorado Survey in 2015, we have the highest
incidence of youth marijuana use in the state, with 30.1% reporting using
marijuana in the last 30 days. The legalization of retail marijuana seems to
be reflected in the increased abuse of opiates and heroin too. In addition to
the highest rates of marijuana use by youth, Pueblo has the highest rates of
heroin-related deaths in the state.

This is a very disturbing correlation that needs attention. I have definitely
seen in my practice that marijuana acts as a gateway drug to opiates, and to
relapse to opiates after treatment if the person goes back to using marijuana.
The Smart Approaches to Marijuana status report, which assesses state
compliance with federal marijuana enforcement policy, following what is known
as the Cole memo, documents that Colorado, four years after legalization, has
failed to meet the specific DOJ requirements on controlling recreational
marijuana production, distribution and use. This report documents a
significant increase in drugged driving crashes, youth marijuana use, a
thriving illegal black market and unabated sales of alcohol, which supports
the idea that people are not using marijuana instead of alcohol but rather in
addition to alcohol.

In spite of all this information, powerful people in the government of
Colorado have publicly minimized the consequences. Larry Wolk, MD, the Chief
Medical Officer for the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment,
has reported that he has “not seen any significant problems” with the
legalization of marijuana.

Governor Hickenlooper’s response to Attorney General Sessions recent questions
about compliance with the Cole Memo minimized the adolescent use of marijuana
by saying that youth marijuana use in Colorado has “remained stable since
legalization.” This is not true for Pueblo, but in any event, any use of
marijuana by youth in Colorado should not be minimized and should be a major
concern for future generations.

While there are people who believe we need to enforce federal law and go back
to making marijuana illegal, I am afraid the horse is already out of the barn
and cannot be put back in as we already have several states with “legal”
retail marijuana and multiple more with “medical marijuana.” I cannot conceive
of any way this could be reversed at this point, when the majority of society
supports the legalization of marijuana.

Solutions to our marijuana problems have to be realistic to our current
situation/environment. The number one solution is more education. Many people
seem to lack a true understanding of the drug and all the potential negative
consequences of the higher-potency THC. This is why education is so important.
Adults should have the right to make their own decisions but they need
informed consent, just like with any drug.

The biggest concern is with adolescent use and the developing brain. This
requires a lot more education and increased efforts at prevention, early
intervention and treatment. I believe society would be truly served by a
federal ban on all advertising of addicting drugs including alcohol, tobacco
and marijuana, as well as all pharmaceutical drugs. The decision to use a
pharmaceutical medication should be between the patient and the medical
professional, not influenced by big industry. We clearly have the big
industries— alcohol, tobacco and marijuana—doing everything they can to
influence the public and convince them to use their product.

Since we only have anecdotal evidence at this point that marijuana can aid any
medical condition, I recommend eliminating “medical marijuana” and just have
retail marijuana with limits on THC and regulations similar to alcohol and
tobacco. This could help take away the perception, which adolescents and
others have, that because is it “medical” it must be “safe.” In order to be
able to say it is medical, it should go through the same standards for testing
the safety and efficacy of any prescription drug.

In this vein, I believe we do need more research and that marijuana should be
reclassified as a schedule II drug so this can occur. Since marijuana has been
used medicinally for thousands of years, I believe that the plant deserves
some true research to determine if and what parts of the plant are helpful
medicinally. The reports that marijuana use resulted in less than 10% becoming
addicted to it were done back in the 1990s when THC levels were <5%. Since we
are seeing significant increases in people developing marijuana use disorder
with the higher doses of THC, perhaps the limits on THC should be <5%.
Editor’s note: for more information, see the pdf of the author’s talk on this
topic. Show 11 footnotes

_Source: https://www.madinamerica.com/2017/09/unintended-consequences-
colorado-social-experiment/ 11th September 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts,Health,Marijuana and Medicine,USA :

And Addiction-Connected Carcinogenicity, Congenital Toxicity And Heritable
Genotoxicity

Albert Stuart Reece, Gary Kenneth Hulse

Extracts from the above research. Recommend readers go to source for complete
study.

**A B S T R A C T**

The recent demonstration that massive scale chromosomal shattering or
pulverization can occur abruptly due to errors induced by interference with
the microtubule machinery of the mitotic spindle followed by haphazard
chromosomal annealing, together with sophisticated insights from epigenetics,
provide profound mechanistic insights into some of the most perplexing
classical observations of addiction medicine, including cancerogenesis, the
younger and aggressive onset of addiction-related carcinogenesis, the
heritability of addictive neurocircuitry and cancers, and foetal
malformations.

Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and other addictive agents have been shown to
inhibit tubulin polymerization which perturbs the formation and function of
the microtubules of the mitotic spindle. This disruption of the mitotic
machinery perturbs proper chromosomal segregation during anaphase and causes
micronucleus formation which is the primary locus and cause of the chromosomal
pulverization of chromothripsis and downstream genotoxic events including
oncogene induction and tumour suppressor silencing.

Moreover the complementation of multiple positive cannabis-cancer
epidemiological studies, and replicated dose-response relationships with
established mechanisms fulfils causal criteria. This information is also
consistent with data showing acceleration of the aging process by drugs of
addiction including alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, stimulants and opioids. THC
shows a non-linear sigmoidal dose-response relationship in multiple pertinent
in vitro and preclinical genotoxicity assays, and in this respect is similar
to the serious major human mutagen thalidomide. Rising community exposure,
tissue storage of cannabinoids, and increasingly potent phytocannabinoid
sources, suggests that the threshold mutagenic dose for cancerogenesis will
increasingly be crossed beyond the developing world, and raise
transgenerational transmission of teratogenicity as an increasing concern.

**CONCLUSION**

As mentioned above high dose cannabis and THC test positive in many
genotoxicity assays, albeit often with a highly non-linear threshold like
effects above low doses. As long ago as 2004 it was said that 3–41% of all
neonates born in various North American communities had been exposed to
cannabis [172]. Since cannabis is addictive [187], is becoming more potent
[77,83,86], quickly builds up in adipose tissues [62,82] and seems generally
to becoming more widely available under fluid regulatory regimes [187,188],
real concern must be expressed that the rising population level of cannabinoid
exposure will increasingly intersect the toxic thresholds for major
genotoxicity including chromosomal clastogenicity secondary to interference
and premature aging of the mitotic apparatus.

Under such a conceptualization, it would appear that the real boon of
restrictive cannabis regimes [189] is not their supposed success in any drug
war, but their confinement in the populations they protect, to a low dose
exposure paradigm which limits incident and transgenerational teratogenicity,
ageing, mental retardation and cancerogenicity.

_Source: Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis
Journal Homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/molmut January 2016_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health :

**Background**

On August 29, 2013, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines to
Federal prosecutors and law enforcement officials regarding where to focus
their drug enforcement efforts in states that have passed laws legalizing the
retail sales of marijuana. The so-called “Cole Memo” directs enforcement
officials to focus resources, including prosecutions, “on persons and
organizations whose conduct interferes with any one or more of [eight]
priorities, regardless of state law.”

Per the memorandum, the eight DOJ priorities are:

● Preventing distribution of marijuana to minors

● Preventing marijuana revenue from funding criminal enterprises, gangs or
cartels

● Preventing marijuana from moving out of states where it is legal

● Preventing use of state-legal marijuana sales as a cover for illegal
activity

● Preventing violence and use of firearms in growing or distributing marijuana

● Preventing drugged driving or exacerbation of other adverse public health
consequences associated with marijuana use

● Preventing growing marijuana on public lands

● Preventing marijuana possession or use on federal property

According to the Department of Justice, the Federal “hands-off” approach to
marijuana enforcement enumerated in the Cole Memo is contingent on its
expectation that “states and local governments that have enacted laws
authorizing marijuana-related conduct will implement strong and effective
regulatory and enforcement systems that will address the threat those state
laws could pose to public safety, public health, and other law enforcement
interests.

A system adequate to that task must not only contain robust controls and
procedures on paper, it must also be effective in practice.”

Unfortunately, since Colorado and Washington became the first states to
legalize the recreational sale of marijuana in 2012, evidence has emerged that
regulations intended to control the sale and use of marijuana have failed to
meet the promises made by advocates for legalization.

For example, states with legal marijuana are seeing an increase in drugged
driving crashes and youth marijuana use. States that have legalized marijuana
are also failing to shore up state budget shortfalls with marijuana taxes,
continuing to see a thriving illegal black market, and are experiencing an
unabated sales of alcohol, despite campaign promises from advocates promising
that marijuana would be used as a “safer” alternative instead.

Moreover, state regulatory frameworks established post-legalization have
failed to meet each of the specific DOJ requirements on controlling
recreational marijuana production, distribution, and use.

While long-term studies and research on the public health and safety impacts
of marijuana legalization are ongoing, this report provides a partial census
of readily available information that demonstrates how Colorado, Oregon, and
Washington State -

the jurisdictions with the most mature regulatory markets and schemes - have
not fulfilled the requirements of the Cole Memo.

DOJ Guideline 1: “Preventing distribution of marijuana to minors”

● According to the nation's largest and most comprehensive survey of drug use
trends in the nation, past-month use of marijuana among 12 to 17-year-olds in
Colorado increased significantly - from 9.82% to 12.56% after marijuana retail
sales began (Colorado legalized marijuana in 2012 and implemented legal
marijuana stores in 2014).

The same study notes that teens and adults in Colorado now use marijuana at a
higher rate than the rest of the country. No other representative sample of
drug users in Colorado has contradicted this sample.

● A 2017 study from the University of Colorado found that marijuana-related
emergency room visits and visits to its satellite urgent care centers by teens
in Colorado more than quadrupled after the state legalized marijuana.

● In Colorado, a new report from the state’s public safety agency reveals that
after the state legalized the drug, marijuana-related arrests for black and
Hispanic youth rose by 58% and 29% respectively, while arrest rates for white
kids dropped by eight percent. School Resource Officers in Colorado have
reported a substantial increase in marijuana-related offenses in Colorado
schools after the state commercialized the drug.

● According to data from the State of Washington, there have been over 240
violations of legal marijuana sales to minors and of minors frequenting
restricted marijuana sales areas as of July 2017. ● Youth use – among 8th and
10th graders at least – is increasing in Washington State. According to a
special analysis of teenage drug use published in the peer-reviewed, highly
regarded Journal of American Medical Association Pediatrics, the perceived
harmfulness of marijuana in Washington declined 14.2% and 16.1% among eighth
and 10th graders, respectively, while marijuana use increased 2.0% and 4.1%
from 2010-2012 to 2013-2015.

● According to the Washington State Office of the Superintendent of Public
Instruction during 2013-2014, 48 percent of statewide student expulsions were
for marijuana in comparison to alcohol, tobacco, and other illicit drugs.
During the 2014-2015 school year, statewide student expulsions for marijuana
increased to 60 percent. Marijuana related suspensions for the 2013-2014
school year reported 42 percent and for the 2014-2015 school year, suspensions
increased to 49 percent.

● In Washington State, youth (12-17) accounted for 64.9% of all state
marijuana seizures in 2015 as compared to 29.9% in 2010, according to data
from the National Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS).

● From 2012 to 2016, reported exposure calls for marijuana increased 105
percent in Washington. According to the 2016 Annual Cannabis Toxic Trends
Report, of exposures related to children under the age of five, 73 percent
occurred in those one to three years of age. The counties with the highest
reported exposures for both 2015 and 2016 were: King, Spokane, Snohomish, and
Pierce.

DOJ Guideline 2: “Preventing revenue of the sale of marijuana from going to
criminal enterprises, gangs, and cartels”

● In June 2017, Colorado Attorney General Cynthia Coffman announced a takedown
of a massive illegal marijuana trafficking ring in Colorado. The bust is the
largest since legalization and indicted 62 individuals and 12 businesses in
Colorado. The operation stretched into other states including Kansas, Texas,
Nebraska, Ohio and Oklahoma.

● In March 2017, a leaked report from the Oregon State Police uncovered
evidence from state officials that the black market for marijuana continues to
thrive in the state. The 39-page report noted that, “The illicit exportation
of cannabis must be stemmed as it undermines the spirit of the law and the
integrity of the legal market…it steals economic power from the market, the
government, and the citizens of Oregon, and furnishes it to criminals, thereby
tarnishing state compliance efforts.”

Washington State Office of the Superintendent of Instruction. (2016, Jan. 26).
Behavior Report. http://www.k12.wa.us/SafetyCenter/Behavior/default.aspx

Washington State Poison Center – Toxic Trends Report: 2016 Annual Cannabis
Report

● In 2016, Seattle Police spokesman Sean Whitcomb noted that “large-scale
illegal grow operations… are still prevalent in Seattle, and we do come across
those with a degree of frequency.” DOJ Guideline 3: “Preventing the diversion
of marijuana from states where it is legal under state law in some form to
other states”

● In 2014, two states - Nebraska and Oklahoma - sued their neighbor state of
Colorado by citing evidence of increased marijuana flowing into those states.
Law enforcement officials have reported a substantial increase in marijuana
flow across state borders into neighboring states.

● In 2016, there were multiple raids conducted by state law enforcement in
Colorado, leading authorities to seize more than 22,0000 pounds of marijuana
intended for sales outside of Colorado.

● According to the Oregon State Police, the state has an “expansive geographic
footprint” on marijuana exports across the U.S. Several counties in Oregon
including Jackson, Multnomah, Josephine, Lane, Deschutes and Washington "lead
the way" in supplying marijuana to states where it is not legal.

● According to the Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area task
force, “there were 360 seizures of marijuana in Colorado destined for other
states. This is nearly a 600% increase in the number of individual stops in a
decade, seizing about 3,671 pounds in 2014. Of the 360 seizures reported in
2014, 36 different states were identified as destinations, the most common
being Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, Oklahoma and Florida.”

● Law enforcement officials report that since legalization in 2012, Washington
State marijuana has been found to be destined for 38 different states
throughout the United States. Between 2012 and 2017, 8,242.39 kilograms
(18,171.35 pounds) have been seized in 733 individual seizure events across 38
states. From 2012 to 2016, 470 pounds of marijuana have been seized on
Washington State highways and interstates. Since 2012, 320 pounds of
Washington State-origin marijuana have been seized during attempted parcel
diversions. DOJ Guideline 4: “Preventing state-authorized marijuana activity
from being used as a cover or pretext for the trafficking of other illegal
drugs or other illegal activity”

● According to Jorge Duque from the Colorado Department of Law, cartels
operating in Colorado are now “trading drugs like heroin for marijuana,” and
the trade has since opened the door to drug and human trafficking. Duque also
explains that money 5 laundering is a growing problem as “cartels are often
disguising their money through legally purchasing marijuana or buying houses
and growing marijuana in it.”

● In June 2017, a former Colorado marijuana enforcement officer and a Denver-
based marijuana entrepreneur were indicted for running a statewide marijuana
trafficking ring that illegally produced and sold “millions of dollars worth
of marijuana across state lines.” This trafficking organization obtained 14
marijuana licenses in order to present their activities as protected business
endeavors, despite “never ma[king] a single legal sale of cannabis in their
two years of operation.”

● In Oregon, State Police officials report that criminals are exploiting
Oregon’s legal marijuana industry for financial crimes and fraud. In one
example, according to the Oregon State Police report, “Tisha Silver of
Cannacea Medical Marijuana Dispensary falsified licensing to solicit investors
and worked with Green Rush Consulting to locate unwitting investors. Silver
exploited the burgeoning cannabis industry in the state to entice investors to
back an illegitimate company, securing a quarter of a million dollars in
fraudulent gains. According to some analysts, cannabis investors fell prey to
‘pump and dump’ schemes and lost up to $23.3 billion in 2014 alone.”

● Officials in Oregon note that the U.S. Postal Service is being exploited to
ship marijuana products and revenue. According to former Attorney General Eric
Holder, “The Postal Service is being used to facilitate drug dealing,” a clear
violation of federal law and a violation of the sanctity of the U.S. mailing
system.

DOJ Guideline 5: “Preventing violence and the use of firearms in the
cultivation and distribution of marijuana”

● While crime rates dropped or remained stable in many of the nation’s largest
cities, Colorado’s crime rate increased. There has been an increase in rape,
murder, robbery and auto thefts. While it is not possible to link legalization
to a direct change in crime rates, officials in Colorado cited marijuana
legalization as one of the reasons behind the rise.

● In Colorado, prosecutors are reporting an increase in marijuana-related
homicides since the state legalized the drug. This situation is detailed here:
http://www.oregonlive.com/marijuana/index.ssf/2016/07/state_slaps_portland_dispensar.h
tml.

Other instances of fraud have been discussed here: Sapient Investigations
Newsletters (2015, Feb. 10) “High Times for Fraud," available online at
https://sapientinvestigations.com/spi-news/high-times-for-fraud/

● In Oregon, state police report that, “Cannabis is a lucrative target for
robbery. As recently as December 2016, a state-licensed cannabis producer was
targeted for a violent armed robbery. In the aforementioned case, a well-known
cannabis grower in Jackson County was assaulted, bound, and his harvest was
taken by armed assailants.”

● In Prince George's County Maryland, Police Chief Henry Stawinski noted a
significant rise in marijuana-related homicides since neighboring D.C.
legalized the drug. Stawinski said 19 homicides in 2016 were related to
marijuana.

DOJ Guideline 6: “Preventing drugged driving and the exacerbation of other
public health consequences associated with marijuana use”

● Drugged driving has increased in states with legal marijuana sales.
According to a study published by the American Automobile Association, fatal
drugged driving crashes doubled in Washington State after the state legalized
marijuana. The Governors Highway Safety Association also notes a disturbing
rise in drugged driving crashes even as alcohol-related crashes are declining.

● A Denver Post analysis found the number of marijuana-impaired drivers
involved in fatal crashes in Colorado more than doubled since 2013, the year
after the state voted to legalize recreational marijuana use. Colorado saw a
145 percent increase in the number of marijuana-impaired drivers involved in
fatal crashes between 2013 and 2016. Marijuana is also figuring into more of
Colorado’s fatal crashes overall: in 2013, marijuana-impaired drivers
accounted for 10 percent of all fatal crashes, but by 2016 it reached 20
percent.

● According to a study published in the Annals of Emergency Medicine, poison
control calls for children more than tripled after marijuana legalization.
Much of this is linked to a boom in the sale of marijuana “edibles.” THC
concentrate is mixed into almost any type of food or drink, including gummy
candy, soda, and lollipops. Today, these edibles comprise at least half of
Colorado’s marijuana market.

● In Washington State, the number of marijuana-involved DUIs are increasing
with 38 percent of total cases submitted in 2016 testing above the five
nanogram per milliliter of blood legal limit for those over the age of twenty-
one. In addition, 10 percent of drivers involved in a fatal accident from 2010
to 2014 were THC-positive.

● A study by the Highway Loss Data Institute reveals that Colorado, Oregon,
and Washington have experienced three percent more collision claims overall
than would ( NWHIDTA Drug Threat Assessment For Program Year 2018) have been
expected without legalization.

Colorado witnessed the largest jump in claims. The state experienced a rate 14
percent higher than neighboring states.

● In Washington State, from 2012 to 2016, calls to poison control centers
increased by 79.48%. Exposures increased 19.65% from the time of marijuana
commercialization in 2014 to 2016. Of the marijuana calls answered by the
Poison Center in 2016, youth under the age of 20 accounted for almost 40% of
all calls.

According to the 2016 Annual Cannabis Toxic Trends Report, 42% of the calls
reported were for persons aged 13 to 29. Additionally, among exposures related
to children under the age of five, 73% involved children one to three years of
age. The counties with the highest reported number of exposures for 2015
remained in the top four for 2016: King, Spokane, Snohomish, and Pierce.

DOJ Guideline 7: “Preventing the growing of marijuana on public lands and the
attendant public safety and environmental dangers posed by marijuana on public
lands”

● In Washington State, 373,778 marijuana plants were found growing illegally
on public and private lands between 2012 and 2016. Of the illegal marijuana
plants eradicated in 2016, 60% were being cultivated on state land, and the
58,604 illegal marijuana plants eradicated in 2016 consumed an estimated 43.2
million gallons of water over a full growing season (120-day cycle).

More than 400 pounds of fertilizers, chemicals, and pesticides were removed
from illegal marijuana growing operations in 2016, and Furadan, a neurotoxin
that is extremely dangerous to humans, was found in an illegal marijuana
growing operation the same year.

● In June 2017, Colorado officials found more than 7,000 illegal plants on
federal land in the state’s San Isabel National Forest. This was the fifth
illegal grow found in that area alone since the year marijuana legalization
passed, demonstrating legalization has not curbed the problem of grows
exploiting public lands.

● In Oregon, the legalization of marijuana in the state has failed to
eliminate illegal growing operations and public lands continue to be exploited
despite a legal market. According to a report from state officials, “To date
in Oregon, cannabis legalization has not had a noticeable influence on Mexican
National [Drug Trafficking Organizations] illicit cannabis cultivation
operations on public lands… leaving a lasting scar on Oregon’s unique
ecosystems.

Illicit cannabis grows employ excessive amounts of pesticides, rodenticides,
and herbicides, thereby threatening local wildlife habitats. Additionally,
many illicit grow sites clear-cut timber, furthering soil erosion and water
contamination. Research on the environmental impact of illicit cannabis grows
indicates that grows tend to be bunched near water sources, resulting in
disproportionate impacts on ecologically important areas…

Oregon is robbed of roughly 122 Olympic swimming pools 8 worth of water
annually, or roughly 442,200 gallons of water daily during the growth season.”

DOJ Guideline 8: “Preventing marijuana possession or use on federal property”

● Advocates for legal marijuana frequently flout federal laws by possessing
and using marijuana on federal properties purportedly in acts of civil
disobedience. In January 2017, one group gave away free marijuana in
Washington, D.C. to smoke on the National Mall during the inauguration of
President Trump. On April 24, 2017, four activists were arrested after
purposely flouting federal law and publicly using marijuana on U.S. Capitol
grounds.

**Conclusion and Key Recommendations**

Federal resources should target the big players in the marijuana industry.
Individual marijuana users should not be targeted or arrested, but large-scale
marijuana businesses, several of which now boast of having raised over $100
million in capital, and their financial backers, should be a priority. These
large businesses are pocketing millions by flouting federal law, deceiving
Americans about the risks of their products, and targeting the most
vulnerable.

They should not have access to banks, where their financial prowess would be
expanded significantly, nor should they be able to advertise or commercialize
marijuana.

These businesses target many of the marijuana products they sell toward kids,
such as pot candies, cookies, and ice cream. And despite state regulations,
these products continue to have problems with contamination. Recently, one of
the largest, most sophisticated manufacturers of these pot “edibles” was
forced to recall a number of products because they contained non-food-grade
ingredients.

Additionally, the black market continues unabated in legalized states. A
leaked report from Oregon police showed that at least 70 percent of that
state’s marijuana market is illegal, despite legalization. In June 2017,
Colorado Attorney General Cynthia Coffman said, “The black market for
marijuana has not gone away since recreational marijuana was legalized in our
state, and in fact continues to flourish.”

Further, state-legal businesses have acted as top cover for these illegal
operations, as recent large-scale arrests in Colorado have shown. These large
marijuana operations, which combine the tactics of Big Tobacco with black
marketeering, should form the focus of federal law enforcement, not individual
users. Recalls are becoming more commonplace because of pesticides, moulds,
and other issues.

See The Denver Post for news stories related to these recalls in legalized
states: http://www.thecannabist.co/tag/marijuana-recall/

At the same time, the federal government along with non-government partners
should implement a strong, evidence-based marijuana information campaign,
similar to the truth ® campaign for tobacco, which alerts all Americans about
the harms of marijuana and the deceitful practices of the marijuana industry.

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Environment,Global
Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health,USA :

**Background:**

Cannabis is increasingly available for the treatment of chronic pain, yet its
efficacy remains uncertain.

**Purpose:**

To review the benefits of plant-based cannabis preparations for treating
chronic pain in adults and the harms of cannabis use in chronic pain and
general adult populations.

**Data Sources:**

MEDLINE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and several other sources
from database inception to March 2017.

**Study Selection:**

Intervention trials and observational studies, published in English, involving
adults using plant-based cannabis preparations that reported pain, quality of
life, or adverse effect outcomes.

**Data Extraction:** Two investigators independently abstracted study
characteristics and assessed study quality, and the investigator group graded
the overall strength of evidence using standard criteria.

**Data Synthesis:** From 27 chronic pain trials, there is low-strength
evidence that cannabis alleviates neuropathic pain but insufficient evidence
in other pain populations. According to 11 systematic reviews and 32 primary
studies, harms in general population studies include increased risk for motor
vehicle accidents, psychotic symptoms, and short-term cognitive impairment.
Although adverse pulmonary effects were not seen in younger populations,
evidence on most other long-term physical harms, in heavy or long-term
cannabis users, or in older populations is insufficient.

**Limitation:** Few methodologically rigorous trials; the cannabis
formulations studied may not reflect commercially available products; and
limited applicability to older, chronically ill populations and patients who
use cannabis heavily.

**Conclusion:**

Limited evidence suggests that cannabis may alleviate neuropathic pain in some
patients, but insufficient evidence exists for other types of chronic pain.
Among general populations, limited evidence suggests that cannabis is
associated with an increased risk for adverse mental health effects.

_Source: http://annals.org/aim/article/2648595/effects-cannabis-among-adults-
chronic-pain-overview-general-harms-systematic#.WZXJbYbta0I.email_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health :

_Arrests are up. We still have a black market. And people are in danger._

Last week, Senator Cory Booker introduced the Marijuana Justice Act in an
effort to legalize marijuana across the nation and penalize local communities
that want nothing to do with this dangerous drug. This is the furthest
reaching marijuana legalization effort to date and marks another sad moment in
our nation’s embrace of a drug that will have generational consequences.

Our country is facing a drug epidemic. Legalizing recreational marijuana will
do nothing that Senator Booker expects. We heard many of these same promises
in 2012 when Colorado legalized recreational marijuana.

In the years since, Colorado has seen an increase in marijuana related traffic
deaths, poison control calls, and emergency room visits. The marijuana black
market has increased in Colorado, not decreased. And, numerous Colorado
marijuana regulators have been indicted for corruption.

In 2012, we were promised funds from marijuana taxes would benefit our
communities, particularly schools. Dr. Harry Bull, the Superintendent of
Cherry Creek Schools, one of the largest school districts in the state, said,
"So far, the only thing that the legalization of marijuana has brought to our
schools has been marijuana."

In fiscal year 2016, marijuana tax revenue resulted in $156,701,018. The total
tax revenue for Colorado was $13,327,123,798, making marijuana only 1.18% of
the state's total tax revenue. The cost of marijuana legalization in public
awareness campaigns, law enforcement, healthcare treatment, addiction
recovery, and preventative work is an unknown cost to date.

Senator Booker stated his reasons for legalizing marijuana is to reduce
"marijuana arrests happening so much in our country, targeting certain
communities - poor communities, minority communities." It's a noble cause to
seek to reduce incarceration rates among these communities but legalizing
marijuana has had the opposite effect.

According to the Colorado Department of Public Safety, arrests in Colorado of
black and Latino youth for marijuana possession have increased 58% and 29%
respectively after legalization. This means that Black and Latino youth are
being arrested more for marijuana possession after it became legal.

Furthermore, a vast majority of Colorado's marijuana businesses are
concentrated in neighborhoods of color. Leaders from these communities, many
of whom initially voted to legalize recreational marijuana, often speak out
about the negative impacts of these businesses.

Senator Booker released his bill just a few days after the Washington Post
reported on a study by the Review of Economic Studies that found "college
students with access to recreational cannabis on average earn worse grades and
fail classes at a higher rate." Getting off marijuana especially helped lower
performing students who were at risk of dropping out.

Since legalizing marijuana, Colorado's youth marijuana use rate is the highest
in the nation, 74% higher than the national average, according to the Rocky
Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area Report. This is having terribly
negative effects on the education of our youth.

If Senator Booker is interested in serving poor and minority communities,
legalizing marijuana is one of the worst decisions. There is much work to be
done to reduce incarceration and recidivism, but flooding communities with
drugs will do nothing but exacerbate the problems.

The true impact of marijuana on our communities is just starting to be
learned. The negative consequences of legalizing recreational marijuana will
be felt for generations. I encourage Senator Booker to spend time with
parents, educators, law enforcement, counsellors, community leaders, pastors,
and legislators before rushing to legalize marijuana nationally. We’ve seen
the effects in our neighborhoods in Colorado, and this is nothing we wish upon
the nation.

Jeff Hunt is the Vice President of Public Policy at Colorado Christian
University. Follow him on Twitter: @jeffhunt.

_Source: https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2017/08/07/marijuana_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Global Drug
Legalisation Efforts,USA :

**Key Points**

**Question** Are US state medical marijuana laws one of the underlying factors
for increases in risk for adult cannabis use and cannabis use disorders seen
since the early 1990s?

**Findings** In this analysis using US national survey data collected in
1991-1992, 2001-2002, and 2012-2013 from 118 497 participants, the risk for
cannabis use and cannabis use disorders increased at a significantly greater
rate in states that passed medical marijuana laws than in states that did not.

**Meaning** Possible adverse consequences of illicit cannabis use due to more
permissive state cannabis laws should receive consideration by voters,
legislators, and policy and health care professionals, with appropriate health
care planning as such laws change.

**Abstract**

**Importance** Over the last 25 years, illicit cannabis use and cannabis use
disorders have increased among US adults, and 28 states have passed medical
marijuana laws (MML). Little is known about MML and adult illicit cannabis use
or cannabis use disorders considered over time.

**Objective** To present national data on state MML and degree of change in
the prevalence of cannabis use and disorders.

**Design, Participants, and Setting** Differences in the degree of change
between those living in MML states and other states were examined using 3
cross-sectional US adult surveys: the National Longitudinal Alcohol
Epidemiologic Survey (NLAES; 1991-1992), the National Epidemiologic Survey on
Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC; 2001-2002), and the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions–III (NESARC-III;
2012-2013). Early-MML states passed MML between NLAES and NESARC (“earlier
period”). Late-MML states passed MML between NESARC and NESARC-III (“later
period”).

**Main Outcomes and Measures** Past-year illicit cannabis use and DSM-IV
cannabis use disorder.

**Results** Overall, from 1991-1992 to 2012-2013, illicit cannabis use
increased significantly more in states that passed MML than in other states
(1.4–percentage point more; SE, 0.5; P = .004), as did cannabis use disorders
(0.7–percentage point more; SE, 0.3; P = .03).

In the earlier period, illicit cannabis use and disorders decreased similarly
in non-MML states and in California (where prevalence was much higher to start
with). In contrast, in remaining early-MML states, the prevalence of use and
disorders increased.

Remaining early-MML and non-MML states differed significantly for use (by 2.5
percentage points; SE, 0.9; P = .004) and disorder (1.1 percentage points; SE,
0.5; P = .02). In the later period, illicit use increased by the following
percentage points: never-MML states, 3.5 (SE, 0.5); California, 5.3 (SE, 1.0);
Colorado, 7.0 (SE, 1.6); other early-MML states, 2.6 (SE, 0.9); and late-MML
states, 5.1 (SE, 0.8). Compared with never-MML states, increases in use were
significantly greater in late-MML states (1.6–percentage point more; SE, 0.6;
P = .01), California (1.8–percentage point more; SE, 0.9; P = .04), and
Colorado (3.5–percentage point more; SE, 1.5; P = .03).

Increases in cannabis use disorder, which was less prevalent, were smaller but
followed similar patterns descriptively, with change greater than never-MML
states in California (1.0–percentage point more; SE, 0.5; P = .06) and
Colorado (1.6–percentage point more; SE, 0.8; P = .04).

**Conclusions and Relevance**

Medical marijuana laws appear to have contributed to increased prevalence of
illicit cannabis use and cannabis use disorders. State-specific policy changes
may also have played a role. While medical marijuana may help some, cannabis-
related health consequences associated with changes in state marijuana laws
should receive consideration by health care professionals and the public.

_Source: JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74(6):579-588.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.0724_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,Marijuana and Medicine,Social Affairs :

LONDON (Reuters) - People who smoke marijuana have a three times greater risk
of dying from hypertension, or high blood pressure, than those who have never
used the drug, scientists said on Wednesday. The risk grows with every year of
use, they said.

The findings, from a study of some 1,200 people, could have implications in
the United States among other countries. Several states have legalized
marijuana and others are moving toward it. It is decriminalized in a number of
other countries.

"Support for liberal marijuana use is partly due to claims that it is
beneficial and possibly not harmful to health," said Barbara Yankey, who co-
led the research at the school of public health at Georgia State University in
the United States.

"It is important to establish whether any health benefits outweigh the
potential health, social and economic risks. If marijuana use is implicated in
cardiovascular diseases and deaths, then it rests on the health community and
policy makers to protect the public."

Marijuana is also sometimes used for medicinal purposes, such as for glaucoma.

The study, published in the European Journal of Preventive Cardiology, was a
retrospective follow-up study of 1,213 people aged 20 or above who had been
involved in a large and ongoing National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey. In 2005–2006, they were asked if they had ever used marijuana.

For Yankey's study, information on marijuana use was merged with mortality
data in 2011 from the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, and adjusted
for confounding factors such as tobacco smoking and variables including sex,
age and ethnicity.

The average duration of use among users of marijuana, or cannabis, was 11.5
years.

The results showed marijuana users had a 3.42-times higher risk of death from
hypertension than non-users, and a 1.04 greater risk for each year of use.

There was no link between marijuana use and dying from heart or
cerebrovascular diseases such as strokes.

Yankey said were limitations in the way marijuana use was assessed --
including that researchers could not be sure whether people had used the drug
continuously since they first tried it.

But she said the results chimed with plausible risks, since marijuana is known
to affect the cardiovascular system.

"Marijuana stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, leading to increases in
heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen demand," she said.

Experts not directly involved in the study said its findings would need to be
replicated, but already raised concerns.

"Despite the widely held view that cannabis is benign, this research adds to
previous work suggesting otherwise," said Ian Hamilton, a lecturer in mental
health at Britain's York University. Source:
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-marijuana-hypertension-idUSKBN1AP0JS
9th Aug.201

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health :

A string of recent deaths in New Zealand is being attributed to the rise of
so-called synthetic cannabis is made to look like normal cannabis

A man in his 20s died on Tuesday night, bringing the number of fatalities this
month linked to the illegal substance to eight. The drug consists of dried
plants sprayed with synthetic drugs - it triggers effects similar to cannabis
but is more powerful and dangerous. Synthetic cannabis has already caused huge
concerns in the US and Europe.

In each of the eight deaths this month, the victim was thought to have used
the drug before dying or was found with the drug on them. The actual substance
in the drug responsible for the deaths is not yet known.

All eight deaths have occurred in Auckland and authorities say there is a much
higher number of non-fatal cases where people had to be taken to hospital.

Earlier this month, the Auckland City District Police issued a warning on
Facebook over the drug use and the apparent link to the rising number of
victims.

"This is not an issue unique to Auckland," the statement warned. "Police are
also concerned at the impact of synthetic cannabis in other communities in New
Zealand."

Auckland police also took the rare step of releasing CCTV footage of a man
violently ill and barely able to stand after smoking synthetic cannabis.

"We have grave concerns as users don't know what poisonous chemicals they are
potentially putting into their bodies when they're smoking this drug," Det
Insp Lendrum said.

**What is synthetic cannabis?**

§ Actual cannabis contains an active ingredient which interacts with certain
receptors in the brain.

§ Synthetic cannabis is dried plant matter sprayed with chemicals that
interact with the same receptors.

§ Produced and sold illegally, the chemicals used vary a lot. That means the
effect of the drug is a lot less predictable, so a lot more dangerous.

§ Effects can be extreme, including increased heart rates, seizures,
psychosis, kidney failure and strokes.

Cannabis-simulating substances - or synthetic cannabinoids - were developed
more than 20 years ago in the US for testing on animals as part of a brain
research programme. But in the last decade or so they've become widely
available to the public.

In the UK, synthetic cannabis was also temporarily legal, being sold under a
variety of names most prominently Spice and Black Mamba. The drugs were banned
in 2016 but continue to cause widespread problems in the country.

Synthetic cannabis has also been banned in the US but continues to be widely
available as an illegal drug.

_Source: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-40724390 26 July 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Health,New Zealand,Synthetics :

Legalizing marijuana not only harms public health and safety, it places a
significant strain on local economies and weakens the ability of the American
workforce to compete in an increasingly global marketplace.

Today, a growing class of well-heeled lobbyists intent on commercializing
marijuana are doing everything they can to sell legal weed as a panacea for
every contemporary challenge we face in America. Over the past several years
we've been barraged by claims that legal pot can cure the opioid crisis, cure
cancer, eliminate international drug cartels, and even solve climate change.

One seemingly compelling case made by special interest groups is that legal
marijuana can boost our economy too: after all, marijuana businesses create
jobs and bring in millions of dollars in much-needed tax revenue.

Yet, a closer look at the facts reveals a starkly different reality. The truth
is, a commercial market for marijuana not only harms public health and safety,
it also places a significant strain on local economies and weakens the ability
of the American workforce to compete in an increasingly global marketplace.

We already know that drug use costs our economy hundreds of millions of
dollars a year in public health and safety costs. The last comprehensive study
to look at costs of drugs in society found that drug use cost taxpayers more
than $193 billion – due to lost work productivity, health care costs, and
higher crime. A new study out of Canada found that marijuana-impaired driving
alone costs more than $1 billion. Laws commercializing marijuana only make
this problem worse and hamper local communities' ability to deal with the
health and safety fallout of increased drug use.

"So far in Colorado, marijuana taxes have failed to shore up state budget
shortfalls. The budget deficit there doubled in the last few years, despite
claims that pot taxes could turn deficit into surplus."

This isn't just a theory - it's already happening. As marijuana use has
increased in states that have legalized it, so has use by employees, both on
and off the job. Large businesses in Colorado now state that after
legalization they have had to hire out-of-state residents in order to find
employees that can pass a pre-employment drug screen, particularly for safety-
sensitive jobs like bus drivers, train operators, and pilots.

And now drug using employees - supported by special interest groups - are
organizing to make drug use a "right" despite the negative impacts we know it
will have on employers and the companies that hire them.

And what about that promised tax revenue? So far in Colorado, marijuana taxes
have failed to shore up state budget shortfalls. The budget deficit there
doubled in the last few years, despite claims that pot taxes could turn
deficit into surplus.

Collected pot taxes only comprise a tiny fraction of the Colorado state
budget— less than one percent. After costs of enforcement and regulation are
subtracted, the remaining revenue used for public good is very limited.

Even viewed solely in the context of Colorado's educational needs, pot revenue
is not newsworthy. The Colorado Department of Education indicates their
schools require about $18 billion in capital construction funds alone.
Marijuana taxes do not even make a dent in this gap.

In Washington State, half of the $42 million of marijuana tax money
legalization advocates promised would reach prevention programs and schools by
2016 never materialized. We've seen this movie before: witness our experience
with gambling, the lottery, and other vices.

We should also care about the human fallout of increased marijuana acceptance.
Recent evidence demonstrates that today's marijuana isn't the weed of the
1960s. It is addictive and harmful to the human brain, especially when used by
adolescents.

Moreover, in states that have already legalized the drug, there has been an
increase in drugged driving crashes and youth marijuana use. States that have
legalized marijuana also continue to see a thriving black market, and are
experiencing a continued rise in alcohol sales despite arguing users will
switch to a "safer" drug.

Over the past several months, the Trump Administration has signaled it is
considering a crackdown on marijuana in states where it is legal. We don't yet
know what this policy change may look like, but one thing we know for sure is
that incarcerating low-level, nonviolent offenders in federal prisons is not
the answer. Individual users need incentives to encourage them to make healthy
decisions, not handcuffs.

But we do need to enforce federal law. Indeed, by reasserting federal control
over the exploding marijuana industry, we know we can make a positive
difference in preventing the commercialization of a drug that will put profits
over public health and fight every regulation proposed to control its sale and
use. Marijuana addiction is real, and simply ignoring this health condition
will only cost us down the road. We should assess marijuana users for drug use
disorders as well as mental health problems, and assist those into recovery.
This can't happen in a climate that promotes use.

_Source: http://www.cnbc.com/2017/07/27/trump-should-crackdown-on-legal-weed-
commentary.html_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Economic,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA
:

A new study provides credible evidence that marijuana legalization will lead
to decreased academic success. (Elaine Thompson/AP)

The most rigorous study yet of the effects of marijuana legalization has
identified a disturbing result: College students with access to recreational
cannabis on average earn worse grades and fail classes at a higher rate.
Economists Olivier Marie and Ulf Zölitz took advantage of a decision by
Maastricht, a city in the Netherlands, to change the rules for “cannabis
cafes,” which legally sell recreational marijuana. Because Maastricht is very
close to the border of multiple European countries (Belgium, France and
Germany), drug tourism was posing difficulties for the city. Hoping to address
this, the city barred noncitizens of the Netherlands from buying from the
cafes.

This policy change created an intriguing natural experiment at Maastricht
University, because students there from neighboring countries suddenly were
unable to access legal pot, while students from the Netherlands continued.

The research on more than 4,000 students, published in the Review of Economic
Studies, found that those who lost access to legal marijuana showed
substantial improvement in their grades. Specifically, those banned from
cannabis cafes had a more than 5 percent increase in their odds of passing
their courses. Low performing students benefited even more, which the
researchers noted is particularly important because these students are at
high-risk of dropping out. The researchers attribute their results to the
students who were denied legal access to marijuana being less likely to use it
and to suffer cognitive impairments (e.g., in concentration and memory) as a
result.

Other studies have tried to estimate the impact of marijuana legalization by
studying those U.S. states that legalized medicinal or recreational marijuana.
But marijuana policy researcher Rosalie Pacula of RAND Corporation noted that
the Maastricht study provide evidence that “is much better than anything done
so far in the United States.”

States differ in countless ways that are hard for researchers to adjust for in
their data analysis, but the Maastricht study examined similar people in the
same location — some of them even side by side in the same classrooms — making
it easier to isolate the effect of marijuana legalization. Also, Pacula
pointed out that since voters in U.S. states are the ones who approve
marijuana legalization, it creates a chicken and egg problem for researchers
(i.e. does legalization make people smoke more pot, or do pot smokers tend to
vote for legalization?). This methodological problem was resolved in the
Maastricht study because the marijuana policy change was imposed without input
from those whom it affected.

Although this is the strongest study to date on how people are affected by
marijuana legalization, no research can ultimately tell us whether
legalization is a good or bad decision: That’s a political question and not a
scientific one. But what the Maastricht study can do is provides highly
credible evidence that marijuana legalization will lead to decreased academic
success — perhaps particularly so for struggling students — and that is a
concern that both proponents and opponents of legalization should keep in
mind.

_Source:https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/07/25/these- college-
students-lost-access-to-legal-pot-and-started-getting-better-grades/?_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Education,Education Sector (Papers),Europe :

**Werewolf in London? Or maybe it’s a Skunk.**

Cannabis is now the most popular illicit drug in the world. Several US states
have legalized cannabis for medical or recreational use and more are in the
process of doing the same. Numerous prospective epidemiological studies have
reported that use of cannabis is a modifiable risk factor for schizophrenia-
like psychosis. In 2012, the Schizophrenia Commission in the UK concluded that
research to quantify the link between cannabis use and serious mental illness
should be pursued.

Between May 1, 2005, and May 31, 2011, researchers culled data from 410
patients with first-episode psychosis and 370 controls. The risk of
individuals having a psychotic disorder was approximately three-fold higher
among users of “skunk-like” cannabis, compared with those who never used
cannabis (adjusted odds ratio [OR] 2•92, 95% CI 1•52–3•45, p=0•001). Further,
daily use of skunk-like cannabis resulted in the highest risk of psychotic
disorders, compared with no use of cannabis (adjusted OR 5•4, 95% CI
2•81–11•31, p=0•002).

The population attributable fraction of first episode psychosis for skunk use
for the geographical area of south London was 24% (95% CI 17–31), possibly
because of the high prevalence of high-potency cannabis (218 [53%] of 410
patients) in the study.

Clearly, and as seen elsewhere, availability of high potency cannabis in south
London most likely resulted in a greater proportion of first onset psychosis
than in previous studies where the cannabis is less potent.

**Why Does this Matter?**

Changes in marijuana potency and the increased prevalence of use by
adolescents and young adults increases the risk of serious mental illness and
the burden on the mental health system.

Chronic, relapsing psychotic illness produced by cannabis is similar to that
produced naturally in Schizophrenia. However, treatment responses are not the
same. Indeed, skunk use appears to contribute to 24% of cases of first episode
psychosis in south London. Our findings show the importance of raising
awareness among young people of the risks associated with the use of high-
potency cannabis. The need for such public education is emphasized by the
worldwide trend of liberalization of the constraints on cannabis and the fact
that high potency varieties are becoming increasingly available.

Finally, in both primary care and mental health services, developing a simple
screening instrument as simple as yes-or-no questions of whether people use
skunk or other drugs will aid public health officials to identify
epidemiological maps and “hot spots” of increased drug use and to develop
interdiction, education and prevention efforts.

_Source: https://www.rivermendhealth.com/resources/cannabis-induced-psychosis-
now-spreading-uk July 2017_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health
:

Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in the United States, and trends
show increasing use in the general population. As cannabis consumption rises,
there has been significant emerging evidence for cannabis-related risks to
health.1

Numerous lines of evidence suggest a correlation between cannabis consumption
and a variety of psychiatric conditions, including cannabis-induced psychosis
(CIP). While it can be difficult to differentiate CIP from other psychoses,
CIP holds distinguishing characteristics, which may aid in its diagnosis.
Given the increasing push toward cannabis legalization, assessing CIP and
employing timely treatments is critical.

Specifically in youth, there is a direct relationship between cannabis use and
its risks. The lack of knowledge surrounding its detrimental effects, combined
with misunderstandings related to its therapeutic effects, has potential for
catastrophic results.

CASE VIGNETTE

Ms. J, a 19-year-old college sophomore, was admitted to the Early Psychosis
Unit at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) displaying signs of
agitation and acute psychosis. Her roommates had noted that her behavior had
become increasingly bizarre, and she had isolated herself over the past month.
She began smoking marijuana at the age of 17 and since starting college used
it daily.

Ms. J exhibited signs of paranoia, believing other students in her dorm were
stealing from her and trying to poison her. She remained adamant that all her
problems were rooted in the competitive environment of the university and that
smoking marijuana aided in keeping her sanity. In a sense, she was self-
medicating. Her clinical presentation was consistent with a diagnosis of CIP.

After the hospitalization, she received outpatient case management services in
the Early Psychosis Program at CAMH, which included motivational interviewing
to raise her awareness about the importance of abstaining from cannabis use.
She has been abstinent from cannabis for more than a year with no evidence of
psychosis; she recently returned to school to finish her degree.

**Epidemiology of CIP**

Reports have shown a staggering increase in cannabis-related emergency
department (ED) visits in recent years. In 2011, the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) and Drug Abuse Warning Network
(DAWN) estimated a total of 1.25 million illicit-drug–related ED visits across
the US, of which 455,668 were marijuana related.2 A similar report published
in 2015 by the Washington Poison Center Toxic Trends Report showed a dramatic
increase in cannabis-related ED visits.3 In states with recent legalization of
recreational cannabis, similar trends were seen.4

States with medicinal marijuana have also shown a dramatic rise in cannabis-
related ED visits. Moreover, states where marijuana is still illegal also
showed increases.5 This widespread increase is postulated to be in part due to
the easy accessibility of the drug, which contributes to over-intoxication and
subsequent symptoms. Overall, from 2005 to 2011, there has been a dramatic
rise in cannabis-related ED visits among all age groups and genders.

**Neurobiology of CIP**

Cannabis is considered an environmental risk factor that increases the odds of
psychotic episodes, and longer exposure is associated with greater risk of
psychosis in a dose-

dependent fashion. The drug acts as a stressor that leads to the emergence and
persistence of psychosis. While a number of factors play a role in the
mechanism by which consumption produces psychosis, the primary psychoactive
ingredient is considered to be delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta9-THC).
Properties of delta9-THC include a long half-life (up to 30 days to eliminate
the long-acting THC metabolite carboxy-THC from urine) and high lipophilicity,
which may contribute to CIP.

During acute consumption, cannabis causes an increase in the synthesis and
release of dopamine as well as increased reuptake inhibition, similar to the
process that occurs during stimulant use. Consequently, patients with CIP are
found to have elevated peripheral dopamine metabolite products.

Findings from a study that examined presynaptic dopaminergic function in
patients who have experienced CIP indicate that dopamine synthesis in the
striatum has an inverse relationship with cannabis use. Long-term users had
reduced dopamine synthesis, although no association was seen between
dopaminergic function and CIP.6 This observation may provide insight into a
future treatment hypothesis for CIP because it implies a different mechanism
of psychosis compared with schizophrenia. As cannabis may not induce the same
dopaminergic alterations seen in schizophrenia, CIP may require alternative
approaches—most notably addressing associated cannabis use disorder.

Polymorphisms at several genes linked to dopamine metabolism may moderate the
effects of CIP. The catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT Val 158Met) genotype
has been linked to increased hallucinations in cannabis users.7Homozygous and
heterozygous genetic compositions (Met/Met, Val/Met, Val/Val) for COMT Val
158Met have been studied in patients with CIP and suggest that the presence of
Val/Val and Val/Met genotypes produces a substantial increase in psychosis in
relation to cannabis use. This suggests that carriers of the Val allele are
most vulnerable to CIP attacks.

There has been much controversy surrounding the validity of a CIP diagnosis
and whether it is a distinct clinical entity or an early manifestation of
schizophrenia. In patients being treated for schizophrenia, those with a
history of CIP had an earlier onset of schizophrenia than patients who never
used cannabis.8Evidence suggests an association between patients who have
received treatment for CIP and later development of schizophrenia spectrum
disorder. However, it has been difficult to distinguish whether CIP is an
early manifestation of schizophrenia or a catalyst. Nonetheless, there is a
clear association between the 2 disorders.

**Assessment of CIP**

DSM-5 categorizes cannabis-induced psychotic disorder as a substance-induced
psychotic disorder. However, there are distinguishing characteristics of CIP
that differentiate it from other psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia.
Clear features of CIP are sudden onset of mood lability and paranoid symptoms,
within 1 week of use but as early as 24 hours after use. CIP is commonly
precipitated by a sudden increase in potency (eg, percent of THC content or
quantity of cannabis consumption; typically, heavy users of cannabis consume
more than 2 g/d). Criteria for CIP must exclude primary psychosis, and
symptoms should be in excess of expected intoxication and withdrawal effects.
A comparison of the clinical features of idiopathic psychosis versus CIP is
provided in the Table.

When assessing for CIP, careful history taking is critical. Time of last drug
ingestion will indicate if a patient’s psychotic symptoms are closely related
to cannabis intoxication/withdrawal effects. While acute cannabis intoxication
presents with a range of transient positive symptoms (paranoia, grandiosity,
perceptual alterations), mood symptoms (anxiety), and cognitive deficits
(working memory, verbal recall, attention), symptoms that persist beyond the
effects of intoxication and withdrawal are better categorized as CIP,
regardless of the route of administration (smoke inhalation, oral,
intravenous). CIP has historically been associated with fewer negative
symptoms than schizophrenia; however, without a clear timeline of use,
distinguishing schizophrenia from CIP may prove difficult.

A diagnosis of primary psychosis (eg, schizophrenia) is warranted in the
absence of heavy cannabis use or withdrawal (for at least 4 weeks), or if
symptoms preceded onset of heavy use. The age at which psychotic symptoms
emerge has not proved to be a helpful indicator; different studies show a
conflicting median age of onset.

Clinical features of schizophrenia and CIP share many overlapping
characteristics. However, compared with primary psychoses with concurrent
cannabis abuse, CIP has been established to show more mood symptoms than
primary psychosis. The mood symptom profile includes obsessive ideation,
interpersonal sensitivity, depression, and anxiety. Of significance is the
presence of social phobia: 20% of patients with CIP demonstrate phobic anxiety
compared with only 3.8% of patients with primary psychosis with cannabis
abuse.

Hypomania and agitation have also been found to be more pronounced in cases of
CIP.9 Visual hallucinations are more common and more distinct in CIP than in
other psychoses such as schizophrenia. Perhaps the most discriminating
characteristic of CIP is awareness of the clinical condition, greater disease
insight, and the ability to identify symptoms as a manifestation of a mental
disorder or substance use. The presence of much more rapidly declining
positive symptoms is another distinctive factor of CIP.

Finally, family history may help distinguish CIP from primary psychosis.
Primary psychosis has a strong association with schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders in first- or second-degree relatives, whereas CIP has a
weaker family association with psychosis.

**Treatment of CIP**

As with all substance-induced psychotic states, abstinence from cannabis may
be the definitive measure to prevent recurrence. With limited research
surrounding CIP, achieving symptomatic treatment during acute phases of CIP
has proved to be difficult. The Figure suggests possible treatment progression
for CIP.

Pharmacotherapeutic interventions include the second-generation antipsychotic
drug olanzapine and haloperidol. While both are equally effective, their
different adverse- effect profiles should be taken into consideration when
treating a patient; olanzapine is associated with significantly fewer
extrapyramidal adverse effects.

One report indicates that antipsychotics worsened the condition in some
patients.10 Conventional antipsychotics failed to abate the symptoms of CIP in
one 20-year old man. Trials of olanzapine, lithium, and haloperidol had little
to no effect on his psychosis. Risperidone was tried but elicited temporal
lobe epilepsy with auditory, somatic, and olfactory hallucinations. However,
the use of valproate sodium markedly improved his symptoms and cognition,
returning him to baseline.

Carbamazepine has also been shown to have rapid effects when used as an
adjunct to antipsychotics.11 Use of anti-seizure medication in CIP treatment
has been hypothesized to reduce neuroleptic adverse effects, resulting in
better tolerance of antipsychotics.10,11 These results suggest the use of
adjunctive anti-epileptics should be considered in CIP treatment strategies,
although further studies in a broad range of patients with CIP are needed.

Abstaining from cannabis is the most beneficial and effective measure for
preventing future CIP events; however, it is likely to be the most difficult
to implement.

Psychosocial intervention has a significant impact on early-phase psychosis,
and when the intervention is initiated plays a role in disease outcomes. A
delay in providing intensive psychosocial treatment has been associated with
more negative symptoms compared with a delay in administrating antipsychotic
medication.12 Employing cannabis- focused interventions with dependent
patients who present with first-episode psychosis can decrease use in a
clinically meaningful way and subjectively improve patient quality of life.

Compared with the standard of care, motivational interviewing significantly
increases number of days abstinent from cannabis and aids in decreasing short-
term consumption.13 Patients who are treated with motivational interviewing in
addition to standard of care (combination of antipsychotic medication, regular
office-based psychiatric contact, psychoeducation) are reported to also have
more confidence and willingness to reduce cannabis use.

Patients with CIP who are unwilling or unable to decrease cannabis consumption
may be protected from psychotic relapse with aripiprazole (10 mg/d). Its use
suppresses the re-emergence of psychosis without altering cannabis levels.
However, no direct comparison has been made with aripiprazole and other
antipsychotics in treating CIP. Clearly, well-controlled large studies of
putative treatments for CIP are needed.

**Conclusions**

As more countries and states approve legalization, and marijuana becomes more
accessible, CIP and other cannabis-related disorders are expected to increase.
Efforts should be made by physicians to educate patients and discourage
cannabis use. Just as there was an era of ignorance concerning the damaging
effects of tobacco, today’s conceptions about cannabis may in fact be judged
similarly in the future. The onus is on psychiatrists to take an evidence-
based approach to this increasing problem.

_Source: http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/substance-use-disorder/cannabis-
induced-psychosis-review 14th July_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Effects of Drugs (Papers),Health,Medical Studies :

As the U.S. is facing its most challenging drug epidemic in history, the need
to prevent adolescence drug misuse is imperative. For the past two years,
Mentor Foundation USA and George Washington University have piloted an
innovative drug prevention peer-to-peer initiative at three high schools in
Columbia County, NY. The program, which engages youth through social media is
showing some promising results in terms of shifts in attitudes towards drugs
and intent to use.

The interactive "multi-media" initiative is called Living the Example (LTE), a
program that incorporates messages for prevention specifically designed to
counteract the misinformation adolescents have about drugs and alcohol.
Messages are framed to promote the benefits of prevention behaviors. "This
approach to branding, an alternative, healthy behavior, or 'counter-marketing'
as it has been termed in tobacco control, has been highly effective and is
recognized as one of the main elements in successful prevention programs, such
as in tobacco control," says Principal Investigator, Dr. Doug Evans, a pioneer
in the use of this strategy. Dr. Evans is a Professor of Prevention and
Community Health & Global Health, with Milken Institute School of Public
Health at George Washington University.

Youth Ambassadors are trained to create LTE branded prevention messages,
disseminate them via social media platforms, and engage peers in their
preferred social networks, with the intention of increasing peer interaction
around the brand's core messaging. Positive receptivity to LTE messages was
associated with some evidence of reduced self-reported drug use intentions,
specifically for marijuana use, and reports of intent to use any drug. Among
youth who reported exposure and receptivity to LTE, they reported a
significant decrease in marijuana use intentions. The most common overall
reason for drug use among all respondents was family stress (81.3%), boredom
(40%) and academic stress (40%).

"Findings from the study suggest that peer-to-peer substance use prevention
via social media is a promising strategy, especially given the low cost and
low burden as an intervention channel, which schools, communities, and
prevention programs can use as an approach, even in low resource settings,"
says Michaela Pratt, President of Mentor Foundation USA. "Through our
international network, Mentor Foundation shares over 20 years of global
experience in best prevention practices, and Mentor Foundation USA has always
been a pioneer in empowering young people to become their own advocates for
drug prevention."

This program was generously supported by The Conrad N. Hilton Foundation, Rip
Van Winkle Foundation, among local foundations in Columbia County. Mentor
Foundation USA is a member affiliate of Mentor International, which was
founded in 1994 by Her Majesty Queen Silvia of Sweden and the World Health
Organization and is the largest network of its kind for evidence based
programs that prevent drug abuse among youth. Collectively, Mentor has
implemented projects in over 80 countries impacting more than 6 million youth.
Mentor Foundation USA is a Delaware registered 501(c)3 non-profit
organization.

_SOURCE http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/200-dc-high-school-students-
shatter-the-myths-around-substance-abuse-in-an-innovative-proven_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Education,Prevention and Intervention,USA :

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/smoking.jpg)

An UdeM study confirms the link between marijuana use and psychotic-like
experiences in a Canadian adolescent cohort. Credit: © Syda Productions /
Fotolia

Going from an occasional user of marijuana to a weekly or daily user increases
an adolescent's risk of having recurrent psychotic-like experiences by 159%,
according to a new Canadian study published in the Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry.

The study also reports effects of marijuana use on cognitive development and
shows that the link between marijuana use and psychotic-like experiences is
best explained by emerging symptoms of depression.

"To clearly understand the impact of these results, it is essential to first
define what psychotic-like experiences are: namely, experiences of perceptual
aberration, ideas with unusual content and feelings of persecution," said the
study's lead author, Josiane Bourque, a doctoral student at Université de
Montréal's Department of Psychiatry. "Although they may be infrequent and thus
not problematic for the adolescent, when these experiences are reported
continuously, year after year, then there's an increased risk of a first
psychotic episode or another psychiatric condition."

She added: "Our findings confirm that becoming a more regular marijuana user
during adolescence is, indeed, associated with a risk of psychotic symptoms.
This is a major public-health concern for Canada."

**What are the underlying mechanisms?**

One of the study's objectives was to better understand the mechanisms by which
marijuana use is associated with psychotic-like experiences. Bourque and her
supervisor, Dr. Patricia Conrod at Sainte Justine University Hospital Research
Centre hypothesized that impairments in cognitive development due to marijuana
misuse might in turn exacerbate psychotic-like experiences.

This hypothesis was only partially confirmed, however. Among the different
cognitive abilities evaluated, the development of inhibitory control was the
only cognitive function negatively affected by an increase in marijuana use.
Inhibitory control is the capacity to withhold or inhibit automatic behaviours
in favor of a more contextually appropriate behaviour. Dr. Conrod's team has
shown that this specific cognitive function is associated with risk for other
forms of substance abuse and addiction.

"Our results show that while marijuana use is associated with a number of
cognitive and mental health symptoms, only an increase in symptoms of
depression -- such as negative thoughts and low mood -- could explain the
relationship between marijuana use and increasing psychotic-like experiences
in youth," Bourque said.

**What 's next**

These findings have important clinical implications for prevention programs in
youth who report having persistent psychotic-like experiences. "While
preventing adolescent marijuana use should be the aim of all drug strategies,
targeted prevention approaches are particularly needed to delay and prevent
marijuana use in young people at risk of psychosis," said Patricia Conrod, the
study's senior author and a professor at UdeM's Department of Psychiatry.

Conrod is optimistic about one thing, however: the school-based prevention
program that she developed, Preventure, has proven effective in reducing
adolescent marijuana use by an overall 33%. "In future programs, it will be
important to investigate whether this program and other similar targeted
prevention programs can delay or prevent marijuana use in youth who suffer
from psychotic-like experiences," she said. "While the approach seems
promising, we have yet to demonstrate that drug prevention can prevent some
cases of psychosis."

**A large youth cohort from Montreal**

The study's results are based on the CIHR-funded Co-Venture project, a cohort
of approximately 4,000 adolescents aged 13 years old from 31 high schools in
the Greater Montreal area. These teens are followed annually from Grade 7 to
Grade 11. Every year they fill out computerized questionnaires to assess
substance use and psychiatric symptoms. The teens also complete cognitive
tasks to allow the researchers to evaluate their IQ, working memory and long-
term memory as well as their inhibitory control skills.

To do their study, the research team first confirmed results from both the
United Kingdom and Netherlands showing the presence of a small group of
individuals (in Montreal, 8%) among the general population of adolescents who
report recurrent psychotic-like experiences. Second, the researchers explored
how marijuana use between 13 and 16 years of age increases the likelihood of
belonging to the 8%. Finally, they examined whether the relationship between
increasing use of marijuana and increasing psychotic-like experiences can be
explained by emerging symptoms of anxiety or depression, or by the effects of
substance use on developing cognitive abilities.

_Source: University of Montreal. "Marijuana and vulnerability to psychosis."
ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 5 July 2017.
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170705104042.htm._

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies, children and
youth,Health,Prevention and Intervention,Youth :

Canada’s Liberal government has stated that marijuana will be decriminalized
by July 2018. This means the removal, or at the least, a lessening of laws and
restrictions related to marijuana use and associated pot services.

While people on both sides of the debate have strongly held and differing
opinions, the protection of youth is an area of agreement.

Marijuana, also known as cannabis, has been illegal in Canada for close to 100
years. Marijuana can’t be produced, sold or even possessed. If caught, one
faces fines, jail time or both.

Despite this, Canada has one of the highest rates of cannabis use in the
world. Over 40 per cent of Canadians have used cannabis during their lifetime.
Furthermore, studies conducted by Health Canada indicate that between 10.2 and
12.2 per cent of Canadians use cannabis at least once a year.

As changes in cannabis regulation occur, new research has been conducted. The
findings are, in a word, alarming. According to published research, someone
who uses marijuana regularly has, on average, less grey matter in the orbital
frontal cortex of the brain. Other research has found increasing evidence of a
link between pot and schizophrenia symptoms.

A major factor is the potency of cannabis, which has gone through the roof for
the last two decades. In the 1960s, THC levels were reported to have been in
the one-to-four-per-cent range. Research reported in the science journal, Live
Science, in 21014 indicates that marijuana’s main psychoactive ingredient,
THC, in random marijuana samples, rose from about four per cent in 1995 to
about 12 per cent in 2014. In a more-recent article, the leader of the
American Chemical Society stated: “We’ve seen potency values close to 30-per-
cent THC, which is huge.”

Despite these clear and increasing dangers, the Government of Canada’s stated
objective is to “legalize, strictly regulate and restrict access to cannabis
for non-medical purposes.” Unfortunately, the government’s approach has
serious flaws. Most importantly, their approach lacks protections for youth,
despite this being another specifically stated objective of the Canadian
government’s new law.

While supporters of cannabis often compare it with alcohol, a legal, but
carefully controlled substance in Canada, there is an important difference.
Cannabis is commonly consumed by smoking, which leads to significant, second-
hand affects and, as a result, second-hand structural changes in the brain.

In my neighbourhood, cannabis-users in one house, taking advantage of the
decreasing legal response to cannabis in B.C. these days, happily smoke the
substance on their back deck, only to have the blue smoke waft across to the
trampoline next door, where my younger brother and his friends often play.

The government’s proposed new policy actually encourages youth exposure by
making it legal for citizens to grow cannabis in their homes. There is no
mention of the protection of children living in those residences, where
cannabis is grown, consumed and potentially sold.

The Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police makes this point well. They warn
that allowing home-grown cultivation will fuel the cannabis black market and
that the four-plant limit proposed under the legislation is impossible to
enforce. The chiefs further note that home cultivation is a direct
contradiction to the government’s promise to create a highly regulated
environment that minimizes youth access to the drug.

The biggest concern that the youth of Canada should have about the
government’s approach to decriminalization is, however, drug quality —
potentially with deadly results. The opportunity for tampering is obvious. A
high school friend and classmate of mine casually uses cannabis and landed in
the hospital for a few weeks. She believes that some of the cannabis she used
was laced with another substance. I often wonder how close my friend came to
dying like another of our fellow students at New Westminster Secondary School.

Canada isn’t ready for the decriminalization of cannabis. The Canadian
government, and our health-care and legal systems, aren’t fully prepared for
the problems and long-term effects that’ll have serious consequences for our
youth. Important issues, including second-hand effects and basic safety, not
to mention enforcement and legal implications, have yet to be fully defined
and planned for. The federal government’s plan to decriminalize pot, as it
stands now, doesn’t provide enough protection for Canada’s young people.

Mitchell Moir is a Grade 12 student at New Westminster Secondary.

_Source: http://vancouversun.com/opinion/op-ed/opinion-proposed-cannabis-
policy-doesnt-do-enough-to-protect-youth 23rd June 2017_

Filed under: Canada,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus,
babies, children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health,Youth :

**Today’s Reality**

Even if you smoked pot 20+ years ago without harm, today’s situation is
different. We want our children to avoid marijuana because they care about the
risks in marijuana itself.

Here’s the facts for raising your children today:

  * Marijuana has been modified since 1994. The THC, which gives the high, is 3-10x stronger in the plants of today. If a child begins using today’s pot , it’s like to learning to drink with grain alcohol, instead of beer or wine. Also, youth today frequently use the potent “dabs” “wax” and “budder.” These are extractions can have 40-80% THC.

  * Marijuana is addictive, contrary to a popular myth, particularly with today’s stronger strains of pot.

  * In states with medical marijuana, teen usage is much higher than in other states, and many teens who use pot get it from some marijuana cardholders.

  * Those who begin in adolescence or their teens, have an addiction rate of 17 percent, as opposed to 9 percent for those who begin using marijuana as an adult. *Emergency Department hospitalizations from marijuana rose from 281,000 to 455,000 between 2004 and 2011, making it 2nd amongst the illegal drugs causing ER treatment.

  * Individuals responses to marijuana can be vary greatly, and the potential for paranoia and psychotic reactions are real side effects, omitted in the pot propaganda.

  * Marijuana is fat soluble and stays in the body for weeks, which is why some people have flashbacks.

  * The brain, which is 1/3 fat, isn’t fully developed until age 25 or later, and until it is, marijuana can cause irreversible damage.

  * Marijuana is not as widely used as alcohol, 6-7% of the adult population, vs. 66% who drink, one reason the comparison doesn’t work. * Marijuana usage causes traffic deaths and it is not safe to combine with driving.

  * More teens seek substance abuse treatment for pot than any other legal or illegal substance. * Marijuana is a gateway drug, because nearly every young person who develops a drug addiction begins with marijuana. Early pot users such as Robert Downey, Jr. (age 9), and Cameron Douglas (age 13), prove that the stranglehold of drug addiction lasts for years.

  * A multi-year study out of New Zealand, tracking marijuana users and through their mid-30s showed IQs decrease an 6-8 percentage points over time. Again, we point to the medical studies summarized on this webpage.

  * In a recent study, schizophrenics who have used marijuana had an onset of the disease 2-1/2 years earlier than those who did not use marijuana. * Marijuana can trigger psychotic symptoms and/or mental illness, and cognitive decline in youth, more quickly than alcohol, while tobacco does not.

  * Since marijuana usage increases the odds of developing a mental illness, expansion of pot will expand mental health treatment needs.

  * Efforts to legalize for age 21+ hide the motivation to attract young users and build big profits. Legal pot mean more young users.

  * Marijuana usage is associated with greater risk for testicular cancer in males.

  * With universal health care, all of us will pay for the increase in medical care for those needing help from pot abuse.

  * The number of pot-related hospitalizations in Colorado accelerated in 2009 and went out of control in the first half of 2014.

  * Existing mental health issues, such as ADHD, anxiety and depression, greatly increase the use of drugs for self-medication.

**Mental Health, Physical Health Alike**

“We cannot promote a comprehensive system of mental health treatment and
marijuana legalization, which increases permissiveness for a drug that
directly contributes to mental illness,” states former Congressman Patrick
Kennedy, who fought tirelessly on behalf of parity for mental health
treatment. Kennedy and policy expert Kevin Sabet promote Smart Approaches to
Marijuana.

  * The National Alliance for Mental Illness lists four illegal drugs which cause psychosis: cannabis, LSD, methamphetamine and heroin and two classes of legal drugs, amphetamines and steroids. Pharmaceutical drugs are sold with warnings, while marijuana isn’t.

Sharon Levy, Chairwoman of the American Academy of Paediatrics committee on
substance abuse, said “We’re losing the public health battle” and policy is
being made by legalization advocates who might be misinformed about
marijuana’s dangers.”

_Source: http://www.poppot.org/2016/08/08/latest-child-dangers-marijuana-
edibles/_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,Parents,USA :

Smart Approaches to Marijuana’s 2017 publication references academic studies
which suggest that marijuana primes the brain for other types of drug usage.
Here’s the summary on that subject from page 4, Marijuana and Other Drugs: A
Link We Can’t Ignore :

MORE THAN FOUR in 10 people who ever use marijuana will go on to use other
illicit drugs, per a large, nationally representative sample of U.S.
adults.(1) The CDC also says that marijuana users are three times more likely
to become addicted to heroin.(2)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/national-

survey.jpg)

Although 92% of heroin users first used marijuana before going to heroin, less
than half used painkillers before going to heroin.

And according to the seminal 2017 National Academy of Sciences report, “There
is moderate evidence of a statistical association between cannabis use and the
development of substance dependence and/or a substance abuse disorder for
substances including alcohol, tobacco, and other illicit drugs.”(3)

RECENT STUDIES WITH animals also indicate that marijuana use is connected to
use and abuse of other drugs. A 2007 Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology study
found that rats given THC later self -administered heroin as adults, and
increased their heroin usage, while those rats that had not been treated with
THC maintained a steady level of heroin intake.(4) Another 2014 study found
that adolescent THC exposure in rats seemed to change the rodents’ brains, as
they subsequently displayed “heroin-seeking” behaviour. Youth marijuana use
could thus lead to “increased vulnerability to drug relapse in adulthood.”(5)

**National Institutes of Health Report**

The National Institutes of Health says that research in this area is
“consistent with animal experiments showing THC’s ability to ‘prime’ the brain
for enhanced responses to other drugs. For example, rats previously
administered THC show heightened behavioral response not only when further
exposed to THC, but also when exposed to other drugs such as morphine—a
phenomenon called cross-sensitization.”(6)

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/acohol-300x235.jpg)

Suggestions that one addictive substance replaces another ignores the problem
of polysubstance abuse, the common addiction of today.

Additionally, the majority of studies find that marijuana users are often
polysubstance users, despite a few studies finding limited evidence that some
people substitute marijuana for opiate medication. That is, people generally
do not substitute marijuana for other drugs. Indeed, the National Academy of
Sciences report found that “with regard to opioids, cannabis use predicted
continued opioid prescriptions 1 year after injury. Finally, cannabis use was
associated with reduced odds of achieving abstinence from alcohol, cocaine, or
polysubstance use after inpatient hospitalization and treatment for substance
use disorders” [emphasis added].(7)

Moreover, a three-year 2016 study of adults also found that marijuana
compounds problems with alcohol. Those who reported marijuana use during the
first wave of the survey were more likely than adults who did not use
marijuana to develop an alcohol use disorder within three years.(8) Similarly,
alcohol consumption in Colorado has increased slightly since legalization. (9)

_Source: http://www.poppot.org/2017/07/03/replacing-one-addiction-another-
will-not-work/_

Filed under: Addiction,Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects :

Mass Illness from Marijuana Edibles in San Francisco There’s more potential
for overdose from edibles than smoked marijuana, although the teen in Seattle
who jumped to his death last December did it after smoking pot for the first
time. Two shocking incidents in California suggest that overdose emergencies
will increase if that states vote to legalize marijuana in November. Here’s a
summary of recent cases of toxicity from edibles:

· 19 people were hospitalized in San Francisco on August 7 from THC, after
attending a quinceañera party. The source is believed be marijuana-infused
candies, perhaps gummy bears. Several children were among those poisoned, one
as young as six. A 9-year-old had severe difficulty breathing.

· Pot brownies sent a bachelorette party to the emergency room in South Lake
Tahoe over the weekend of July 30-31. Eight of the 10 women were admitted to
the hospital according to the City of South Lake Tahoe’s website.

· A JAMA Paediatrics article explains the dramatic rise in children’s
hospitalizations related to marijuana in Colorado since legalization. In 10
cases, the product was not in a child-resistant container; in 40 scenarios
(34%) there was poor child supervision or product storage. Edible products
were responsible for 51 (52% ) of exposures. The report claimed that child-
resistant packaging has not been as effective in reducing kids’ unintended
exposure to pot as hoped.

· The report mentions the death of one child, an 11-month-old baby. Nine of
the children had symptoms so serious that they ended up in the intensive care
unit of Colorado Children’s Hospital. Two children needed breathing tubes.

· The state of Washington has a similar problem with edibles, as reported on
the King County Health Department’s website. From 2013 to May 2015, there were
46 cases of children’s intoxications related to marijuana edibles reported in
Washington. However, reporting is voluntary and the state estimates that
number could be much higher.

· In May, a father plead guilty to deliberately giving his 4-year-old daughter
marijuana-laced cake in Vancouver, Washington. He was sentenced to two years
in prison.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/Intoxication.jpg)

Intoxication from marijuana edibles has risen steadily since legalization.
Source: King County Department of Health. Top photo: AP

· In Hingham, MA, there was a 911 related to teen girl who ingested marijuana
edibles. The candies were in a package labelled Conscious Creations, which
didn’t disclose ingredients. Massachusetts has a medical marijuana program,
but it is not clear how or to whom they were sold or dispensed.

· July, 2016: Two California teens were hospitalized after eating a marijuana-
laced cookie. The teens reported purchasing the cookie from a third teenager
who was subsequently arrested.

· July, 2016: A California man was arrested for giving candy laced with
marijuana to a 6-year-old boy and an 8-year-old boy; the 6-year-old was
hospitalized for marijuana poisoning.

· July, 2016: Police in Arizona arrested a mother for allegedly giving her 11-
and 12-year-old children gummy candy infused with marijuana. Police say the
marijuana-infused candy was originally purchased by an Arizona medical
marijuana user, but was illegally transferred to the mother in question.
(State medical marijuana programs have poor track records of assuring the
“medicine” goes to whom it is intended.)

· On April 27, a Georgia woman was arrested after a 5- year-old said he ate a
marijuana cake for breakfast. The child was taken to the hospital for
treatment following the incident; according to officials, his pulse was
measured at over 200 beats per minute.

· Last year there were more than 4,000 treatments at hospitals and poison
center treatments in the US related to marijuana toxicity in children and
teens.

![](https://drugprevent.org.uk/ppp/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Edible.jpg)

Growth of marijuana edibles intoxication by age. Source: King County,
Washington

Edible marijuana poses a “unique problem,” because “no other drug is infused
into a palatable and appetizing form” – such as cookies, brownies and candy.
Many household items cause poisonings, but marijuana edibles are different
because they’re made to look appealing and they appeal to children.

_Source: http://www.poppot.org/2016/08/08/latest-child-dangers-marijuana-e_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Effects of Drugs,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Social
Affairs,USA :

It is vital that physicians—particularly psychiatrists who are on the
frontlines with patients who struggle with cannabis use—are able to identify
and characterize cannabis use disorders; provide education; and offer
effective, evidence-based treatments. This article provides a brief overview
of each of these topics by walking through clinical decision-making with a
case vignette that touches on common experiences in treating a patient with
cannabis use disorder.

A separate and important issue is screening for emerging drugs of abuse,
including synthetic “marijuana” products such as K2 and spice. Although these
products are chemically distinct from the psychoactive compounds in the
traditional cannabis plant, some cannabis users have tried synthetic
“marijuana” products because of their gross physical similarity to cannabis
plant matter.

CASE VIGNETTE

Mr. M is a 43-year-old legal clerk who has been working in the same office for
20 years. He presents as a referral from his primary care physician to your
outpatient psychiatry office for an initial evaluation regarding “managing
some mid-life issues.” He states that while he likes his job, it is the only
job he has had since graduating college and he finds the work boring, noting
that most of his co-workers have gone on to law school or more senior
positions in the firm. When asked what factors have prevented him from seeking
different career opportunities, he states that he would “fail a drug test.”
Upon further inquiry, Mr. M says he has been smoking 2 or 3 “joints” or taking
a few hits off of his “vaping pen” of cannabis daily for many years, for which
he spends approximately $70 to $100 a week.

He first used cannabis in college and initially only smoked “a couple hits” in
social settings. Over time, he has needed more cannabis to “take the edge off”
and has strong cravings to use daily. He reports liking how cannabis decreases
his anxiety and helps him fall asleep, although he thinks the cannabis
sometimes makes him “paranoid,” which results in his avoidance of family and
friends.

More recently, he identifies conflict and regular arguments with his wife over
his cannabis use—she feels it prevents him from being present with his family
and is a financial burden. He admits missing an important awards ceremony for
her work and sporting events for his children, for which he had to “come up
with excuses,” but the truth is that he ended up smoking more than he had
intended and lost track of the time.

Mr. M reports multiple previous unsuccessful attempts to reduce his use and 2
days when he stopped completely, which resulted in “terrible dreams,” poor
sleep, sweating, no appetite, anxiety, irritability, and strong cravings for
cannabis. Resumption of his cannabis use relieved these symptoms. He denies
tobacco or other drug use, including use of synthetic marijuana products such
as K2 or spice, and reports having a glass of wine or champagne once or twice
a year for special occasions.

**The diagnosis**

In the transition from DSM IV-TR to DSM-5, cannabis use disorders, along with
all substance use disorders, have been redefined in line with characterizing a
spectrum of

pathology and impairment. The criteria to qualify for a cannabis use disorder
remain the same except for the following:

1\. The criterion for recurrent legal problems has been removed.

2\. A new criterion for craving or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis has
been added, and the terms abuse and dependence were eliminated.

To qualify as having a cannabis use disorder, a threshold of 2 criteria must
be met. Severity of the disorder is characterized as “mild” if 2 or 3 criteria
are met, “moderate” if 4 or 5 criteria are met, and “severe” if 6 or more
criteria are met. Mr. M demonstrates 3 symptoms of impaired control: using
longer than intended, unsuccessful efforts to cut back, and craving; 3
symptoms of social impairment: failure to fulfil home obligations, persistent
problems with his wife, and reduced pursuit of occupational opportunities; 1
symptom of risky use: continued use despite paranoia; and 2 symptoms of
pharmacological properties: tolerance and withdrawal. As such, he meets 9
criteria, which qualify him for a diagnosis of severe cannabis use disorder.

You summarize Mr. M’s 9 symptoms and counsel him about severe cannabis use
disorder. He becomes upset and states that he was not aware one could develop
an “addiction” to cannabis. He expresses an interest in treatment and asks
what options are available.

**Treatment options**

Psychotherapeutic treatments, including motivational enhancement treatment
(MET), cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and contingency management (CM),
have demonstrated effectiveness in reducing frequency and quantity of cannabis
use, but abstinence rates remain modest and decline after treatment.
Generally, MET is effective at engaging individuals who are ambivalent about
treatment; CM can lead to longer periods of abstinence during treatment by
incentivizing abstinence; and CBT can work to enhance abstinence following
treatment (preventing relapse). Longer duration of psychotherapy is associated
with better outcomes. However, access to evidence-based psychotherapy is
frequently limited, and poor adherence to evidence-based psychotherapy is
common.

In conjunction with psychotherapy, medication strategies should be considered.
Because there are no FDA-approved pharmacological agents for cannabis use
disorder, patients should understand during the informed consent process that
all pharmacotherapies used to treat this disorder are off-label. A number of
clinical trials provide evidence for the off-label use of medications in the
treatment of cannabis use disorder. The current strategies for the off-label
treatment of cannabis use disorder target withdrawal symptoms, aim to initiate
abstinence and prevent relapse or reduce use depending on the patient’s goals,
and treat psychiatric comorbidity and symptoms that may be driving cannabis
use. Here we focus on the evidence supporting these key strategies.

**Targeting withdrawal and craving**

Cannabis withdrawal is defined by DSM-5 as having 3 or more of the following
signs and symptoms that develop after the cessation of prolonged cannabis use:

• Irritability, anger, or aggression

• Nervousness or anxiety

• Sleep difficulty

• Decreased appetite or weight loss

• Restlessness

• Depressed mood

• At least one of the following physical symptoms that causes discomfort:
abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or headache

Withdrawal symptoms may be present within the first 24 hours. Overall, they
peak within the first week and persist up to 1 month following the last use of
cannabis. In the case of Mr. M, insomnia, poor appetite, and irritability as
well as sweating are identified, which meet DSM-5 criteria for cannabis
withdrawal during the 2 days he abstained from use. He also identifies strong
craving and vivid dreams, which are additional withdrawal symptoms included on
marijuana withdrawal checklists in research studies, although not included in
DSM-5 criteria. These and other symptoms should be considered in clinical
treatment.

Medication treatment studies for cannabis withdrawal have hypothesized that if
withdrawal symptoms can be reduced or alleviated during cessation from regular
cannabis use, people will be less likely to resume cannabis use and will have
better treatment outcomes. Studies have shown that dronabinol and nabilone
improved multiple withdrawal symptoms, including craving; and quetiapine,
zolpidem, and mirtazapine help with withdrawal-induced sleep disturbances.1-5

Combining dronabinol and lofexidine (an alpha-2 agonist) was superior to
placebo in reducing craving, withdrawal, and self-administration during
abstinence in a laboratory model. However, in a subsequent treatment trial,
the combined medication treatment was not superior to placebo in reducing
cannabis use or promoting abstinence.6

Six double-blind placebo-controlled pharmacotherapy trials in adults with
cannabis use disorder have looked at withdrawal as an outcome.7 Of these
studies, only dronabinol, bupropion, and gabapentin reduced withdrawal
symptoms.8-10 In addition to reducing withdrawal symptoms, nabiximols/Sativex
(a combination tetrahydrocannabinol [THC] and cannabidiol nasal spray not
available in the US) increased retention (while actively on the medication in
an inpatient setting) but did not reduce outpatient cannabis use at follow-
up.11

All of the medications available for prescription in the US can be monitored
reliably with urine drug screening to assess for illicit cannabis use except
dronabinol, which will result in a positive screen for cannabis. When using
urine drug screening, remember that for heavy cannabis users the qualitative
urine drug screen can be positive for cannabis up to a month following
cessation. When selecting a medication, take into account the cost of the
medication, particularly since insurance will likely not cover THC agonists
such as dronabinol for this indication, and possible misuse or diversion of
scheduled substances (eg, dronabinol, nabilone). In addition, monitoring for
reductions in substance use and withdrawal symptoms is key.

**Abstinence initiation and relapse prevention**

Other clinical trials have looked at medications to promote abstinence by
reducing stress-induced relapse, craving (not as a component of withdrawal),
and the reinforcing aspects of cannabis. Of these trials, the following
results show potential promise with positive findings: gabapentin reduced
quantitative THC urine levels and improved cognitive functioning (in addition
to decreasing withdrawal), and buspirone led to more negative urine drug
screens for cannabis (although the difference was not significant compared
with placebo).10,12 However, in a follow-up larger study, no differences were
seen compared with placebo and women had worse cannabis use outcomes on
buspirone.13

N-acetylcysteine resulted in twice the odds of a negative urine drug screen in
young adults and adolescents (although there was no difference between
adolescent groups in self-report of cannabis use).14 Gray and colleagues15
reported that no differences were seen between N-acetylcysteine and placebo
(results of the trial are soon to be published). Topiramate resulted in
significantly decreased grams of cannabis used but no difference in percent
days used or proportion of positive urine drug screens.16 In a recent small
clinical trial, reductions in cannabis use were seen with oxytocin in
combination with MET.17 Studies with nabilone and long-term naltrexone
administration reduced relapse and cannabis self-administration and subjective
effects, respectively, which suggests promising avenues yet to be explored by
clinical trials.2,18

**Treatment of psychiatric comorbidity**

Other studies have looked at the effects of treating common comorbid
psychiatric disorders in adults with cannabis use disorder, postulating that
if the psychiatric disorder is treated, the individual may be more likely to
abstain or reduce his or her cannabis use. For example, if a person is less
depressed, he may better engage in CBT for relapse prevention.

Fluoxetine for depression and cannabis use disorder in adolescents decreased
cannabis use and depression, although there was no difference compared with
placebo.19 A trial of venlafaxine for adults with depression and cannabis use
disorder demonstrated less abstinence with greater withdrawal-like symptoms
compared with placebo.20,21 These findings suggest that this antidepressant
might not be beneficial for treatment-seeking individuals with cannabis use
disorder and may actually negatively affect outcomes.

CASE VIGNETTE CONT'D

After discussing and presenting the different psychotherapy and medication
treatment options to Mr. M, you and he decide to start CBT to help with
abstinence initiation. In addition, you prescribe 20 mg of dronabinol up to 2
times daily in combination with 50 mg of naltrexone daily, to help globally
target Mr. M’s withdrawal symptoms and prevent relapse once abstinence is
achieved. However, a few days later, Mr. M calls to say that his insurance
will not cover the prescription for dronabinol and he cannot afford the high
cost. Given his main concerns of cannabis withdrawal symptoms, you select
gabapentin up to 400 mg 3 times daily and continue weekly individual CBT.

Mr. M calls back several days later and reports that he has made some
improvements in reducing the frequency of his cannabis use, which he
attributes to the medication, but he thinks he needs additional assistance.
After reviewing the treatment options again, he gives informed consent to
start 1200 mg of N-acetylcysteine twice daily. After 10 weeks of this
medication, his urine screens are negative.

You continue to provide relapse prevention CBT. He reports to you that his
anxiety and insomnia are almost resolved, and you suspect that withdrawal was
the cause of these symptoms. He reports significant improvement in his
relationship with his family and recently received a promotion at work for
“going above and beyond” on a project he was given the lead.

Over the next 6 months, he has 2 relapses that in functional analysis with you
are determined to be triggered by unsolicited contact from his former drug
dealer. Together, you develop a plan to block any further contact from the
drug dealer. After several months, both the gabapentin and N-acetylcysteine
are tapered and discontinued. Mr. M continues to see you for biweekly therapy
sessions with random drug screens every 4 to 6 weeks.

**Conclusion**

Based on the available evidence, gabapentin, THC agonists, naltrexone, and
possibly N-acetylcysteine show the greatest promise in the off-label treatment
of cannabis use disorders. System considerations, such as medication cost,
need to be factored into the decision-making as well as combination medication
and psychotherapy approaches, which—as demonstrated in the case of Mr. M—may
ultimately work best. Until further research elucidates the standard of
medication practices for cannabis use disorder, the best off-label medication
strategy should target any co-occurring disorders as well as any identified
problematic symptoms related to cannabis use and cessation of use. When
available, referral for evidence-based psychotherapy should be made.

_Source: (http://www.psychiatrictimes.com) 30th June 201_

Filed under: Addiction (Papers),Cannabis/Marijuana,Medical Studies,Treatment :

In The Lancet Psychiatry, Schoeler and colleagues present a study1 describing
the mediating effect of medication adherence on the association between
continued cannabis use and relapse risk in patients with first-episode
psychosis.

They have previously reported a relapse rate of 36% in this patient group over
a 2-year period.2 Acknowledging the potential risk of psychosis relapse
related to the high proportion of patients continuing cannabis use after the
onset of psychosis, the current study1 investigates the same patient group
consisting of 245 patients, obtaining retrospective data on active cannabis
use and medication adherence shortly after illness onset, as well as risk of
relapse at 2-year follow-up. The authors find that relapse of psychosis
associated with continued cannabis use is partly mediated through non-
adherence to prescribed antipsychotic medication.

It is well established that cannabis use increases the risk of schizophrenia,
not only from the early Swedish conscript studies3 but also from studies on
people who use sinsemilla in London, UK, showing that high potency cannabis
increases the risk of schizophrenia.4

Twin studies from Norway have shown that cannabis increases the risk of
psychosis, even when controlling for genetic factors.5There has been
discussion on the direction of the association, as none of these studies can
rule out reverse causality, but it seems reasonable to conclude that cannabis
is one of many stressors that can precipitate schizophrenia, at least in
susceptible individuals.

The association between cannabis use and psychosis continues to interest
clinicians and researchers. Cannabis does not precipitate psychosis in most
users.3 What are the risk factors in the pathway from cannabis use to
psychosis?

The use of cannabis in patients with psychosis can be divided into three
groups: those not using cannabis, those using cannabis with few negative
consequences, and those in whom cannabis use is followed by relapse and
worsening of the disease. Too little effort has been put into studying people
with psychosis who can use cannabis without many negative consequences.

Further research should also be put into different variants of cannabis.
Strains cultured to produce high content of D-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) are
probably associated with higher risk for psychosis than those strains with
less THC.4 In healthy participants, cannabidiol has been shown to inhibit THC-
elicited paranoid symptoms and hippocampal-dependent memory impairment.6 The
use of more balanced forms of cannabis could possibly be less detrimental to
mental health.

Genetic predisposition is one factor that is related to the development of
psychosis after the use of cannabis.5 However, there is still a long way to go
in clarifying the interplay between genes and environmental factors in the
cannabis–psychosis association. Therefore, we support the request for doing
more studies to investigate the possible interaction between polygenic risk
score for schizophrenia and cannabis use in causing psychosis.7

Furthermore, there is a need to examine the use of antipsychotic medication
and investigate if some medications are particularly useful for patients with
psychotic disorders who intend to continue to use cannabis. In a randomised
trial comparing the effects of different antipsychotics,8 clozapine seemed to
stand out in reducing craving for cannabis, a finding that is in need of
replication.

Previous research has shown that stopping cannabis use after a first episode
of psychosis has beneficial outcomes compared with continued use.9 A meta-
analysis of observational studies published in 201710 compared adherence to
antipsychotic medication between cannabis users and non-users, and found that
cannabis use increases the risk of non-adherence to anti-psychotic medication
and quitting cannabis may help adherence to antipsychotics. In the current
study by Schoeler and colleagues,1 the authors found that adherence to
medication was a possible mediator in the association between cannabis use and
risk of psychosis relapse when taking potential confounders into account. They
found that medication adherence partly mediated the effect of continued
cannabis use on outcome, including risk of relapse (proportion mediated=26%,
pindirecteffects=0·040, 95% CI 0·004–0·16), number of relapses (36%, pindirect
effects=0·040, 0·003–0·14), time to relapse (28%, pindirect effects=0·051,
−0·53 to 0·001), and care intensity (20%, pindirect effects=0·035,
0·004–0·11), but not length of relapse (6%, pindirect effects=0·35, −0·030 to
0·09).

Acknowledging the complexity of psychosis relapse prevention, the current
findings point to reduction in cannabis use as an intervention target to
improve medication adherence, thereby preventing psychosis relapse. The
understanding of a triangular association of ongoing cannabis use with
medication adherence and psychosis relapse may be a step forward in
counteracting further psychotic episodes in some patients.

_Source: DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30254-7 Published:
10/7/17_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Health :

Investigating the proposition that cannabis is worth bothering with, this hot
topic looks at reports that stronger cannabis on the market is increasing
harms to users, prospects of recovery from disorders and dependence, and the
emerging response to synthetic forms of cannabis like ‘spice’.

CANNABIS IN THE LAW

A controlled ‘Class B’ substance, cannabis carries legal penalties for
possession, supply, and production. Between 2004–2009 cannabis was
reclassified as a ‘Class C’ substance, meaning for a brief period of time it
carried lesser penalties for possession. In 2009, the Association of Chief
Police Officers issued new guidance, advising officers to take an escalating
approach to the policing of cannabis possession for personal use: • A warning
• A penalty notice for disorder (PND) • Arrest

This three-tiered approach was designed to be “ethical and non-
discriminatory”, but also reinforce the “national message that cannabis is
harmful and remains illegal”.

In 1990s Britain a common reaction to allocating resources to treating
cannabis users was, ‘Why bother? We have more than enough patients with
problems with serious drugs like heroin.’ The typically calming use of the
drug by adults was seen as preferable to the main alternative – alcohol and
its associated violence and disorder. Calls for a treatment response were seen
as pathologising what in many societies is both normal and in some ways
desirable youth development: trying new experiences, challenging conventions,
and exposing the hypocrisy of alcohol-drinking adults. In 1997 the Independent
on Sunday launched a campaign to decriminalise cannabis, culminating in a mass
‘roll-up’, and 16,000-strong pro-cannabis march from Hyde Park to Trafalgar
Square. Its Editor Rosie Boycott wrote in the paper about her own coming-of-
age experience smoking cannabis, telling readers:

“I Rolled my first joint on a hot June day in Hyde Park. Summer of ’68. Just
17\. Desperate to be grown-up. … My first smoke, a mildly giggly intoxication,
was wholly anti-climatic. The soggy joint fell apart. I didn’t feel changed.
But that act turned me – literally – into an outlaw. I was on the other side
of the fence from the police – or the fuzz, as we used to call them. So were a
great many of my generation.”

The campaign was explosive, but short-lived, apparently subsiding when Boycott
left to take up her role as Editor of the Daily Express. A decade later, the
Independent issued an apology for the campaign. ‘If only they had known then,
what they knew now’, was the message of the article, referring to the
reportedly damaging impact of the more potent strains of cannabis and its
links to “mental health problems and psychosis for thousands of teenagers”.

**Are stronger strains creating more problems?**

There has been a long-standing, but controversial, association between
cannabis strength and harm. Reading newspaper articles on the subject, it
wouldn’t be unusual to see a headline drawing a straight line between ‘super-
strength skunk’ and addiction, violence, deaths, or psychosis. In 2008, then
Prime Minister Gordon Brown spoke in a similar vein, telling a breakfast-
television viewing audience:

I have always been worried about cannabis, with this new skunk, this more
lethal part of cannabis.

I don’t think that the previous studies took into account that so much of the
cannabis on the streets is now of a lethal quality and we really have got to
send out a message to young people – this is not acceptable.

Brown was warning of a dangerous new strain of cannabis on the market, that
caused very severe harms to users – contrasting starkly with the common
perception of cannabis as a ‘low harm’ or ‘no harm’ drug. The strength or
potency of cannabis is determined by the amount of ‘THC’ it contains. THC
produces the ‘high’ associated with cannabis, and another major component
‘CBD’ produces the sedative and anti-anxiety effects. As well as potency, the
relative amounts of THC and CBD are important for understanding the effects of
cannabis – something explored in a University College London study during the
programme Drugs Live: Cannabis on Trial. The research team compared two
different types of cannabis: the first had high levels of THC (approx. 13%)
but virtually no CBD; and the second had a lower level of THC (approx. 6.5%)
and substantial amounts of CBD (approx. 8%). They found that CBD had a
moderating or protective effect on some of the negative effects of THC, and
that “many of the effects that people enjoy are still present in low-potency
varieties without some of the harms associated with the high-potency
varieties”. At least in the US over the last two decades (between 1995–2014),
potency has increased from around 4% to 12%, and the protective CBD content of
cannabis has decreased, from around 28% to less than 15%, significantly
affecting the ratio of THC to CBD, and with it, the nature and strength of the
psychoactive effect of cannabis. Until the 1990s, herbal cannabis sold in the
UK was predominantly imported from the Caribbean, West Africa, and Asia. After
this time, it was increasingly produced in the UK, being grown indoors using
intensive means (artificial lighting, heating, and control of day-length). A
study funded by the Home Office analysed samples of cannabis confiscated by 23
police forces in England and Wales in 2008, and found that over 97% of herbal
cannabis had been grown by intensive methods; its average potency of 16%
compared with just 8% for traditional imported herbal cannabis. This matched
other reports of home-grown cannabis being consistently (around 2–3 times)
stronger than imported herbal cannabis and cannabis resin.

In 2015, observing a decrease in the use of cannabis in England and Wales, but
parallel increase in demand for treatment, a UK study examined whether the
trend could be explained by an increase in the availability of higher-potency
cannabis. Over 2500 adults were surveyed about their use of different types of
cannabis, severity of dependence, and cannabis-related concerns. The
researchers found that higher potency cannabis was associated with a greater
severity of dependence, especially in young people, and was rated by
participants as causing more memory impairment and paranoia than lower potency
types. However at the same time, it was reported to produce the best ‘high’,
and to be the preferred type.

By definition cannabis is a psychoactive substance, which means it can change
people’s perceptions, mood, and behaviour. Higher potency cannabis contains
more of the psychoactive component, so it makes sense that higher potency
cannabis could increase the risk of temporary or longer-term (adverse)
problems with perceptions, mood, and behaviour. However, there is a particular
concern that cannabis use could be linked to ‘psychosis’, a term describing a
mental illness where a person perceives or interprets reality in a very
different way to those around them, which can include hallucinations or
delusions.

Whether cannabis causes psychosis, precipitates an existing predisposition,
aggravates an existing condition, or has no impact at all on psychotic
symptoms, has for decades been hotly contested. With our focus on evaluations
of interventions, Drug and Alcohol Findings is in no position to pronounce on
this issue, nor on the possibility that the drug might sometimes improve
mental health, but some examples of research informing this debate are
included below. A 2009 UK study examined whether daily use of high-potency
cannabis was linked to an elevated risk of psychosis, comparing 280 patients
in London presenting with a first episode of psychosis with a healthy control
group. The patients were found to be more likely to smoke cannabis on a daily
basis than the control group, and to have smoked for more than five years.
Among those who used cannabis, 78% of the patients who had experienced
psychosis used higher-potency cannabis, compared with 37% of those in the
control group. The findings indicated that the risk of psychosis was indeed
greater among the people who were using high potency cannabis on a frequent
basis, but couldn’t show that the cannabis use caused the psychosis, or even
that the cannabis use made the group more susceptible to psychosis. The wider
literature on mental health and substance use would suggest that the
association is more complex than this. A recently published paper from the
University of York has demonstrated the complications of attributing any
association between cannabis use and psychosis to a causal effect of cannabis
use rather than other factors or a reverse causal effect. A calculation based
on data from England and Wales helped to put this into perspective, indicating
that even if cannabis did cause psychosis more than 20,000 people would need
to be stopped using cannabis to prevent just one case of psychosis. The
apparent steady increase in cannabis potency in the UK since the 1990s is
important context for further research. Where higher potency cannabis is
increasingly becoming the norm, and is the preference for cannabis users, it
would be relevant to generate more evidence of the health-related problems
with high potency cannabis, and the treatment and harm reduction solutions
based around these health-related problems.

**Cannabis accounts for half of all new drug treatment patients**

The most widely used illegal drug in Europe, many seemingly enjoy cannabis
without it leading to any significant negative social or health effects.
However, numbers entering treatment for cannabis use problems have been on the
rise (both in the UK, and the rest of Europe), while heroin treatment numbers
have fallen chart. According to Public Health England, this is not because
more people are using cannabis, but perhaps because services relieved of some
of the recent pressure of opiate user numbers are giving more priority to
cannabis, because they are making themselves more amenable to cannabis users,
and because of emerging issues with stronger strains of the drug. Whatever the
causes, across the UK figures submitted to the European drug misuse monitoring
centre show that the proportion of patients starting treatment for drug
problems who did so primarily due to their cannabis use rose steadily from 11%
in 2003/04 to 22% in 2011/12. With the caveat that data from 2013 onwards is
not directly comparabledue to changes in methodology, in 2014 and 2015 the
proportion of patients who entered treatment primarily because of a cannabis
issue hovered above previous years at 26% (25,278 and 26,295 respectively).
Among first ever treatment presentations, the increase from 2003/04 was more
pronounced, from 19% to 37%. By 2013, cannabis use had become the main prompt
for half the patients who sought treatment for the first time (at 49%), and
stayed relatively constant at 47% in 2014, and 48% in 2015.

Showing that more users was not the reason for more starting treatment, over
about the same period, in England and Wales the proportion of 16–59-year-olds
who in a survey said they had used cannabis in the past year fell from about
11% to 7% in 2013/14, then stayed at that level in 2014/15 and 2015/16. The
treatment figures largely reflect trends in England, where in 2013/14 the
number of patients starting treatment with cannabis use problems had risen to
30,422, 21% of all treatment starters, up from 23,018 and 19% in 2005/06.
Subsequently the number dropped to 27,965 in 2015/16, still around a fifth of
all treatment starters. Among the total treatment population – starting or
continuing in treatment – cannabis numbers rose from 40,240 in 2005/06 to peak
at 64,407 in 2013/14 before falling back to 59,918 in 2015/16; corresponding
proportions again hovered around a fifth. As a primary problem substance among
under-18s cannabis dominated, accounting for three-quarters of all patients in
treatment in 2015/16 and in numbers, 12,863. The dominance of cannabis
increased from 2008/09 as numbers primarily in treatment for drinking problems
fell.

**‘All treatments appear to work’**

According to the two main diagnostic manuals used in Europe and the USA,
problem cannabis use can develop into a cannabis use disorder or cannabis
dependence, identifiable by a cluster of symptoms including: loss of control;
inability to cut down or stop; preoccupation with use; neglecting activities
unrelated to use; continued use despite experiencing problems; and the
development of tolerance and withdrawal. This level of clinical appreciation
for cannabis use problems didn’t exist when researcher and writer William L.
White entered the addictions field half a century ago:

“When I first entered the rising addiction treatment system in the United
States nearly half a century ago, there existed no clinical concept of
cannabis dependence and thus no concept of recovery from this condition. In
early treatment settings, cannabis was not consider[ed] a “real” drug, the
idea of cannabis addiction was scoffed at as remnants of “Reefer Madness,” and
casual cannabis use was not uncommon among early staff working in addiction
treatment programs of the 1960s. Many in the field remain sceptical of the
idea of cannabis dependence, specifically whether problem users at the severe
end experience physiological withdrawal. However, reviewing what they believe
is mounting evidence, these authors suggest there can be confidence in the
existence of a “true withdrawal syndrome” – albeit one that differs
qualitatively from the “significant medical or psychiatric problems as
observed in some cases of opioid, alcohol, or benzodiazepine withdrawals”. In
the case of cannabis, the main symptoms are primarily emotional and
behavioural, although appetite change, weight loss, and some physical
discomfort are reported. A brief review aimed at practitioners in UK primary
care provides guidance on how to manage symptoms of withdrawal among patients
trying to stop or reduce their cannabis use.

Research has come a long way, says William L. White, with now “clear data
supporting the dependency producing properties of cannabis, a clear
conceptualization of cannabis use disorders (CUD) and cannabis dependence
(CD)”, but until recently, very little evidence about the prospects of long-
term recovery. Yet, key papers – found here and here – indicate that:

• Full remission from cannabis use disorders is not only possible, but
probable.

• Stable remission takes time – an average of 33 months.

• Abstinence may not be initially realistic for heavy cannabis users – but
those in remission are usually able to reduce the intensity of their use and
its consequences.

At least in the United States, it seems dependence is more quickly overcome
from cannabis than the main legal drugs. A survey of the US general adult
population found that within a year of first becoming dependent, 3% each of
smokers and drinkers were in remission and remained so until they were
surveyed. For cannabis the figure was nearly 5% and for cocaine, nearly 9%.
After ten years the proportions in remission had risen to 18% for nicotine,
37% for alcohol, 66% for cannabis and 76% for cocaine. About 26 years after
first becoming dependent, half the people at some time dependent on nicotine
were in remission, a milestone reached for alcohol after 14 years, for
cannabis six years, and for cocaine, five.

**Specialised treatment programmes for cannabis users in European countries**

Generally for people with cannabis use problems, the European Monitoring
Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction concluded in 2015, and before that in
2008, that “all treatments appear to work”. For adults, effective treatments
include motivational interviewing, motivational enhancement therapy and
cognitive-behavioural therapy, and for younger people, family-based therapies
seem most beneficial. Less important than the type of treatment is the
treatment context and the individual’s determination to overcome their
problems through treatment. And there is “no firm basis for a conclusion” that
cannabis-specific interventions (designed around the risks and harms
associated with cannabis) are more effective than general substance use
treatment tailored to the individual needs of the cannabis user seeking
treatment chart. In some studies brief interventions have been found to work
just as well as more intensive treatment, but when the patients are heavily
dependent, and the most difficult cases are not filtered out by the research,
longer and more individualised therapies can have the advantage. When the
World Health Organization trialled its ASSIST substance use screening and
brief advice programme in Australia, India, the United States, and Brazil,
just over half the identified patients (all had to be at moderate risk of harm
but probably not dependent) were primarily problem cannabis users. Among
these, risk reduction in relation to this drug was significantly greater among
patients allocated to a brief advice session than among those placed on a
three-month waiting list for advice. In each country too, risk reduction was
greater among intervention patients, except for the USA, where the order was
reversed. Suggesting that severity of use was not a barrier to reacting well
to brief intervention, only patients at the higher end of the moderate risk
spectrum further reduced their cannabis use/risk scores following
intervention. The ASSIST study was confined to adults, but young people in
secondary schools in the USA whose problem substance use focused mainly on
cannabis also reacted well to brief advice.

The relative persistence of opiate use problems versus the transitory nature
of those primarily related to cannabis seemed reflected in an analysis of
treatment entrants in England from 1 April 2005 to the end of 2013/14, the
last time this particular analysis was published. At the end of this period
just 7% of primary cannabis users were still in or back in treatment compared
to the 30% overall figure and 36% for primary opiate users. The figure peaked
at 43% for users of opiates and crack. Over half – 53% – of primary cannabis
users had left treatment as planned, apparently having overcome their cannabis
problems, compared to 27% of primary opiate users and just 20% with dual
opiates and crack use problems. Another 40% of cannabis users had left
treatment in an unplanned manner, a slightly higher proportion than among
opiate users. The figures tell a tale of relatively high level of success
which enables cannabis users to leave treatment, though even in the absence of
recorded success, few stay long-term.

However, the forms patients in England complete with their keyworkers while in
treatment seem to tell a different story. Compared to how they started
treatment, around six months later 45% of primary cannabis users were assessed
as using just as often (including a few using more), compared to 30% of opiate
users and 42% whose main problem drugs were both opiates and crack, suggesting
more rapid and/or more complete remission for opiate users than for cannabis
users. One interpretation is that the widespread use of substitute drugs like
methadone more reliably reduced the illegal opiate use of opiate users and
also helped retain them in treatment, while cannabis users tended quickly to
leave treatment, having done well or not. However, these figures relate only
to patients who completed the forms at their six-month review, which in
practice could have happened anywhere from about one to six months after their
assessment for treatment. What proportion of primary cannabis users were still
in treatment at that point and available to complete the forms is not clear,
but they may have been the patients whose problems were deep seated enough to
require extended treatment.

Enjoyable and trouble-free for many, but not without harms Harm reduction –
the “set of practical strategies and ideas aimed at reducing negative
consequences associated with drug use” – is mostly associated with ‘harder’
drugs like heroin, for which blood-borne viruses and drug-related deaths are
clear and severe risks. Yet while “many people experience cannabis as
enjoyable and trouble free”, there are also varying degrees of harm with this
drug depending on the characteristics of the person using, the type of the
cannabis, and the way they consume it. Many formal cannabis harm reduction
programmes borrow from the fields of alcohol and tobacco. Advice includes:

• safer modes of administration (eg, on the use of vaporisers, on rolling
safer joints, on less risky modes of inhaling) Many people experience cannabis
as enjoyable and trouble free … some people require help to reduce or stop

• skills to prevent confrontation with those who disapprove of use

• encouraging users to moderate their use

• discouraging mixing cannabis with other drugs

• drug driving prevention and controls

• reducing third-party exposure to second-hand smoke

• education about spotting signs of problematic use

• self-screening for problematic use

In some parts of the UK, National Health Service tobacco smoking cessation
services incorporated cannabis into their interventions with adults; and
Health Scotland, also addressing the risks of tobacco and cannabis smoking,
published a booklet for young people titled Fags ‘n’ Hash: the essential guide
to cutting down the risks of using tobacco and cannabis.

Vaporising or swallowing cannabis offers a way to avoid respiratory risks, but
only a minority of cannabis do this, most choosing to smoke cannabis joints
(or cannabis and tobacco joints). While not all will know about the different
health risks, cannabis users may choose against safer consumption methods
anyway for a range of reasons (including their own thoughts about safe use):

• Users may find it easier to control the effects (eg, severity, length of
effect) of cannabis when inhaling in the form of a joint or spliff

• Preparing and sharing joints can be an enjoyable part of the routine, or
part of a person’s social activities

• Alternative methods of smoking (eg, bongs and vaporisers) may be
inconvenient to use, or expensive to buy

Most harm reduction advice is delivered informally long before users come into
contact with drugs professionals – for example through cannabis magazines,
websites, and headshops – highlighting the importance of official sources
engaging with non-official sources to promote the delivery of accurate,
evidence-based harm reduction messages.

**A new high**

In May 2016 the Psychoactive Substances Act placed a ‘blanket ban’ on new
psychoactive substances (previously known as ‘legal highs’), including
synthetic cannabinoids (synthetic forms of cannabis). Prior to this, in 2014,
there had been 163 reported deaths from new psychoactive substances in the UK,
and 204 the year after. The average age was around 28, younger than the
average age for other drug misuse deaths of around 38. The fact that these
psychoactive substances – which produced similar effects to illicit drugs like
cannabis, cocaine, and ecstasy – could be bought so easily online or on the
high street, appeared inconsistent; and each fatality prompted “an outcry for
something to be done to prevent further tragedies”. This was the context (and
arguably the political trigger) for the introduction of the Psychoactive
Substances Act. While possession of a psychoactive substance as such wasn’t
criminalised;, production, supply, offer to supply, possession with intent to
supply, import or export were – with a maximum penalty of seven years’
imprisonment.

Just seven months after the Act came into effect, the Home Office labelled it
a success, with a press release stating that nearly 500 people had been
arrested, 332 shops around the UK had been stopped from selling the
substances, and four people had been sent to prison. But did the Psychoactive
Substances Act have the presumably desired effect of limiting access to
psychoactive substances (and reducing deaths), or did it just push the drugs
the way of dealers? It is perhaps too early to tell, but former chair of the
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs Professor Nutt had warned before the
Act came into effect that the ‘blanket ban’ would make it harder (not easier)
to control drugs. And while Chief executive of DrugWise Harry Shapiro had said
the new law would make new psychoactive substances harder to obtain, he also
agreed that sale of the drugs would not cease, but merely be diverted to the
illicit market: “The same people selling heroin and crack will simply add this
to their repertoire.” The paper “From niche to stigma” examined the changing
face of the new psychoactive substance user between 2009 and 2016, focusing on
people using the synthetic cannabis known as ‘spice’. It looked at the
transition of (then) ‘legal highs’ from an “experimental and recreational”
scene associated with a “niche middle class demographic”, to “those with
degrees of stigma”, especially homeless, prison, and socially vulnerable youth
populations (including looked after children, those involved in or at risk of
offending, and those excluded or at risk of exclusion from mainstream
education). In 2014, the DrugScope Street Drug Survey also observed a problem
among these particular groups, recording a “rapid rise in the use of synthetic
cannabinoids such as Black Mamba and Exodus Damnation by opiate users, the
street homeless, socially excluded teenagers and by people in prison”.

‘SPICE’ AND OTHER SYNTHETICS

Cannabis contains two key components:

• ‘THC’ (tetrahydrocannabinol), which produces the ‘high’

• ‘CBD’ (cannabidiol), which produces the sedative and anti-anxiety effects

Synthetic forms of cannabis contain chemicals that aim to copy the effects of
‘THC’ in cannabis. But the effects of synthetic cannabis can be quite
different (and often stronger): firstly, because synthetic production makes it
easier to manipulate the amount of the THC-like chemical; and secondly,
because of the absence of the moderating equivalent of ‘CBD’. Some synthetics
are purposely designed to resemble herbal cannabis, and can be consumed in the
same ways (eg, smoked or inhaled). The names also often have deliberate
cannabis connotations. The risk of this is that people wishing to take
cannabis may be initially unaware that they have been sold the synthetic form,
or may believe from the look of it that it will produce similar sought-after
effects. The greater intensity of synthetic cannabis at lower dose levels (
box) ensures that it has an appeal in terms of potency and affordability, but
may put those with fewer resources at greater harm.

In 2014, the prison inspectorate for England and Wales raised concerns about
the rise in the use of psychoactive substances in prisons, in particular
synthetic cannabis. A study set in an English adult male prison found that the
nature of the market was posing significant challenges to the management of
offenders. There, the primary motivation for consumption was being able to
take a substance without it being detected. Given this motivation, and the
greater likelihood of harms from synthetic versus natural cannabis, the
researchers concluded that it was imperative for mandatory drug-testing
policies to be revised, and instead rooted in harm reduction – something which
would also apply to people on probation subject to mandatory drug-testing.

Cannabis throws up a range of issues rather different from those associated
with the drugs treatment in the UK has normally focused on. If current trends
continue, understanding the findings will become yet more important to British
treatment services.

_Source: http://findings.org.uk/PHP/dl.php?file=cannabis_treat. Last revised
10 July 2017._

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Effects of Drugs (Papers),Health,Intervention (including testing)
(Papers) :

INTRODUCTION

Drug addiction is a chronic and relapsing disease that often begins during
adolescence.

Epidemiological evidence documents an association between marijuana use during
adolescence and subsequent abuse of drugs such as heroin and cocaine (1, 2).
While many factors including societal pressures, family, culture, and drug
availability can contribute to this apparent `gateway' association, little is
known about the neurobiological basis underlying such potential vulnerability.

Of the neural substrates that have been investigated, the enkephalinergic
opioid system is consistently altered by developmental marijuana exposure
(3–5), perhaps reflecting neuroanatomical interactions between cannabinoid
receptor type 1 and the enkephalinergic system (6, 7).

Debates exist, however, regarding the relationship between proenkephalin
(Penk) dysregulation and opiate susceptibility. We previously reported that
adult rats exposed to Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC; primary psychoactive
component of marijuana) during adolescence exhibit increased heroin self
administration (SA) as well as increased expression of Penk, the gene encoding
the opioid neuropeptide enkephalin, in the nucleus accumbens shell (NAcsh), a
mesolimbic structure critically involved in reward-related behaviors (3).

Although these data suggest that increased NAcsh Penk expression and heroin SA
behavior are independent consequences of adolescent THC exposure, they do not
address a possible causal relationship between THCinduced Penk upregulation in
NAcsh and enhanced behavioral susceptibility to opiates.

Moreover, insights regarding the neurobiological mechanisms by which
adolescent THC exposure maintains upregulation of Penk into adulthood remain
unknown.

Here, we take advantage of viral-mediated gene transfer strategies to show
that adulthood addiction-like behaviors induced by adolescent THC exposure are
dependent on discrete regulation of NAcsh Penk gene expression. A number of
recent studies have demonstrated an important role for histone methylation in
the regulation of drug-induced behaviors and transcriptional plasticity,
particularly alteration of repressive histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation
at NAc gene promotors (8, 9).

We report here that one mechanism by which adolescent THC exposure may mediate
Penk upregulation in adult NAcsh is through reduction of H3K9 di- and
trimethylation, a functional consequence of which may be decreased
transcriptional repression of Penk.

ABSTRACT

Background

Marijuana use by teenagers often predates the use of harder drugs, but the
neurobiological underpinnings of such vulnerability are unknown. Animal
studies suggest enhanced heroin self-administration (SA) and dysregulation of
the endogenous opioid system in the nucleus accumbens shell (NAcsh) of adults
following adolescent Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) exposure. However, a causal
link between Penk expression and vulnerability to heroin has yet to be
established.

Methods

To investigate the functional significance of NAcsh Penk tone, selective viral
mediated knockdown and overexpression of Penk was performed, followed by
analysis of subsequent heroin SA behavior. To determine whether adolescent THC
exposure was associated with chromatin alteration, we analyzed levels of
histone H3 methylation in the NAcsh via ChIP atfive sites flanking the Penk
gene transcription start site.

Results

Here, we show that regulation of the proenkephalin (Penk) opioid neuropeptide
gene in NAcsh directly regulates heroin SA behavior. Selective viral-mediated
knockdown of Penk in striatopallidal neurons attenuates heroin SA in
adolescent THC-exposed rats, whereas Penk overexpression potentiates heroin SA
in THC-naïve rats. Furthermore, we report that adolescent THC exposure
mediates Penk upregulation through reduction of histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9)
methylation in the NAcsh, thereby disrupting the normal developmental pattern
of H3K9 methylation.

Conclusions

These data establish a direct association between THC-induced NAcsh Penk
upregulation and heroin SA and indicate that epigenetic dysregulation of Penk
underlies the long term effects of THC.

_Source: Biol Psychiatry. 2012 November 15; 72(10): 803–810.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.026._

Filed under: Addiction,Addiction (Papers),Brain and
Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth :

Cannabis has recently been legalised in many US states

Cannabis itself is harmful to cardiovascular health and increases the chance
of early death regardless of related factors such as smoking tobacco, new
research reveals.

Data taken from more than 1,000 US hospitals found that people who used the
drug had a 26 per cent higher chance of suffering a stroke than those who did
not, and a 10 per cent higher chance of having a heart attack.

The findings held true after taking into account unhealthy factors known to
affect many cannabis smokers, such as obesity, alcohol misuse and smoking.

‘This leads us to believe that there is something else going on besides just
obesity or diet-related cardiovascular side effects’ Dr Aditi Kalla, Einstein
Medical Center, Philadelphia

They indicate there is something intrinsic about cannabis which can damage the
proper functioning of the human heart.

"Even when we corrected for known risk factors, we still found a higher rate
of both stroke and heart failure in these patients, so that leads us to
believe that there is something else going on besides just obesity or diet-
related cardiovascular side effects,” said Dr Aditi Kalla, Cardiology Fellow
at the Einstein Medical Center in Philadelphia and the study's lead author.

"It's important for physicians to know these effects so we can better educate
patients.”

Previous research in cell cultures has shown that heart muscle cells have
cannabis receptors relevant to contractility, or squeezing ability, suggesting
that those receptors might be one mechanism through which marijuana use could
affect the cardiovascular system.

The research team analysed more than 20 million records of young and middle-
aged patients aged between 18 and 55 who were discharged from 1,000 hospitals
in 2009 and 2010, when marijuana use was illegal in most states.

It identified 316,000 patients - 1.5 per cent - where marijuana use was
diagnosed in the notes. Their cardiovascular disease rates were compared to
those who shunned the drug.

The research was published yesterday at a meeting of the American College of
Cardiology in Washington DC.

_Source: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2017/03/09/cannabis-boosts-risk-
stroke-heart-attack-independent-tobacco/_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,USA :

Findings From A UK Birth Cohort

ABSTRACT

Background

Evidence on the role of cannabis as a gateway drug is inconsistent. We
characterise patterns of cannabis use among UK teenagers aged 13–18 years, and
assess their influence on problematic substance use at age 21 years.

Methods

We used longitudinal latent class analysis to derive trajectories of cannabis
use from self-report measures in a UK birth cohort. We investigated (1)
factors associated with latent class membership and (2) whether latent class
membership predicted subsequent nicotine dependence, harmful alcohol use and
recent use of other illicit drugs at age 21 years.

Results

5315 adolescents had three or more measures of cannabis use from age 13 to 18
years. Cannabis use patterns were captured as four latent classes
corresponding to ‘non-users’ (80.1%), ‘late-onset occasional’ (14.2%), ‘early-
onset occasional’ (2.3%) and ‘regular’ users (3.4%).

Sex, mother's substance use, and child's tobacco use, alcohol consumption and
conduct problems were strongly associated with cannabis use.

At age 21 years, compared with the non-user class, late-onset occasional,
early-onset occasional and regular cannabis user classes had higher odds of
nicotine dependence (OR=3.5, 95% CI 0.7 to 17.9; OR=12.1, 95% CI 1.0 to 150.3;
and OR=37.2, 95% CI 9.5 to 144.8, respectively); harmful alcohol consumption
(OR=2.6, 95% CI 1.5 to 4.3; OR=5.0, 95% CI 2.1 to 12.1; and OR=2.6, 95% CI 1.0
to 7.1, respectively); and other illicit drug use (OR=22.7, 95% CI 11.3 to
45.7; OR=15.9, 95% CI 3.9 to 64.4; and OR=47.9, 95% CI 47.9 to 337.0,
respectively).

Conclusions

One-fifth of the adolescents in our sample followed a pattern of occasional or
regular cannabis use, and these young people were more likely to progress to
harmful substance use behaviours in early adulthood.

_Source: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech-2016-208503_

Filed under: Addiction (Papers),Cannabis/Marijuana,Medical Studies :

It comes as no surprise that the prevalence of marijuana use has significantly
increased over the last decade. With marijuana legal for recreational use in
four states and the District of Columbia and for medical use in an additional
31 states, the public perception about marijuana has shifted, with more people
reporting that they support legalization. However, there is little public
awareness, and close to zero media attention, to the near-doubling of past
year marijuana use nationally among adults age 18 and older and the
corresponding increase in problems related to its use. Because the addiction
rate for marijuana remains stable—with about one in three past year marijuana
users experiencing a marijuana use disorder—the total number of Americans with
marijuana use disorders also has significantly increased. It is particularly
disturbing that the public is unaware of the fact that of all Americans with
substance use disorders due to drugs other than alcohol; nearly 60 percent are
due to marijuana. That means that more Americans are addicted to marijuana
than any other drug, including heroin, cocaine, methamphetamine, and the
nonmedical use of prescription drugs.

Stores in Colorado and Washington with commercialized marijuana sell
innovative marijuana products offering users record-high levels of THC
potency. Enticing forms of marijuana, including hash oil used in discreet
vaporizer pens and edibles like cookies, candy and soda are attractive to
users of all ages, particularly those underage. The legal marijuana producers
are creatively and avidly embracing these new trends in marijuana product
development, all of which encourage not only more users but also more intense
marijuana use.

Yet despite the expansion of state legal marijuana markets, the illegal market
for marijuana remains robust, leaving state regulators two uncomfortable
choices: either a ban can be placed on the highest potency—and most
enticing—marijuana products which will push the legal market back to products
with more moderate levels of THC, or the current evolution to ever-more potent
and more attractive products can be considered acceptable despite its
considerable negative health and safety consequences. If tighter regulations
are the chosen option, the illegal market will continue to exploit the desire
of marijuana users to consume more potent and attractive products. If state
governments let the market have its way, there will be no limit to the potency
of legally marketed addicting marijuana products.

The illegal marijuana market thrives in competition with the legal market by
offering products at considerably lower prices because it neither complies
with regulations on growth and sale, nor pays taxes on sales or their profits.
Unsurprisingly, much of the illegal marijuana in the states with legalized
marijuana is diverted from the local legal marijuana supply. It is troubling
that in response to the decline in demand for Mexican marijuana, Mexican
cartels are increasing the production of heroin, a more lucrative drug.

When alcohol prohibition ended in 1933, bootlegged alcohol gradually and
almost completely disappeared. Those who favour drug legalization are
confident that the same will occur in the market for drugs; they argue that
legalizing drugs will eliminate the illegal market with all its negative
characteristics including violence and corruption. The initial experience with
marijuana legalization shows that this is dangerous, wishful thinking. Why
doesn’t legalization now work for marijuana as it did for alcohol 80 years
ago? One obvious reason is that there is little similarity between the bootleg
industry of alcohol production that existed during prohibition and
contemporary drug trafficking organizations. Today’s illegal drug production
and distribution system is deeply entrenched, highly sophisticated, and
powerfully globalized. Traffickers are resourceful and able to rapidly to
adjust to changes in the market, including competing with legal drugs.

The legalization of marijuana or any other drug is making a bargain with the
devil. All drugs of abuse, legal and illegal, including marijuana, produce
intense brain reward that users value highly—so highly that they are willing
to pay high prices and suffer serious negative consequences for their use.
Marijuana users’ brains do not know the difference between legal and illegal
marijuana, but, as with other drugs, the brain prefers higher potency
products. Drug suppliers, legal and illegal, are eager to provide the drugs
that users prefer.

The challenge of drug policy today is to find better ways to reduce drug use
by using strategies that are cost-effective and compatible with modern values.
Legalization fails this test because it encourages drug use. Most of the costs
of drug use are the result of the drug use itself and not from efforts to curb
that use. It is hard to imagine a drug user who would be better off with
having more drugs available at cheaper prices. Supply matters. More supply
means more use. Drug legalization enhances drug supply and reduces social
disapproval of drugs.

Our nation must prepare itself for the serious negative consequences both to
public health and safety from the growth of marijuana use fuelled by both the
legal and the illegal marijuana markets.

_Source: http://www.rivermendhealth.com/resources/marijuana-legalization-led-
use-addiction-illegal-market-continues-thrive/ June 2017 Author: Robert L.
DuPont, M.D._

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Health,Social
Affairs,USA :

**Cannabis Use, Gender and the Brain**

Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in the U.S. and, as a result of
legalization efforts for both medical remedy and for recreational use, is now
the second leading reason (behind alcohol) for admission to addiction
treatment in the U.S. The health consequences, cognitive changes, academic
performance and numerous neuroadaptations have been debated ad nauseam. Like
other drugs and medications, effects are different if exposure occurs in the
young vs. the old or in males vs. females. Exposure in utero, early childhood,
adolescence-young adult, adult and elderly may have different effects on the
brain and outcomes. Yet the best available independent research shows that
marijuana use is associated with consistent regionally specific alterations to
important brain circuitry in the striatum and pre-frontal and post orbital
regions. In this study, Chye and colleagues have investigated the association
between marijuana use and the size of specific brain regions that are vitally
important in goal-directed behavior, focus and learning within in the orbitol
frontal cortex (OFC) and caudate. This investigation suggests that marijuana
dependence and recreational use have distinct and region-specific effects.

**Why Does This Matter?**

This is an important finding, but distinction between cannabis use, abuse and
dependence is not always clear, objective, linear or well understood. However,
dependence-related medial OFC volume reduction was robust and highly
significant. Lateral OFC volume reduction was associated with monthly
marijuana use. Greater reductions in brain volume of specific regions were
stronger among females who were marijuana dependent. This finding correlates
with previous evidence of gender-dependent differences towards the various
physiological, behavioral and the reinforcing effect of marijuana for both
recreational use and addiction.

The results highlight important neurological distinctions between occasional
cannabis use and addiction. Specifically, Chye and colleagues found that
smaller medial OFC volume may be driven by marijuana addiction-related
mechanisms, while smaller lateral OFC volume may be due to ongoing exposure to
cannabinoids. The results highlight a distinction between cannabis use and
dependence and warrant future examination of gender-specific effects in
studies of marijuana use and dependence.

_Source: http://www.rivermendhealth.com/resources/cannabis-use-gender-brain/
June 2017 Author: Mark Gold, MD_

Filed under: Addiction,Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,USA :

Today, Dr. Kevin Sabet, president of Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM), a
national group promoting evidence-based marijuana laws, issued the following
statement regarding medical marijuana legislation introduced by Senators
Booker (D-NJ) and Gillibrand (D-NY) and Rep. Steve Cohen (D-TN):

"No one wants to deprive chronically ill patients of medication that could be
helpful for them, but that's not what the legislation being introduced today
is about. We wouldn't allow Pfizer to bypass the FDA - why would we let the
marijuana industry? This bill would completely undermine the FDA approval
process, and encourage the use of marijuana and marijuana products that have
not been proven either safe or effective. The FDA approval process should set
the standard for smart, safe, and sound healthcare in our country, so we can
be sure that patients are receiving the best treatments that do more help than
harm," said SAM President and former senior White House drug policy advisor
Kevin Sabet.

"Raw marijuana is not medicine, so marijuana in crude form should not be
legal, but the medicinal components properly researched, purified, and dosed
should be made available through compassionate research programs, as outlined
in SAM's six-point plan entitled "Researching Marijuana's Medical Potential
Responsibly." We understand the FDA process can seem cumbersome to those
suffering from intractable diseases, but early access programs to drugs in
development are already available.

"Also, while FDA approval is the long-term goal, seizure patients shouldn't
have to go to the unregulated market to get products full of contaminants.
Responsible legislation that fast-tracks these medications for those truly in
need should be supported, rather than diverting patients to an unregulated CBD
market proven to be hawking contaminated or mislabeled products as medicine,
as this bill would endorse. In 2015 and 2016 the FDA sent multiple warning
letters to numerous CBD manufacturers, outlining these concerns. We support
the development of FDA-approved CBD medications, like Epidolex, which is in
the final stages of approval."

News media requesting a one-one-one interview with a representative from SAM
can contact anisha@learnaboutsam.org.

**About SAM**

Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM) is a nonpartisan, non-profit alliance of
physicians, policy makers, prevention workers, treatment and recovery
professionals, scientists, and other concerned citizens opposed to marijuana
legalization who want health and scientific evidence to guide marijuana
policies. SAM has affiliates in more than 30 states. For more information
about marijuana use and its effects, visit http://www.learnaboutsam.org.

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Marijuana and
Medicine,Political Sector,USA :

SPOKANE, Wash. - The release of more data on the effects of marijuana on a
baby has led researchers to the conclusion that moms should think twice before
using pot during and after pregnancy.

Many moms turn to marijuana for relief of symptoms such as nausea and anxiety,
yet scientific research is emerging that identifies associated risks.

Confusion over the safety of these products prompted multiple agencies,
including the Spokane Regional Health District, to launch a new component to
its Weed to Know campaign: Weed to Know for Baby and You.

The campaign educates families and caregivers about harms associated with
marijuana use while pregnant, breastfeeding, or caring for children. The
campaign stresses the results of several peer-reviewed studies, which
revealed: Marijuana use before pregnancy could: -Cause a baby to be born
before his or her body and brain are ready. This could mean serious health
problems at birth and throughout life.

-Change how a baby's brain develops. These changes may cause life-long behavior problems like trouble paying attention or following rules. for them to do well in school. Marijuana use during breastfeeding is associated with these risks: -Feeding problems, as THC, the active ingredient in marijuana, can lower milk supply.

-Increased risk for sudden infant death syndrome

Using marijuana can affect a person's ability to safely care for a baby or
other children. Marijuana use decreases a person's ability to concentrate,
impairs judgment, and slows response time.

“We hear all the time from mothers who feel they used marijuana ‘successfully’
in previous pregnancies, or know someone who did, but it is also likely the
child is not old enough yet to exhibit the long-term health consequences,”
said Melissa Charbonneau, a public health nurse in the health district’s
Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs program. “To be on the safe
side, your best bet is to avoid marijuana altogether while you're expecting.”

_Source: http://www.kxly.com/news/local-news/marijuana-use-during-pregnancy-
associated-with-many-risks-studies-reveal/531202931_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Health :

Marijuana sales have created an economic boom in U.S. states that have fully
or partially relaxed their cannabis laws, but is the increased cultivation and
sale of this crop also creating escalating environmental damage and a threat
to public health?

In an opinion piece published by the journal Environmental Science and
Technology, researchers from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
and Lancaster University in the U.K. have called on U.S. federal agencies to
fund studies that will gather essential environmental data from the legal
cultivation farms and facilities.

This information could then be used to help U.S. states minimize any
environmental and public health damage caused by this burgeoning industry and
aid legal marijuana growers in making their business environmentally
sustainable.

State-by-state legalization is effectively creating a new industry in U.S.,
one that looks set to rival all but the largest of current businesses. In
Colorado alone, sales revenues have reached $1 billion, roughly equal to that
from grain farming in the state. By 2020 it is estimated that country-wide
legal marijuana sales will generate more annual revenue than the National
Football League.

But the article, titled "High Time to Assess the Environmental Impacts of
Cannabis Cultivation" co-authored by William Vizuete, associate professor of
environment sciences and engineering at UNC's Gillings School of Global Public
health and Kirsti Ashworth, research fellow at Lancaster University's
Lancaster Environment Centre say that this expanded cultivation carries with
it serious environmental effects.

Their article points out that cannabis is an especially needy crop requiring
high temperatures (25-30 °C for indoor operations), strong light, highly
fertile soil and large volumes of water -- around twice that of wine grapes.
In addition, the authors state that the few available studies of marijuana
cultivation have uncovered potentially significant environmental impacts due
to excessive water and energy demands and local contamination of water, air,
and soil.

For example, a study of illegal outdoor grow operations in northern California
found that rates of water extraction from streams threatened aquatic
ecosystems. High levels of growth nutrients, as well as pesticides, herbicides
and fungicides, also found their way back into the local environment, further
damaging aquatic wildlife.

Controlling the indoor growing environment requires considerable energy with
power requirements estimated to be similar to that of Google's massive data
centers. No significant data has been collected on the air pollution impacts
on worker's public health inside these growing facilities or the degradation
of outdoor air quality due to emissions produced by the industrial scale
production of marijuana.

The authors emphasize, however, much of the data on marijuana cultivation to
date has come from monitoring illegal cannabis growing operations.

Dr Ashworth of Lancaster Environment Centre said: "The illegal status of
marijuana has prevented us from understanding the detrimental impacts that
this industrial scale operation has on the environment and public health."

"This is an industry undergoing a historic transition, presenting an historic
opportunity to be identified as a progressive, world-leading example of good
practice and environmental stewardship."

The continued expansion of legalization by the states does offer significant
opportunities for the US Department of Agriculture, Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), National

Institutes of Health (NIH, and Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) to fund research into legal cannabis cultivation to protect the
environment.

"Generating accurate data in all the areas we discussed offers significant
potential to reduce energy consumption and environmental harm, protect public
health and ultimately, improve cultivation methods," said Dr Vizuete . "There
are also significant potential public health issues caused by emissions from
the plants themselves rather than smoking it. These emissions cause both
indoor and outdoor air pollution."

Story Source: Materials provided by Lancaster University. Note: Content may be
edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

K. Ashworth, W. Vizuete. High Time to Assess the Environmental Impacts of
Cannabis Cultivation. Environmental Science & Technology, 2017;
10.1021/acs.est.6b06343DOI:

_Source: ScienceDaily, 21 February 2017.._

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Environment,Health :

Illicit cannabis use and cannabis use disorders increased at a greater rate in
states that passed medical marijuana laws than in other states, according to
new research at Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health and
Columbia University Medical Center. The findings will be published online in
JAMA Psychiatry.

Laws and attitudes regarding cannabis have changed over the last 20 years. In
1991, no Americans lived in states with medical marijuana laws, while in 2012,
more than one-third lived in states with medical marijuana laws, and fewer
view cannabis use as entailing any risks.

The new study is among the first to analyze the differences in cannabis use
and cannabis use disorders before and after states passed medical marijuana
laws, as well as differentiate between earlier and more recent periods and
additionally examine selected states separately.

The researchers used data from three national surveys collected from 118,497
adults: the 1991-1992 National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey, the
2001-2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions and
the 2012-2013 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions-
III.

Overall, between 1991-1992 and 2012-2013, illicit cannabis use increased
significantly more in states that passed medical marijuana laws than in other
states, as did cannabis use disorders. In particular, between 2001-2002 and
2012-2013, increases in use ranged from 3.5 percentage points in states with
no medical marijuana laws to 7.0 percentage points in Colorado. Rates of
increase in the prevalence of cannabis use disorder followed similar patterns.

"Medical marijuana laws may benefit some with medical problems. However,
changing state laws -- medical or recreational -- may also have adverse public
health consequences, including cannabis use disorders," said author Deborah
Hasin, PhD, associate professor of Epidemiology at the Mailman School of
Public Health and in the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia University
Medical Center. "A prudent interpretation of our results is that professionals
and the public should be educated on risks of cannabis use and benefits of
treatment, and prevention/intervention services for cannabis disorders should
be provided."

While illicit use of marijuana decreased and marijuana use disorder changed
little between 1991-1992 and 2001-2002, both use and disorder rates increased
between 2001-2002 and 2012-2013. In 1991-1992, predicted prevalence of use and
disorder were higher in California than other states with early-medical
marijuana laws (use: 7.6 percent vs. 4.5 percent; disorder: 2 percent vs. 1.15
percent). However, the predicted prevalence of past year use in California did
not differ significantly from states that passed laws more recently. In
contrast, the prevalence of use and disorder increased in the other 5 states
with early medical marijuana laws.

"Future studies are needed to investigate mechanisms by which increased
cannabis use is associated with medical marijuana laws, including increased
perceived safety, availability, and generally permissive attitudes," Dr. Hasin
also noted.

_Journal Reference:_

_Melanie M. Wall, PhD et al. US Adult Illicit Cannabis Use, Cannabis Use
Disorder, and Medical Marijuana Laws: 1991-1992 to 2012-2013. JAMA Psychiatry,
April 2017 DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.0724_

Source: ScienceDaily, 26 April 2017.
<www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/04/170426111917.htm:

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine :

One in 5 adolescents at risk of tobacco dependency, harmful alcohol
consumption and illicit drug use

Researchers from the University of Bristol have found regular and occasional
cannabis use as a teen is associated with a greater risk of other illicit drug
taking in early adulthood. The study by Bristol's Population Health Science
Institute, published online in the Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health,
also found cannabis use was associated with harmful drinking and smoking.

Using data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC),
the researchers looked at levels of cannabis use during adolescence to
determine whether these might predict other problematic substance misuse in
early adulthood -- by the age of 21.

The researchers looked at data about cannabis use among 5,315 teens between
the ages of 13 and 18. At five time points approximately one year apart
cannabis use was categorised as none; occasional (typically less than once a
week); or frequent (typically once a week or more).

When the teens reached the age of 21, they were asked to say whether and how
much they smoked and drank, and whether they had taken other illicit drugs
during the previous three months. Some 462 reported recent illicit drug use:
176 (38%) had used cocaine; 278 (60%) had used 'speed' (amphetamines); 136
(30%) had used inhalants; 72 (16%) had used sedatives; 105 (23%) had used
hallucinogens; and 25 (6%) had used opioids.

The study's lead author, Dr Michelle Taylor from the School of Social and
Community Medicine said:

"We tend to see clusters of different forms of substance misuse in adolescents
and young people, and it has been argued that cannabis acts as a gateway to
other drug use. However, historically the evidence has been inconsistent.

"I think the most important findings from this study are that one in five
adolescents follow a pattern of occasional or regular cannabis use and that
those individuals are more likely to be tobacco dependant, have harmful levels
of alcohol consumption or use other illicit drugs in early adulthood."

In all, complete data were available for 1571 people. Male sex, mother's
substance misuse and the child's smoking, drinking, and behavioural problems
before the age of 13 were all strongly associated with cannabis use during
adolescence. Other potentially influential factors were also considered:
housing tenure; mum's education and number of children she had; her drinking
and drug use; behavioural problems when the child was 11 and whether s/he had
started smoking and/or drinking before the age of 13.

After taking account of other influential factors, those who used cannabis in
their teens were at greater risk of problematic substance misuse by the age of
21 than those who didn't.

Teens who regularly used cannabis were 37 times more likely to be nicotine
dependent and three times more likely to have a harmful drinking pattern than
non-users by the time they were 21. And they were 26 times more likely to use
other illicit drugs.

Both those who used cannabis occasionally early in adolescence and those who
starting using it much later during the teenage years had a heightened risk of
nicotine dependence, harmful drinking, and other illicit drug use. And the
more cannabis they used the greater was the likelihood of nicotine dependence
by the age of 21.

This study used observational methods and therefore presents evidence for
correlation but not does not determine clear cause and effect -- whether the
results observed are because cannabis use actually causes the use of other
illicit drugs. Furthermore, it does not identify what the underlying
mechanisms for this might be. Nevertheless, clear categories of use emerged.

Dr Taylor concludes:

"We have added further evidence that suggests adolescent cannabis use does
predict later problematic substance use in early adulthood. From our study, we
cannot say why this might be, and it is important that future research focuses
on this question, as this will enable us to identify groups of individuals
that might as risk and develop policy to advise people of the harms.

"Our study does not support or refute arguments for altering the legal status
of cannabis use -- especially since two of the outcomes are legal in the UK.
This study and others do, however, lend support to public health strategies
and interventions that aim to reduce cannabis exposure in young people."

Journal Reference:

1\. Michelle Taylor, Simon M Collin, Marcus R Munafò, John MacLeod, Matthew
Hickman, Jon Heron. Patterns of cannabis use during adolescence and their
association with harmful substance use behaviour: findings from a UK birth
cohort. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 2017; jech-2016-208503
DOI: 10.1136/jech-2016-208503

_Source: www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/06/170607222448 <.htm>. 7 June
2017._

Filed under: Addiction,Addiction (Papers),Alcohol,Cannabis/Marijuana,Youth :

**Highlights**

· •Cannabidiol appears often in Norwegian THC-positive blood samples.

· •Cannabidiol does not appear to protect against THC-induced impairment.

· •Cannabidiol may be detected in blood for more than 2 h after cannabis
intake.

· •Hashish has revealed far lower THC/cannabidiol ratios than marijuana in
Norway.

**Abstract**

**Background and aims**

Several publications have suggested increasing cannabis potency over the last
decade, which, together with lower amounts of cannabidiol (CBD), could
contribute to an increase in adverse effects after cannabis smoking.
Naturalistic studies on tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and CBD in blood samples
are, however, missing. This study aimed to investigate the relationship
between THC- and CBD concentrations in blood samples among cannabis users, and
to compare cannabinoid concentrations with the outcome of a clinical test of
impairment (CTI) and between traffic accidents and non-accident driving under
the influence of drugs (DUID)-cases. Assessment of THC- and CBD contents in
cannabis seizures was also included.

**Methods**

THC- and CBD concentrations in blood samples from subjects apprehended in
Norway from April 2013–April 2015 were included (n = 6134). A CTI result was
compared with analytical findings in cases where only THC and/or CBD were
detected (n = 705). THC- and CBD content was measured in 41 cannabis seizures.

**Results**

Among THC-positive blood samples, 76% also tested positive for CBD. There was
a strong correlation between THC- and CBD concentrations in blood samples
(Pearson’s r = 0.714, p < 0.0005). Subjects judged as impaired by a CTI had
significantly higher THC- (p < 0.001) and CBD (p = 0.008) concentrations
compared with not impaired subjects, but after multivariate analyses,
impairment could only be related to THC concentration (p = 0.004). Analyzing
seizures revealed THC/CBD ratios of 2:1 for hashish and 200:1 for marijuana.

**Conclusions**

More than ¾ of the blood samples testing positive for THC, among subjects
apprehended in Norway, also tested positive for CBD, suggesting frequent
consumption of high CBD cannabis products. The simultaneous presence of CBD in
blood does, however, not appear to affect THC-induced impairment on a CTI.
Seizure sample analysis did not reveal high potency cannabis products, and
while CBD content appeared high in hashish, it was almost absent in marijuana.

_Source: http://www.fsijournal.org/article/ July 2017 Volume 276, Pages 12–17_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drugs and Accidents,Europe :

Warfarin. A single published case report describes an interaction with a
patient taking warfarin who also regularly smoked tobacco and marijuana. The
patient had multiple comorbidities and was taking at least 10 other
medications. On at least two occasions, the patient's international normalized
ratio (INR) increased to values over 10 with episodes of bleeding. The only
change reported for both occasions was an increase in the amount and frequency
of marijuana smoking.[24] Patients who take warfarin and use marijuana
regularly should receive close INR monitoring for any potential interaction.

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). A recent study examined baseline serum AED levels
to identify drug-drug interactions between CBD and 19 AEDs during an open-
label safety study in 81 patients (39 adults, 42 children) with refractory
epilepsy.[25] As doses of CBD were increased, the researchers noted an
increase in the serum levels of topiramate (P<.01), rufinamide (P<.01), and
desmethylclobazam (P<.01) and a decrease in the levels of clobazam (P<.01) in
both adult and pediatric patients. In adult patients, a significant increase
in the serum levels of zonisamide (P=.02) and eslicarbazepine (P=.04) was
observed with increasing CBD dose. No other drug interactions among the 19
AEDs were noted. The authors recommended monitoring serum AED levels in
patients receiving CBD, as drug-drug interactions may be correlated with
adverse events and laboratory abnormalities.

Patients using marijuana should be educated to avoid drugs that affect
associated CYP450 enzymes. When these drugs cannot be avoided, and marijuana
use is expected to continue, the patient should be monitored closely for
potential drug interactions. Be Aware and Educate Patients

Smoking more than two joints weekly is likely to increase the risk for drug-
related interactions.[5,10] No data exist monitoring large-scale marijuana use
in the United States. However, in Washington, a state in which marijuana use
is legal, the average user is estimated to smoke two to three joints per
week.[26] With growing legalization and use throughout the nation, healthcare
professionals must exercise heightened caution in the situation of concomitant
use of medications and marijuana.

_Source:: Stirring the Pot: Potential Drug Interactions With Marijuana -
Medscape - Jun 08, 2017. http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/881059#vp_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,Prescription
Drugs :

Study Finds Users Are 26 Times More Likely To Turn To Other Substances By The
Age Of 21

Study is first clear evidence that cannabis is gateway to cocaine and heroin

Teen marijuana smokers are 37 times more likely to be hooked on nicotine

Findings from Bristol University provide authoritative support for those
warning against the liberalisation of drugs laws

Teenagers who regularly smoke cannabis are 26 times more likely to turn to
other drugs by the age of 21.

The study of the lives of more than 5,000 teenagers produced the first
resounding evidence that cannabis is a gateway to cocaine, amphetamines,
hallucinogens and heroin.

It also discovered that teenage cannabis smokers are 37 times more likely to
be hooked on nicotine and three times more likely to be problem drinkers than
non-users of the drug.

The findings from Bristol University provide authoritative support for those
warning against the liberalisation of drugs laws.

Medical researchers have argued for years that cannabis is far from harmless
and instead carries serious mental health risks.

Dr Michelle Taylor, who led the study, said: ‘It has been argued that cannabis
acts as a gateway to other drug use. However, historically the evidence has
been inconsistent.

‘The most important findings from this study are that one in five adolescents
follow a pattern of occasional or regular cannabis use and that those
individuals are more likely to be tobacco dependent, have harmful levels of
alcohol consumption or use other illicit drugs in early adulthood.

‘Our study does not support or refute arguments for altering the legal status
of cannabis use.

'This study and others do, however, lend support to public health strategies
and interventions that aim to reduce cannabis exposure in young people.’

The Bristol evidence was gathered from a long-term survey of the lives of
young people around the city, the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and
Children.

The survey, which was published in the Journal of Epidemiology & Community
Health, examined 5,315 teenagers between the ages of 13 and 18. One in five
used cannabis.

Dr Tom Freeman of King’s College London said: ‘This is a high quality study
using a large UK cohort followed from birth. It provides further evidence that
early exposure to cannabis is associated with subsequent use of other drugs.’

The study of the lives of more than 5,000 teenagers produced the first
resounding evidence that cannabis is a gateway to cocaine amphetamines,
hallucinogens and heroin .

Ian Hamilton, who is a mental health researcher at York University, said: ‘It
adds to evidence that cannabis acts as a gateway to nicotine dependence, as
the majority of people using cannabis in the UK combine tobacco with cannabis
when they roll a joint.

‘This habit represents one of the greatest health risks to the greatest number
of young people who use cannabis. It suggests that adolescent cannabis use
serves as a gateway to a harmful relationship with drugs as an adult.’

The report said: ‘After taking account of other influential factors, those who
used cannabis in their teens were at greater risk of problematic substance
misuse by the age of 21.

‘Teens who regularly used cannabis were 37 times more likely to be nicotine
dependent and three times more likely to have a harmful drinking pattern than
non-users by the time they were 21. And they were 26 times more likely to use
other illicit drugs.

‘Both those who used cannabis occasionally early in adolescence and those who
started using it much later during the teenage years had a heightened risk of
nicotine dependence, harmful drinking, and other illicit drug use.

'And the more cannabis they used the greater was the likelihood of nicotine
dependence by the age of 21.’

_Source: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4582548/Proof-cannabis-DOES-
lead-teenagers-harder-drugs.html 8th June 2017_

Filed under: Addiction,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus,
babies, children and youth,Health,Youth :

Changes may increase risk of continued drug use and addiction

ANN ARBOR, Mich. — Most people would get a little ‘rush’ out of the idea that
they’re about to win some money. In fact, if you could look into their brain
at that very moment, you’d see lots of activity in the part of the brain that
responds to rewards.

But for people who’ve been using marijuana, that rush just isn’t as big – and
gets smaller over time, a new study finds.

And that dampened, blunted response may actually open marijuana users up to
more risk of becoming addicted to that drug or others.

The new results come from the first long-term study of young marijuana users
that tracked brain responses to rewards over time. It was performed at the
University of Michigan Medical School.

Published in JAMA Psychiatry, it shows measurable changes in the brain’s
reward system with marijuana use – even when other factors like alcohol use
and cigarette smoking were taken into account.

“What we saw was that over time, marijuana use was associated with a lower
response to a monetary reward,” says senior author and U-M neuroscientist Mary
Heitzeg, Ph.D. “This means that something that would be rewarding to most
people was no longer rewarding to them, suggesting but not proving that their
reward system has been ‘hijacked’ by the drug, and that they need the drug to
feel reward -- or that their emotional response has been dampened.”

**Watching the reward centers**

The study involved 108 people in their early 20s – the prime age for marijuana
use. All were taking part in a larger study of substance use, and all had
brain scans at three points over four years. Three-quarters were men, and
nearly all were white.

While their brain was being scanned in a functional MRI scanner, they played a
game that asked them to click a button when they saw a target on a screen in
front of them. Before each round, they were told they might win 20 cents, or
$5 – or that they might lose that amount, have no reward or loss.

The researchers were most interested at what happened in the reward centers of
the volunteers’ brains – the area called the nucleus accumbens. And the moment
they cared most about was that moment of anticipation, when the volunteers
knew they might win some money, and were anticipating performing the simple
task that it would take to win.

In that moment of anticipating a reward, the cells of the nucleus accumbens
usually swing into action, pumping out a ‘pleasure chemical’ called dopamine.
The bigger the response, the more pleasure or thrill a person feels – and the
more likely they’ll be to repeat the behavior later.

But the more marijuana use a volunteer reported, the smaller the response in
their nucleus accumbens over time, the researchers found.

While the researchers didn’t also look at the volunteers’ responses to
marijuana-related cues, other research has shown that the brains of people who
use a high-inducing drug repeatedly often respond more strongly when they’re
shown cues related to that drug.

The increased response means the drug has become associated in their brains
with positive, rewarding feelings. And that can make it harder to stop seeking
out the drug and using it.

If this is true with marijuana users, says first author Meghan Martz, doctoral
student in developmental psychology at U-M, “It may be that the brain can
drive marijuana use, and that the use of marijuana can also affect the brain.
We’re still unable to disentangle the cause and effect in the brain’s reward
system, but studies like this can help that understanding.

**Change over time**

Regardless, the new findings show that there is change in the reward system
over time with marijuana use. Heitzeg and her colleagues also showed recently
in a paper in Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience that marijuana use impacts
emotional functioning.

The new data on response to potentially winning money may also be further
evidence that long-term marijuana use dampens a person’s emotional response –
something scientists call anhedonia.

“We are all born with an innate drive to engage in behaviors that feel
rewarding and give us pleasure,” says co-author Elisa Trucco, Ph.D.,
psychologist at the Center for Children and Families at Florida International
University. “We now have convincing evidence that regular marijuana use
impacts the brain’s natural response to these rewards. In the long run, this
is likely to put these individuals at risk for addiction.”

Marijuana’s reputation as a “safe” drug, and one that an increasing number of
states are legalizing for small-scale recreational use, means that many young
people are trying it – as many as a third of college-age people report using
it in the past year.

But Heitzeg says that her team’s findings, and work by other addiction
researchers, has shown that it can cause effects including problems with
emotional functioning, academic problems, and even structural brain changes.
And, the earlier in life someone tries marijuana, the faster their transition
to becoming dependent on the drug, or other substances.

“Some people may believe that marijuana is not addictive or that it’s ‘better’
than other drugs that can cause dependence,” says Heitzeg, who is an assistant
professor of psychiatry at the U-M Medical School and member of the U-M
Addiction Research Center. “But this study provides evidence that it’s
affecting the brain in a way that may make it more difficult to stop using it.
It changes your brain in a way that may change your behavior, and where you
get your sense of reward from.”

She is among the neuroscientists and psychologists leading a nationwide study
called ABCD, for Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development. That study will track
thousands of today’s pre-teens nationwide over 10 years, looking at many
aspects of their health and functioning, including brain development via brain
scans. Since some of the teens in the study are likely to use marijuana, the
study will provide a better chance of seeing what happens over time.

_Source: JAMA Psychiatry, doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.1161_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies, children and
youth,Health,Youth :

A Colorado children’s hospital reports visits by teens to its emergency
department and satellite urgent care centers more than quadrupled after the
state legalized marijuana, a new study finds.

Researchers examined the hospital’s records for 13- to 21-year-olds between
2005 and 2015.

Colorado legalized medical marijuana in 2010 and recreational marijuana in
2014.

The annual number of visits related to marijuana or involving a positive
marijuana urine drug screen more than quadrupled, from 146 in 2005 to 639 in
2014, the researchers found.

They will present their research at the 2017 Paediatric Academic Societies
Meeting in San Francisco.

“The state-level effect of marijuana legalization on adolescent use has only
begun to be evaluated,” lead author George Sam Wang, MD said in a news
release. “As our results suggest, targeted marijuana education and prevention
strategies are necessary to reduce the significant public health impact of the
drug can have on adolescent populations, particularly on mental health.”

_Source: https://www.ncadd.org/blogs/in-the-news/teen-marijuana-related-
visits-to-colorado-er-rose-rapidly-after-legalization 8th May 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

A new study suggests smoking high-potency marijuana may cause damage to nerve
fibers responsible for communication between the brain’s two hemispheres.

The study included MRI scans of 99 people, including some who were diagnosed
with psychosis, HealthDay reports. The researchers found an association
between frequent use of high-potency marijuana and damage to the corpus
callosum, which is responsible for communication between the brain’s left and
right hemispheres.

The corpus callosum is especially rich in cannabinoid receptors. THC, the
psychoactive ingredient in marijuana, acts on these receptors.

Today’s high-potency marijuana has been shown to contain higher proportions of
THC compared with a decade ago. Scientists have known that the use of
marijuana with higher THC content has been associated with greater risk and
earlier onset of psychosis, the researchers noted. This study is the first to
examine the effect of marijuana potency on brain structure, according to a
news release from Kings’s College London.

Frequent use of high-potency marijuana significantly affected the structure of
the corpus callosum in patients with or without psychosis, the researchers
report in Psychological Medicine. The more high-potency marijuana a person
smoked, the greater the damage.

“There is an urgent need to educate health professionals, the public and
policymakers about the risks involved with cannabis use,” said senior
researcher Dr. Paola Dazzan of the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience at King’s College London. “As we have suggested previously, when
assessing cannabis use it is extremely important to gather information on how
often and what type of cannabis is being used.

These details can help quantify the risk of mental health problems and
increase awareness on the type of damage these substances can do to the
brain.’

_Source: https://www.ncadd.org/about-addiction Dec. 2015_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Health :

Researchers at Canada’s Waterloo University studied what happens to academic
goals, engagement, preparedness, and performance when high school students
shift from no marijuana use to marijuana use. Their sample included 26,475
students in grades 9-12 in the COMPASS study, Canada’s largest survey of youth
substance use. The researchers found that compared to students who do not use
marijuana, those who use it at least once a month were:

· four times more likely to skip class,

· two to four times less likely to complete homework,

· two to four times less likely to value getting good grades, and

· half as likely to actually get good grades.

Moreover, half of those who smoked marijuana daily were less likely to report
plans to attend college compared to nonusers. “We found that the more
frequently students started using the drug, the greater their risk for poor
school performance and engagement,” says Karen Patte, lead author of the
study. Read more here.

_Source: srusche@nationalfamilies.org National Families in Action 's The
Marijuana Report 17TH May 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth,Education,Youth :

Prescribing medicinal cannabis for patients with chronic non-cancer pain is
not going to revolutionise their treatment and should not be supported until
there is substantial proof of its effectiveness, according to a leading pain
specialist.

Professor Milton Cohen is presenting Medicinal cannabis for chronic non-cancer
pain: promise or pothole? at the Australian and New Zealand College of
Anaesthetists (ANZCA) annual scientific meeting in Brisbane on Saturday May
13\. “There is no reason to be enthusiastic about cannabinoids in the
treatment of non-cancer related chronic pain,’’ Professor Cohen said.

‘‘On the basis of what we know about cannabis as a treatment it’s not going to
revolutionise the field of chronic pain management.’’

Professor Cohen is a specialist pain medicine physician in Sydney and Director
of Professional Affairs for ANZCA’s Faculty of Pain Medicine. The Faculty does
not support the use of cannabinoids in chronic non-cancer pain ‘’until such
time as a clear therapeutic role for them is identified in the scientific
literature.’’

Professor Cohen said he was concerned that ‘’anecdote and clamour’’ and
‘’community enthusiasm’’ had preceded science on the issue of prescribing
medicinal cannabis for patients who suffered chronic non-cancer pain. As a
result, a culture of ‘’false hope’’ based on the elusive idea of a ‘’magic
pill’’ was driving community misinformation about medicinal cannabis as a
treatment for such patients.

The Federal government last year legalised a pathway for access of patients to
Australian-grown and manufactured medicinal cannabis, subject to state and
territory government regulations. In New Zealand, the use of cannabis-based
products for medicinal purposes is available only on prescription authorised
by the Ministry of Health.

‘’It’s a classic example of the cart being put before the horse with a
political imperative to facilitate access to an unproven medicine,’’ Professor
Cohen said. International studies that have assessed the effectiveness of
medicinal cannabis for non-cancer chronic pain have revealed very ‘’modest’’
effects, he said.

‘’The international data on which one could make an informed decision about
the effect of medicinal cannabis on chronic non-cancer pain is in fact very
poor. The conclusions have been oversold,’’ he said.

Professor Cohen said the management of chronic non-cancer pain is complex as
it required consideration of a range of factors including the medical,
physical, psychological and social.

‘’We know that chronic pain is a much more complex phenomenon which requires a
holistic approach to management that is tailored to the individual's
circumstances. To rely only on medicines is just not going to work.

‘’If doctors are to prescribe substances—that is if they are to be available
on doctors’ prescriptions—they should be proven substances,’’ Professor Cohen
explained.

Professor Cohen cited an ongoing study of 1500 people who had been prescribed
opioids for chronic non-cancer pain, undertaken by the National Drug and
Alcohol Research Centre at the University of New South Wales. Almost half of
those surveyed said they had used cannabis for recreational purposes, one in
six admitted to using cannabis in search of pain relief and one quarter said
they would use cannabis in search of pain relief if they could.

‘’We know that cannabis is freely available but we also know that drugs are
not the mainstay of managing chronic pain,’’ Professor Cohen said.

Professor Cohen said that, given the legislative changes introduced by the
Federal government and some states and territories, the introduction of
individualised trials of medicinal cannabis for patients with chronic non-
cancer pain to monitor and evaluate its effectiveness and adverse effects
might be considered. This would require the development of a patient register,
similar to an approach introduced in Israel, to ensure that the trial was
properly monitored and managed.

‘’Given the reality of the situation – these substances are going to be
produced in Australia and will be marketed -- so there now is an opportunity
for individual, personalised clinical studies to ascertain if there is a
benefit from this treatment,’’ Professor Cohen said.

**About FPM**

The Faculty of Pain Medicine is a world-leading professional organisation for
pain specialists that sets standards in pain medicine and is responsible for
education and training in the discipline in Australia and New Zealand. Pain
medicine is multidisciplinary, recognising that the management of severe pain
requires the skills or more than one area of medicine. Chronic pain affects
about one in five people in Australia and New Zealand. Specialists also manage
acute pain (post-operative, post-trauma, acute episodes of pain in medical
conditions) and cancer pain.

_Source: http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/GE1705/S00087/false-hope-driving-
claims-medicinal-cannabis-is-magic-pill.htm 13th May 2917_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine :

During the 2015 election, the Liberals campaigned on a plan to greenlight
marijuana for recreational use to keep it out of the hands of children and the
profits out of the hands of criminals.

The party's election platform said Canada's current approach -- criminalizing
people for possession and use -- traps too many Canadians in the justice
system for minor offences.

Last month, the government spelled out its plans in legislation, setting
sweeping policy changes in motion. The new law proposes setting the national
minimum age to legally buy cannabis at 18 years old. It will be up to the
provinces should they want to restrict it further.

Is it true, as Wilson-Raybould and the Liberals suggest, that legalization
will in fact keep cannabis out of the hands of kids?

Spoiler alert: The Canadian Press Baloney Meter is a dispassionate examination
of political statements culminating in a ranking of accuracy on a scale of "no
baloney" to "full of baloney" (complete methodology below)

This one earns a lot of baloney -- the statement is mostly inaccurate but
contains elements of truth. Here's why:

**THE FACTS**

There is no doubt cannabis is in the hands of young people today.

In fact, Canada has one of the highest rates of teenage and early-age
adulthood use of marijuana, says Dr. Mark Ware, the vice-chair of the
federally-appointed task force on cannabis and a medicinal marijuana
researcher at McGill University.

"We don't anticipate that this is going to eliminate it; but the public health
approach is to make it less easy for young adolescents, young kids, to access
cannabis than it is at the moment," he said.

Bonnie Leadbeater, a psychology professor at the University of Victoria who
specializes in adolescent behaviour, said as many as 60 per cent of 18-year-
olds have used marijuana at some point in their lives.

The aim of a regulated, controlled system of legalized cannabis is to make it
more difficult for kids to access pot, Ware said, noting the principle goal is
to delay the onset of use.

So will a recreational market for adults coupled with a regulatory regime
really keep pot out of the hands of kids?

**THE EXPERTS**

Public health experts -- including proponents of legalization -- say that
probably won't happen.

"I don't exactly know what they are planning to do to keep it out of the hands
of young people and I think some elaboration of that might be helpful,"
Leadbeater said. "It is unlikely that it will change … it has been very, very
accessible to young people."

Benedikt Fischer, a University of Toronto psychiatry professor and senior
scientist with the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, agrees the
expectation that legalization will suddenly reduce or eliminate use among
young people is counter-intuitive and unrealistic to a large extent.

"The only thing we could hope for is that maybe because it is legal, all of a
sudden it is so much more boring for young people that they're not interested
in it anymore," he said.

Increasing penalties for people who facilitate access to kids will help
discourage law-abiding Canadians from doing so, says Steven Hoffman, director
of a global strategy lab at the University of Ottawa Centre for health law,
policy and ethics.

"That being said, when there's a drug, there's no foolproof way of keeping it
out of the hands of all children," Hoffman said. "For sure, there will still
be children who are still consuming cannabis."

Cannabis will not be legal for people of all ages under the legislation, he
added, noting this means there may still be a market for criminal activity for
cannabis in the form of selling it to children.

In Colorado, officials thought there would be an increase in use as a result
of legalization, according to Dr. Larry Wolk, chief medical officer at the
Department of Public Health and Environment, but he said there's been no
increase among either youth or adults. Nor has there been a noticeable
decrease.

"What it looks like is folks who may have been using illicitly before are
using legally now and teens or youth that were using illicitly before, it's
still the same rate of illicit use," he said.

**THE VERDICT**

Donald MacPherson, executive director of the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition,
said the Liberal government could provide a more nuanced, realistic message
about its plans to legalize marijuana.

"To suddenly go over to the rhetoric … that strict regulation is going to keep
it out of the hands of young people doesn't work," he said.

"There's a better chance of reducing the harm to young people through a …
public health, regulatory approach. That's ideally what they should be
saying."

Careful messaging around legalized marijuana -- like the approach taken by the
Netherlands -- could make cannabis less of a tempting forbidden fruit for
young people, said Mark Haden, an adjunct professor at the University of
British Columbia.

"What we know is that prohibition maximizes the engagement of youth, so if we
did it well and skillfully and ended prohibition with a wise approach and made
cannabis boring, it would keep it out of the hands of kids," he said.

"It isn't completely baloney, it just hasn't gone far enough in terms of a
rich, real discussion. It is just political soundbites."

For this reason, Wilson-Raybould's statement contains "a lot of baloney."

**METHODOLOGY**

The Baloney Meter is a project of The Canadian Press that examines the level
of accuracy in statements made by politicians. Each claim is researched and
assigned a rating based on the following scale:

· No baloney - the statement is completely accurate

· A little baloney - the statement is mostly accurate but more information is
required

· Some baloney - the statement is partly accurate but important details are
missing

· A lot of baloney - the statement is mostly inaccurate but contains elements
of truth

· Full of baloney - the statement is completely inaccurate

_Source: http://www.ctvnews.ca/politics/fact-check-will-legalizing-pot-keep-
it-out-of-the-hands-of-kids-1.3397542 4th May 2017_

Filed under: Canada,Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,Legal
Sector,Youth :

The first to die was the family's pet duck, killed in an attempt to rid the
house of evil.

By then, Raina Thaiday had already been on a cleaning frenzy for a week,
scrubbing the ceilings of her Cairns home and tossing possessions out into the
yard in a bid to "cleanse" the house. But it was when she heard a dove's call,
which she interpreted as a sign from God, that she decided she must "kill her
children in order to save them".

The Mental Health Court of Queensland last month ruled, in a decision not made
public until Thursday, that Raina Mersane Ina Thaiday was of unsound mind when
she stabbed to death seven of her children and a niece in her home on December
19, 2014.

In 2009, Raina Thaiday was interviewed thanking paramedics for safely
delivering her child in the back of an ambulance. Photo: Nine News

"To her way of thinking at the time, what she was doing was the best thing she
could do for her children. She was trying to save them," Justice Jean Dalton
said, exempting the mother from trial and confining her to mental health
treatment.

Along the way the court heard details of the 40-year-old's descent into
"schizophrenia at its very depths", likely exacerbated by years of heavy
cannabis use, and culminating in her being in a psychotic state when she
killed eight children under the age of 15.

A week before the killing, her then-20-year-old son, Lewis Warria found Mrs
Thaiday stressed and serious, spending large amounts of time lecturing him
about God, the court heard. She went on a mission to "cleanse" her house,
which Justice Dalton noted went far beyond a "normal spring clean".

"All the furniture from the house was taken outside and put in the yard," she
said."Inside the house was cleaned, in a most unusual way, including scrubbing
the ceilings and the walls and a lot of Mrs Thaiday's possessions were thrown
away. "And a lot of them were quite valuable."

Things deteriorated still further the night of December 18. Her eldest
daughter, niece and godchild had gone out shopping and did not return at 10pm
as she had requested. Mrs Thaiday walked up and down the street, "preaching"
to neighbours about their use of drugs and alcohol. Agitated, she slept
outside on a mattress dragged out in the cleaning.

Justice Dalton said with the benefit of hindsight, the things neighbours heard
as Mrs Thaiday walked up and down the street, talking to herself or on the
phone, were "clearly psychotic". "She was saying things like 'I am the chosen
one'," the judge said.

"'I have the power to kill people and to curse people. You hurt my kids, I
hurt them first. You stab my kids, I stab them first. If you kill them, I'll
kill them'."

At 11.40am on December 19, Mr Warria arrived home to find his mother slumped
on the front verandah, covered in approximately 35 self-inflicted stab wounds
that included a punctured lung. His siblings and cousin were dead inside.

Nearly two-and-a-half years later Mr Warria was in the courtroom inside
Brisbane's Queen Elizabeth II Courts of Law as a judge heard the opinions of
six psychiatrists who had painstakingly analysed his mother's mental state.

The court heard when police and paramedics arrived Mrs Thaiday immediately
admitted she had killed the children inside. "Papa God" had been speaking to
her, she told

psychiatrists, describing herself as the "anointed one" at risk from demons,
who had to rid her Cairns home of an evil presence.

Psychiatrist Dr Angela Voita treated Mrs Thaiday from the day she came into
The Park, one of Australia's largest mental health facilities, on Christmas
Eve 2014, five days after the mass killing. She assessed her more than 50
times and, along with three other psychiatrists who gave evidence to the
hearing, unanimously agreed she was mentally ill at the time of the offences.

After examining reams of evidence and interviews, Dr Voita said her patient
was not capable of telling right from wrong or being able to control her
actions at the time of the killings. Assisting psychiatrist Dr Frank Varghese
described the "unique" crime as "a horrendous case, the likes of which I have
never seen before, and hopefully will never see (again)." This is not ordinary
schizophrenia," he advised the judge.

"This is schizophrenia at its very depths and at its worst in terms of the
terror for the patient as well as for the consequences for the individuals
killed as a result of psychotic delusions."

Mrs Thaiday had no psychiatric history or previous contact with mental health
services outside of counselling at a local indigenous health service.
Independent psychiatrist Dr Pamela van de Hoef said there was some evidence
that in 2007 she was also very disturbed.

"She had cut all her own hair off and threatened to kill one of the children
with an axe."

In 2011, she had ideas to drown herself and similar thoughts two weeks out
from the 2014 killing, the psychiatrist said. The court heard cannabis was
commonly linked to the onset of schizophrenia in those already vulnerable to
the illness.

Ms Thaiday kicked a 10-20 cone a day habit in the months before the slaughter,
leading psychiatrists to question whether her "psychosis" was a form of
withdrawal, before mostly rejecting the notion.

Instead, Dr Jane Phillips and Dr Donald Grant agreed it was more likely the
illness began to affect her while she was still using cannabis, causing to her
to develop "religious delusions" that "forced her to live a clean life".

"Altogether it amounts to a very convincing body of evidence that Mrs Thaiday
was psychotic at the time of the killing," Justice Dalton said.

She ruled Mrs Thaiday had the defence of unsoundness of mind available to her
and issued a forensic order for ongoing mental health treatment.

_Source: http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/queensland/schizophrenia-at-its-very-
depths-drove-mother-to-kill-eight-children-20170503-gvyf42.html 4th May 2017_

Filed under: Australia,Brain and
Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Crime/Violence/Prison,Drug use-various effects :

SAN FRANCISCO – Visits by teens to a Colorado children's hospital emergency
department and its satellite urgent care centers increased rapidly after
legalization of marijuana for commercialized medical and recreational use,
according to new research being presented at the 2017 Paediatric Academic
Societies Meeting in San Francisco.

The study abstract, “Impact of Marijuana Legalization in Colorado on
Adolescent Emergency Visits” on Monday, May 8 at the Moscone West Convention
Center in San Francisco.

Colorado legalized the commercialization of medical marijuana in 2010 and
recreational marijuana use in 2014. For the study, researchers reviewed the
hospital system’s emergency department and urgent care records for 13- to
21-year-olds seen between January 2005 and June 2015.

They found that the annual number of visits with a cannabis related diagnostic
code or positive for marijuana from a urine drug screen more than quadrupled
during the decade, from 146 in 2005 to 639 in 2014.

Adolescents with symptoms of mental illness accounted for a large proportion
(66%) of the 3,443 marijuana-related visits during the study period, said lead
author George Sam Wang, M.D., FAAP, with psychiatry consultations increasing
from 65 to 442. More than half also had positive urine drug screen tests for
other drugs. Ethanol, amphetamines, benzodiazepines, opiates and cocaine were
the most commonly detected.

Dr. Wang, an assistant professor of paediatrics at the University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, said national data on teen marijuana use suggest
rates remained roughly the same (about 7%) in 2015 as they’d been for a decade
prior, with many concluding no significant impact from legalization. Based on
the findings of his study, however, he said he suspects these national surveys
do not entirely reflect the effect legalization may be having on teen usage.

“The state-level effect of marijuana legalization on adolescent use has only
begun to be evaluated,” he said. “As our results suggest, targeted marijuana
education and prevention strategies are necessary to reduce the significant
public health impact of the drug can have on adolescent populations,
particularly on mental health.”

Dr. Wang will present the abstract, “Impact of Marijuana Legalization in
Colorado on Adolescent Emergency Department (ED) Visits,” from 8 a.m. to 10
a.m. Numbers in this news release reflect updated information provided by the
researchers. The abstract is available at https://registration.pas-
meeting.org/2017/reports/rptPAS17_abstract.asp?abstract_final_id=3160.11.

The Paediatric Academic Societies (PAS) Meeting brings together thousands of
individuals united by a common mission: to improve child health and well-being
worldwide. This international gathering includes paediatric researchers,
leaders in academic paediatrics, experts in child health, and practitioners.
The PAS Meeting is produced through a partnership of four organizations
leading the advancement of paediatric research and child advocacy: Academic
Paediatric Association, American Academy of Paediatrics, American Paediatric
Society, and Society for Paediatric Research. For more information, visit the
PAS Meeting online at www.pas-meeting.org, follow us on Twitter @PASMeeting
and #pasm17, or like us on Facebook. For additional AAP News coverage, visit
http://www.aappublications.org/collection/pas-meeting-updates.

_Source: http://www.aappublications.org/news/2017/05/04/PASMarijuana050417_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Global Drug Legalisation
Efforts,Health,Medicine and Marijuana,USA :

**Background:**

Cannabis use (CU) has recently been legalized in several states for medicinal
purposes and remains the most commonly used illicit drug. Cardiovascular
effects of CU are not well established as studies thus far have been limited
by size. We therefore utilized a large national database to examine the
incidence of cardiovascular risk factors and events amongst patients with CU.

**Methods:**

Patients aged 18-55 years with CU were identified in the Nationwide Inpatient
Sample 2009-2010 database using the Ninth Revision of International
Classification of Disease (ICD) code 304.3. Demographics, risk factors, and
cardiovascular event rates were collected on these patients and compared to
general population data.

**Results:**

Incidence of heart failure (HF), cerebrovascular accident (CVA), coronary
artery disease (CAD), sudden cardiac death, and hypertension (HTN) were
significantly higher in patients with CU. After multivariate regression
adjusting for age, gender, diabetes mellitus, HTN, CAD, tobacco use, and
alcohol use, CU remained an independent predictor of both HF (OR=1.1
[1.03-1.18], p<0.01) and CVA (OR=1.24 [1.14-1.34], p<0.001).

**Conclusions:**

CU independently predicted the risks of HF and CVA in individuals 18-55 years
old. With continued legalization of cannabis, potential cardiovascular effects
and their underlying mechanisms need to be further investigated.

1187-055 - Cannabis Use Predicts Risks of Heart Failure and Cerebrovascular
Accidents: Results from the National Inpatient Sample

Background: Cannabis use (CU) has recently been legalized in several states
for medicinal purposes and remains the most commonly used illicit drug.
Cardiovascular effects of CU are not well established as studies thus far have
been limited by size. We therefore utilized a large national database to
examine the incidence of cardiovascular risk factors and events amongst
patients with CU.

Methods: Patients aged 18-55 years with CU were identified in the Nationwide
Inpatient Sample 2009-2010 database using the Ninth Revision of International
Classification of Disease (ICD) code 304.3. Demographics, risk factors, and
cardiovascular event rates were collected on these patients and compared to
general population data.

Results: Incidence of heart failure (HF), cerebrovascular accident (CVA),
coronary artery disease (CAD), sudden cardiac death, and hypertension (HTN)
were significantly higher in patients with CU. After multivariate regression
adjusting for age, gender, diabetes mellitus, HTN, CAD, tobacco use, and
alcohol use, CU remained an independent predictor of both HF (OR=1.1
[1.03-1.18], p<0.01) and CVA (OR=1.24 [1.14-1.34], p<0.001).

Conclusions: CU independently predicted the risks of HF and CVA in individuals
18-55 years old. With continued legalization of cannabis, potential
cardiovascular effects and their underlying mechanisms need to be further
investigated.

_Source: http://ativsoftware.com/appinfo.php?page=Inthtml
&project=ACC17&server=ep70.eventpilot.us&id=2545 March 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects :

by David Sergeant of The Bow Group

The Bow Group is a leading conservative think tank based in London. Founded in
1951, the Bow Group is the oldest conservative think tank in the UK and exists
to publish the research of its members, stimulate policy debate through an
events programme and to provide an intellectual home to conservatives.
Although firmly housed in the conservative family, the Bow Group does not take
a corporate view and represents all strands of conservative opinion. The
Group's Patrons are The Rt Hon. The Lord Lamont of Lerwick, The Rt Hon. The
Lord Tebbit of Chingford CH, Dr David Starkey CBE & Professor Sir Roger
Scruton. The Group's Parliamentary Board consists of The Rt Hon. The Lord
Tebbit of Chingford CH, The Rt Hon. David Davis MP, Sir Gerald Howarth MP,
Geoffrey Clifton-Brown MP FRICS, Daniel Hannan MEP, The Rt Hon. Dominic Grieve
QC MP, David Rutley MP, The Rt Hon. John Redwood MP, Dr. Phillip Lee MP and
Adam Afriyie MP.

**INTRODUCTION**

The evidence couldn’t be clearer. Cannabis is a hugely damaging drug that
causes misery, particularly for our poorest citizens. Our aim should be its
eradication and that can never be achieved through legalised capitulation.
According to a report published last November by the Adam Smith Institute, our
drug policy is: ‘An embarrassment.’ (Laven-Morris, 2016, para. 1) Commenting
on the report, Steve Moore, Director of ‘Volteface’ concurred, insisting that:
‘The global movement towards legalisation, regulation and taxation of cannabis
is now inexorable.’ (Laven-Morris, 2016, para. 16)

While this supposed ‘inexorability’ may have political and social elites
jumping for joy, it’s yet another step toward greater suffering for those
vulnerable individuals at risk of damage from the mind-altering drug, as well
as for families and communities who are, and will increasingly, be forced to
pick up the pieces. Within this paper, I will seek to address some of the
primary points of contention and concern surrounding cannabis and counter the
myths and assertions propounded by ideologues, corporate lobbyists, and the
liberal media, each dogmatic in their pursuit of recreational cannabis
legalisation. I will conclude that the consistent application of the
meaningful criminal penalties already legislatively available, aggressive and
rigorous policing across the socio-economic spectrum, the use of evidence
based education, conferring the real health-risks of the drug and well-funded,
compassionate, abstinence-based treatment for those who have become dependent
on cannabis can, deliver its eradication.

**1) HARM**

Forgive my scepticism, but when that all-knowing beacon of progress and
morality, billionaire Richard Branson insisted that, ‘most of us’ could smoke
skunk without it doing us ‘any harm,’ I was not immediately convinced.
(Holehouse, 2015, para. 2) The problem is that most of the people that Mr
Branson has ever met are wealthy, expensively educated elites, who likely have
access to the private health insurance he’s so keen for ‘Virgin Healthcare’ to
bestow on the rest of us. Even if Mr Branson was right and cannabis, for most,
presented no tangible health risks, this would still not be sufficient moral
rationale for its legalisation. If we care about all our fellow citizens we
cannot sacrifice the mental health of some for the recreational pleasure of
‘most.’

Correspondingly, also in support of legalisation is Amanda Fielding, Countess
of Wemyss and March and founder of the pro-drug Beckley Foundation - located
at Fielding’s Oxfordshire Tudor estate. The foundation boldly assert in their
book: ‘Cannabis Policy: Moving beyond Stalemate,’ that with regards to
cannabis: ‘Those harms at the population level are modest in comparison with
alcohol or cocaine.’ (Beckley Foundation, 2009, para. 2) While there is no
doubt that both alcohol and cocaine can create as much if not more misery than
cannabis, its possible nature as a ‘slightly lesser’ evil is no cause for its
celebration. Long gone are the 3 days in which advocates could claim that the
effects of cannabis were ‘modest.’ This well perpetuated myth of
‘harmlessness’ has now been comprehensively medically discredited.

There is an increasingly diverse research consensus that cannabis use is
directly connected to serious mental health issues. Timms and Atakin (2014)
revealed that Adolescents who use cannabis daily are ‘five times more likely
to develop depression and anxiety later in life,’ (para. 36) while Hall &
Degenhardt’s (2011) strong body of evidence indicates that: ‘cannabis
precipitates schizophrenia in vulnerable people.’ (p. 511) Further, Hall &
Degenhardt discovered that, for those with a family history of psychosis,
regular cannabis use doubles the likelihood of development from one in ten, to
one in five. (2011, p. 512)

When we look at expectant mothers who smoke cannabis we see a direct
correlation. The more they smoke, the greater the likelihood that their
children will report feelings of depression and anxiety at the age of ten.
(Goldschmidta, Richardson, Cornelius & Dayb, 2004, p. 526) Moreover, a huge
American study, utilising the latest technology in brain-scanning equipment
discovered that cannabis users had: ‘abnormally low blood flow in virtually
every area of the brain.’ This means that users are at considerably higher
risk of developing diseases such as Alzheimer’s. (Tatera, 2016, para. 1) Even
Professor Nutt, a well-known proponent of legalisation, concedes that cannabis
smokers are ‘2.6 times more likely to have a psychotic-like experience than
non-smokers.’ (Nutt, 2009, para. 7).

In addition to the real danger cannabis poses to mental health, research
suggests that the use of cannabis doubles the risk of infertility in men under
the age of 30. (Connor, 2014, para. 1) The mind is complicated beyond the
possibility of human comprehension. A cautious and respectful approach to its
potential damage is surely wise, as once it is lost it must be an exceedingly
difficult thing to get back. There are few more disturbing things than seeing
a friend or relative struggle with mental health issues – a daily battle not
with the world but with themselves. Indeed, youngsters who use cannabis daily
are seven times more likely to commit suicide. (Laccino, 2014, para. 1) So,
while Mr Branson might encourage you to smoke cannabis with your children,
(Janssen, 2016, para 4) the evidence would suggest that doing so could be very
damaging indeed.

**2) USAGE RATES AND CANNABIS AS A GATEWAY DRUG**

Those who back legalisation might argue that it is they who truly care about
cannabis users and they who truly want to reduce the drug’s harmful impacts.
This, they insist, will be made possible by the reduction in usage rates that
a legalised market will deliver. Indeed, the entire foundation of the argument
for legalisation rests on its ability to decrease the numbers of people using
cannabis. The facts and evidence stand comprehensibly against this assertion.
Every single location in which there has been meaningful analysis of usage
rates before and after legalisation or decriminalisation, including Portugal,
Colorado, Southern Australia and Amsterdam, show an upsurge in the number of
people using the drug. (Hughes and Steven, 2010, p. 1005), (Korf, 2002 pp.
854-856), (Single, Christie & Ali para. 25), (Keyes, 2015) Even within
individual nations, the difference between usage rates in jurisdictions with
varying legislative approaches is stark. 15.6% of citizens in the Netherlands
have used cannabis compared to 36.7% of residents in Amsterdam. (Korf, 2002,
p. 854-856) In fact, following the mainstream promotion of coffee-shops in
Amsterdam, the rate of regular cannabis use among 18-to-20-year-olds more than
doubled. (MacCoun and Reuter, 2010 as cited in Mineta, n.d para. 8)
Furthermore, legal cannabis would mean cheaper cannabis. Prohibition drives up
the price of the drug by ‘at least’ 400%. (Mineta, n.d, para. 7) Studies have
shown that when cigarettes are reduced in price by 10% their consumption
shoots up by 7-8%.(Mineta, n.d, para. 7)

While its proponents might have you believe ‘everyone’s getting high
nowadays,’ it’s worth remembering that only 5% of our population regularly
smoke cannabis. (Dunt 2013 para. 1) This compared to 19% who smoke tobacco
(Ash, 2016, para. 1) and 58% of adults who regularly drink alcohol.
(Drinkaware, n.d, para. 10) For some advocates of legalisation who, either
genuinely believe or pretend to believe that legalisation will lead usage
rates to decline, this evidence will, of course, be somewhat inconvenient.

For others, it brings only adulation. In the US state of Colorado, the CEO of
the Harvest Company dispensary, rejoiced that: ‘People who would never have
considered pot before are now popping their heads in.’ (Keyes, 2015, para. 7)
Likewise, when asked why he believed cannabis use had increased in the state
since its legalisation, Henson, President of the Colorado Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, argued that more people felt at ease with the drug: ‘They don’t see
it as something that’s bad for them.’ (Keyes, 2015, para. 6) What’s more, with
regards to the gateway theory, the evidence is clear. Cannabis is a gateway
drug. A 25-year longitude study revealed that in 86% of cases of those who had
taken two or more illegal drugs, cannabis had been the substance they had used
first. (Fergusson. D, Boden. J & Horwood. J 2011, p. 556)

Moreover, those who used cannabis weekly were a staggering 59 times more
likely to use other illegal drugs than those who did not use cannabis at all.
(Fergusson, D. & Horwood J. 2000, pp. 505–520) In the United States, research
revealed that only 7% of young people who had never used cannabis had indulged
in other illegal drug use, compare this to 33% of the young people who
reported using cannabis regularly and 84% of those who used it daily. (Kandel,
1984, pp. 200 – 209)

Advocates of legalisation, while often conceding the gateway theory, insist
that this can easily be countered through legalisation that would disentangle
legal cannabis from the illegal ‘hard drug’ black market. However, cannabis
users are not using other drugs because their dealers are forcing them down
their throats or up their noses. Rather: ‘the biochemical changes induced by
marijuana in the brain result in a drug-seeking, drug-taking behaviour, which
in many instances will lead the user to experiment with other pleasurable
substances.’ (Nahas, 1990, p. 52) Thus, cannabis users will likely seek to
experiment with other illegal drugs regardless of the legal status of
cannabis. Legalisation would result only in more cannabis users and thus a
higher secondary demand for and entanglement within the remaining illegal drug
market.

**3) MONEY: A PRICE WORTH PAYING?**

The Adam Smith Institute have promised the UK one billion pounds in additional
annual tax revenue. All we must do is legalise the drug. However, we can see
by examining the cost of alcohol

abuse that any additional tax revenue would be dwarfed by the hugely increased
medical and social costs brought about by increased usage. The taxes raised
from alcohol cover only a tiny percentage of the societal cost brought about
by alcohol misuse. Indeed, while there are no similar statistics available in
the UK, a 2002 analysis of alcohol-related costs in America was estimated to
be 184 billion dollars annually. (Mineta, n.d. para 10) But surely the
billions of dollars raised in taxes more than covered it? Not quite! Taxes on
alcohol raised only 8.3 billon dollars in the same timeframe, just 4.5% of
costs. (Mineta, n.d. para 10)

In addition, we can be sure that where there is profit to be made, there will
be also be predatory capitalism. The aggressive commercialisation of cannabis
has already begun, with ‘big tobacco’ companies investing considerable funding
in their next project for the betterment of humanity. Similarly, Microsoft
have unashamedly announced their partnership with ‘Kind financial,’ a business
that ‘logistically supports’ cannabis growers. (Becker, 2016, para. 1) By
definition, the purpose of dope companies within legal markets is to sell as
much cannabis to as many people as possible and crucial to this pursuit is
persuading new users to try their product. In the US there is growing concern
these companies have already begun to target a young, impressionable audience
with their advertisement.

Likewise, disingenuous associations between cannabis and wellness and
barefaced lies regarding the non-existent curative potential of the drug are
becoming common-place. According to Vara, the aim is simple. Make as much
money as possible by making: ‘Pot seem as all American as an ice-cold beer.’
(Vara, 2016, para. 1)

**4) SOCIAL MOBILITY and PUBLIC OPINION**

Inevitably, it is working class young people who are least able to afford the
damage that cannabis wreaks on their focus, self-belief and motivation, as
well as on their education and career opportunities. It’s well known that
cannabis users have lower levels of dopamine in the striatum part of their
brains, meaning lower levels of motivation and aspiration. (Bergland, 2013,
para. 1) Even after a wide ranging and comprehensive allowance for confounding
factors, a Christchurch study observing 1265 children found a strong link
between educational underachievement and the use of cannabis. (Fergusson,
Horwood & Beautrais, 2003, p. 1682) Those who had used the drug one hundred
times or more before the age of sixteen were three times more likely than
those who had never used cannabis to leave education without any
qualifications. (Fergusson, Horwood & Beautrais, 2003, p. 1690)

In addition, the numbing effect the drug has on the brain of a user and its
ability to concentrate and remember things can continue for days after usage.
This means that, for regular users, they may never be able to operate at the
best of their ability and fulfil their potential. (National Institute on Drug
Abuse, 2016, p. 1) Overall then, after adjustment for confounding factors,
Fergusson & Boden conclude that cannabis usage between the ages of 14 and 18
was ‘Associated significantly’ with ‘lower levels of life and relationship
satisfaction, lower income and higher levels of unemployment and welfare
dependency.’ (2011, p. 974)

Nevertheless, unlike many prominent proponents of legalisation, I’m a true
believer in democracy. If working-class communities genuinely believe that the
best way to combat cannabis is through legalisation, then who am I to argue.
The reality is quite the contrary. While many, like Lib Dem

Norman Lamb falsely claim that Brits want cannabis to be legalised. (Doward,
2016, para. 1) A comprehensive poll showed that the British public oppose
cannabis legalisation by forty-nine to thirty-two percent. (Jordan, 2015,
para. 7) Moreover, various surveys show that those groups who are amongst the
hardest hit by cannabis, namely the poor and ethnic 6 minorities, often hold
the toughest legal views. In 2010 30% of intermediate non-manual workers had
used cannabis compared to 10% of unskilled manual workers. (Park, Curtice &
Thompson, 2007, p. 127) Likewise, ‘restrictive views’ on cannabis were higher
among those with lower educational attainment. In 2001, just 25% of those with
a degree held ‘restrictive’ views compared to 40% of those with A levels as
highest qualification and 61% with no qualifications. (Park, Curtice
&Thompson, 2007, p. 126)

Even an Ipsos Mori poll which found a slight majority of the overall public in
favour of decriminalisation, found that this was supported by only 25% of
Asians and 41% of blacks, compared to 55% of whites. (Ames & Worsley, 2013, p.
17) Is this really surprising? After all, the dark world of drug-related
crime, violence and addiction hit harder in the streets of Hull than they do
in Hampstead. If we as a society, truly care about those who suffer the most
at the hands of cannabis, maybe we should take the revolutionary approach of
listening to what they think we should do about it.

**5) SOLUTIONS AND PROPOSALS**

Having demonstrated the toxic and damaging effects of cannabis on our society
we must consider how we can best eradicate it. In 1999, The Runciman report
was published, calling for the decriminalisation of cannabis and concluding
that … ‘The present law on cannabis produces more harm than it prevents.’
(Runciman Report, 1999). This paper fully agrees that the present laws produce
more harm than they prevent. However, this is not due to our nation’s refusal
to give in to the drug completely, but because we refuse to properly confront
it. Law enforcement Insisting the only way to tackle drug criminality in
working class communities is to capitulate to those terrorising them by
legalising their product is defeatist madness. The legislative framework and
established penalties for the possession of cannabis are, in theory, suitable
and rigorous. The maximum sentence for cannabis possession stands at five
years’ imprisonment. It is not therefore the theoretical legislative provision
that is at fault, we require no new dramatic laws or hard-line legislation. To
eradicate cannabis, we require only the practical application of existing
legal provision by responsible judges and a police service, uniformly educated
in and committed to this endeavour.

The Runciman report itself acknowledged that: ‘almost no one is given an
immediate custodial sentence solely for possession of cannabis.’ (Runciman
Report, 1999, p. 105) Real deterrence in the form of strict criminal penalties
must be consistently enforced to stem the demand side of the trade. Police
forces in the United Kingdom should operate a zero-tolerance approach to
cannabis possession, with every case leading to arrest and a formal criminal
record. In addition, the criminal justice system ought to implement a ‘two
strikes’ policy. Upon a second arrest for cannabis possession the individual
must always be given a prison sentence of meaningful length. This can be
enforced in several ways. Rigorous, visible and aggressive policing can drive
up the price of cannabis while mitigating the drug’s negative secondary
societal consequences. Community policing must, once again, be the focus of
our law enforcement.

Areas synonymous with youth cannabis usage must be visibly policed and dimly
lit, urban, cannabis ‘trouble spots’ should be provided, where possible, with
better lighting provision and mainstream

public access. The two-tier, confused policing of cannabis must also be
immediately halted, while drug-snobbery and police profiling stamped out. Why
are extensive bag searches and sniffer dogs common place at music festivals
whose attendees are predominantly working class, such as Creamfields, while
glittercovered Home County revellers at Glastonbury can visibly consume drugs
without consequence?

The message that drugs are ok so long as secondary behaviour does not cause a
nuisance must end - replaced by the message that taking drugs is wrong full-
stop. Similarly, distinctions between supposed ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ drugs are
largely unhelpful. The consumption of any illegal drug is morally wrong and so
the use of all drugs must be discouraged with equal vigour. Equally as
important is the insistence that our police force consistently and fairly
enforce the law and that certain, politically motivated members of the police
hierarchy, who have sought to enact a backdoor decriminalisation process,
stop.

In a 2013 study, 103 officers out of 150 interviewed admitted they did not
always arrest for cannabis possession. (Warburton May & Hough, 2005, p. 118)
One officer stated: ‘I never nick anyone for cannabis, and never will, unless
it’s a van load.’ (Warburton May & Hough, 2005, p. 119) Nowhere is this
problem better illustrated as in County Durham, who’s Police Chief Constable,
Mick Barton, has taken it upon himself to give criminals in the county
permission to grow skunk for their own consumption. (Evans, 2015, para. 1)

Sweden provides a useful case study into the potential effectiveness of this
approach. Largely considered to have the toughest cannabis laws in Europe, few
consider the drug ‘soft.’ Police have pursued a zero-tolerance approach with
the vast majority of instances of possession leading to prosecution. This,
coupled with the visible and proactive ‘disturb and annoy’ tactics of the
national police force (Mapes, 2016, p. 1) have delivered a cannabis usage rate
of just 3%. Lower than any other nation in Northern, Western or Southern
Europe, with the exception of Lithuania, on 2%. (European monitoring centre
for drugs and drug addiction, 2016)

**Treatment and education**

Further, we must counter the false claim that only legalisation can allow for
effective and compassionate treatment for those who have become mentally
dependent. Judgement-free, abstinence based assistance for those struggling,
but willing to cease their habitual high should be well funded and available.
This should be coupled with early intervention for those who have developed
mental health problems. Likewise, we cannot be seen to be shying away from the
debate on drugs, why would we? The facts and the evidence regarding the
harmfulness of cannabis stand in our support. Education, countering fanciful
claims that cannabis is ‘twenty-two thousand’ times less dangerous than
alcohol ,should be comprehensive. Of course, there could indeed be occasional
situations in which cannabis might be a small force for good. Whilst it
possesses no curative potential, it is reasonable to conduct a serious and
evidence based debate on the merits of tightly-regulated, prescriptive
cannabinoids medication for the relief of specific symptoms in exceptional
circumstances. In certain situations, morphine is of invaluable medical
assistance. Using heroin recreationally is of great societal and personal
damage. Nonetheless, this tiny element of cannabis usage has long been
hijacked by those dogmatic in their pursuit of legalised recreational usage
and until this ends, progress will be difficult.

Similarly, this paper is not an attack on the middle class in general, or even
all those members of the middle class who smoke the drug. While sensible
support networks and access to early intervention may help many navigate the
pitfalls of cannabis, schizophrenia and depression respect not income nor
family stability. It’s our societal responsibility to safeguard all our people
from a drug that may not, but may well, ruin their life.

**CONCLUSION**

However, most of those pushing for cannabis legalisation aren’t doing so
because they truly believe it is in the best interests of anyone’s health or
even finances. They’re doing so because a world that gets high, is a world
that appeals to them. If cannabis was legalised it would be a monumental
mistake impossible to reverse. We owe it to everyone to resist, with all our
might, the ‘inevitable’ social normalisation and legislative legalisation of
cannabis.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR David Sergeant read Politics at Durham University and is an
Intern and Research Contributor at the Bow Group. He Co-Chaired the High Peak
Constituency ‘Vote Leave’ group, sits on the Australian Monarchist League’s
New South Wales Committee and is Treasurer of Conservatives Abroad – Sydney.

_Source:
https://www.bowgroup.org/sites/bowgroup.uat.pleasetest.co.uk/files/David%20Sergeant%20-%20Cannabis%20paper%20evidence_0.pdf_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts :

**Abstract**

Marijuana (Cannabis sativa) is the most commonly used illicit drug by pregnant
women, but information is limited about the effects of prenatal cannabis
exposure on foetal development. The present study evaluated the influence of
early maternal marijuana use on foetal growth.

Women electing voluntary saline-induced abortions were recruited at a mid-
gestational stage of pregnancy (weeks 17-22), and detailed drug use and
medical histories were obtained. Toxicological assays (maternal urine and
foetal meconium) were used in conjunction with the maternal report to assign
groups. Subjects with documented cocaine and opiate use were excluded.

Main developmental outcome variables were foetal weight, foot length, body
length, and head circumference; ponderal index was also examined. Analyses
were adjusted for maternal alcohol and cigarette use. Marijuana (n=44)- and
non-marijuana (n=95)-exposed foetuses had similar rates of growth with
increased age. However, there was a 0.08-cm (95% CI -0.15 to -0.01) and
14.53-g (95% CI -28.21 to 0.86) significant reduction of foot length and body
weight, respectively, for marijuana-exposed foetuses.

Moreover, foetal foot length development was negatively correlated with the
amount and frequency of marijuana use reported by the mothers. These findings
provide evidence of a negative impact of prenatal marijuana exposure on the
mid-gestational foetal growth even when adjusting for maternal use of other
substances well known to impair foetal development. PMID: 15734273 DOI:
10.1016/j.ntt.2004.11.002

_Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15734273_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth :

Beery points to 50 deaths in 2016, most linked to drugs

Dr. Jeff Beery doesn’t agree with those who think marijuana is a relatively
harmless drug that carries medicinal qualities and should even be winked at
for recreational purposes.

But Beery doesn’t just think marijuana is a gateway to more dangerous drugs.

“It’s a gateway to hell,” he says flatly.

Beery’s perspective is based on four years serving as Highland County coroner,
with more than a decade before that as a deputy coroner. He provided
statistics this week from 2016 on 50 fatalities he investigated last year that
he deemed suspicious, or at least unusually odd or interesting.

Beery said there has been a steady increase in deaths related one way or
another to drugs, raising fatalities connected to illicit drugs to alarming
proportions. He said the word “epidemic” is not sufficient to describe the
toll being taken on Highland County. “It’s a craze, not an epidemic,” he said,
adding that “epidemic” implies something beyond people’s control.

The 50 cases provided by Beery from 2016 range from deaths by car crashes,
burns, gun shots, heart attacks, hyperthermia and suicides to asphyxia and
embolisms. But most of them have a common denominator, he said – the presence
of drug use, or a history of drug use.

At least eight cases out of the 50 cited by Beery include marijuana as a
factor contributing to the fatalities, in his opinion. Six fatalities were
connected to heroin, three to cocaine, eight to amphetamines, including
methamphetamine, and several to drugs like Xanax, Valium, Clonazepam and,
especially, Fentanyl, which has been increasingly found mixed with heroin.

Beery blames a lax attitude by society and particularly by elected officials,
including at the state and federal level, for contributing to the rise in
drug-related deaths. He said former U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder’s
decision not to pursue marijuana charges at the federal level “opened the door
to the wild progression of illicit drugs.”

Holder consistently expressed views on marijuana that were opposed to treating
the drug as seriously as other narcotics. In a 2016 PBS interview, after he
was no longer attorney general, Holder said, “It’s hard for me to imagine ever
decriminalizing crack cocaine, drugs like that. But the whole question of
should marijuana be decriminalized, I mean, that’s a conversation I think that
we should engage in.”

Beery is aware of the fierce pushback among many people and organizations to
his stand on marijuana. Groups like the National Organization for the Reform
of Marijuana Laws (NORML) – whose mission is “to move public opinion
sufficiently to legalize the responsible use of marijuana by adults, and to
serve as an advocate for consumers to assure they have access to high quality
marijuana that is safe, convenient and affordable,” according to its website –
have won referendums and convinced legislatures to at least legalize marijuana
for medicinal purposes.

Many patients suffering from certain serious illnesses or chronic pain insist
that marijuana is the only effective relief they have found. Beery disagrees,
saying marijuana has no medicinal qualities. He blames Ohio’s Republican-led
“so-called conservative” legislature for caving in on the medical marijuana
issue, even though the consequences of marijuana use and cultivation are
obvious, especially in southern Ohio, he said.

“Just look at Pike County,” said Beery, referring to the murders last year of
the Rhoden family, where a large marijuana growing operation worth hundreds of
thousands of dollars on the street was found. Beery said a lax attitude about
border security and drugs also contributes to the problem.

Beery said that while investigating deaths in recent years, “I would see other
things,” ranging from marijuana to heroin to cocaine that, to him, were
obvious contributors not just to overdoses but to car wrecks, gun shots,
homicides, burns and suicides.

_Source: http://timesgazette.com/news/13879/highland-county-coroner-marijuana-
is-gateway-to-hell_

March 2017

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Drugs and Accidents :

A new study released today by JAMA Psychiatry found that rates of marijuana
use and marijuana addiction increased significantly more in states that passed
medical marijuana laws as compared to states that have not. Examining data
from 1992 to 2013, researchers concluded that medical marijuana laws likely
contributed to an increased prevalence of marijuana and marijuana-addicted
users.

"Politicians and pro-pot special interests are quick to tout the benefits of
medical marijuana legalization, but it's time to see through the haze --
medical marijuana has gone completely unregulated," said SAM President Kevin
Sabet. "More people in these states are suffering from an addiction to
marijuana that harms their lives and relationships, while simultaneously more
have begun using marijuana. No one wants to see patients denied something that
might help them, but this study underscores the fact that "medical" and
"recreational" legalization are blurred lines. Smoked marijuana is not
medicine, and has not been proven safe and effective as other FDA-approved
medications have."

The study's researchers wrote that increases in marijuana use in states with
medical marijuana laws "may have resulted from increasing availability,
potency, perceived safety, [or] generally permissive attitudes." They conclude
that "changing state laws (medical or recreational) may also have adverse
public health consequences." Evidence demonstrates that marijuana -- which has
skyrocketed in average potency over the past decades -- is addictive and
harmful to the human brain, especially when used by adolescents. Moreover, in
states that have already legalized the drug, there has been an increase in
drugged driving crashes and youth marijuana use. States that have legalized
marijuana have also failed to shore up state budget shortfalls with marijuana
taxes, continue to see a thriving black market, and are experiencing a
continued rise in alcohol sales.

_Source: http://www.learnaboutsam.org. Alexandria, VA, April 26, 2017_

**About SAM**

Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM) is a nonpartisan, non-profit alliance of
physicians, policy makers, prevention workers, treatment and recovery
professionals, scientists, and other concerned citizens opposed to marijuana
legalization who want health and scientific evidence to guide marijuana
policies. SAM has affiliates in more than 30 states. For more information
about marijuana use and its effects, visit http://www.learnaboutsam.org.

Filed under: Addiction,Cannabis/Marijuana,Marijuana and Medicine,USA :

**Alzheimer’s and Marijuana ?**

An estimated 200,000 people in the United States under age 65 are living with
younger-onset Alzheimer’s disease. And hundreds of thousands more are coping
with mild cognitive impairment, a precursor to Alzheimer’s and other
dementias.

“It’s beyond epidemic proportions. There truly is a tidal wave of Alzheimer’s
disease,” said Dr. Vincent Fortanasce, a clinical professor of neurology in
Southern California who is also a renowned Catholic bioethicist, author and
radio host.

Fortanasce, a member of Legatus’ San Juan Capistrano Chapter, for several
years has studied Alzheimer’s disease, its underlying causes and treatments.
Through his research, he believes there may be a link between chronic use of
marijuana — especially when started at a young age — and Alzheimer’s.

**Finding the link**

Fortanasce notes that medical research shows chronic users of marijuana, in
particular the kind with high quantities of THC, have reduced volume in the
hippocampus, the region of the brain responsible for memory and learning. In
Alzheimer’s disease, Fortanasce said, medical researchers have also noticed
reduced hippocampus volume with increased B-amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles.

Taking into account other factors, such as skyrocketing obesity rates and lack
of exercise, Fortanasce argues that chronically smoking marijuana and
consuming products laced with cannabis are harming the long-term mental health
of millions of young Americans. He is trying to convince the American Academy
of Neurology to conduct a major survey to see if people diagnosed with
dementia have also smoked marijuana.

_Source: : http://legatus.org/kicking-pot-curb/ April 9th 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects,Health,USA :

In 2014, recreational cannabis use was legalized in Colorado, and seven other
states have since followed suit. With an ever-expanding part of the population
using marijuana to cure a number of ailments, researchers at Colorado State
University have investigated its effects on mood. The researchers - led by
Lucy Troup, assistant professor in the university's Department of Psychology -
publish their findings in the journal PeerJ.

They note that the "relationship between cannabis use and symptomatology of
mood and anxiety disorders is complex," adding that although "a great deal of
research exists and continues to grow, the evidence remains contradictory."
Troup and colleagues point to a large international survey published in 2013,
in which 5.2 percent of respondents reported that they used cannabis to
alleviate depressive symptoms. Meanwhile, a survey of medical marijuana users
in California revealed that 26.1 percent of participants reported therapeutic
benefits for depression, and 37.8 percent reported benefits for anxiety.

"This trend of self-medication for conditions other than the one prescribed is
too large to ignore when investigating the associations between cannabis use
and mood disorders," write the Colorado State University researchers.

They add that this increases "the need to include recreational users for
research, especially when the casual user group are most likely recreational
users and seem to sustain the greatest deficits in mood."

Is cannabis used correctly for self-medication? For their study, Troup and
colleagues wanted to focus on Colorado, which was the first state to legalize
recreational marijuana.

As such, they conducted an in-depth, questionnaire-based study of 178 legal
cannabis users who were aged 18-22.

They divided their participants into three groups based on self-reported use:
a control group who never used cannabis, a casual user group, and a group of
chronic users.

Interestingly, the participants who were categorized with subclinical
depression, and who also used cannabis to treat their depressive symptoms,
scored lower on anxiety symptoms than on their depressive symptoms. In short,
they were more depressed than anxious.

The researchers also say that the self-reported anxiety sufferers were found
to be more anxious than depressed.

Study co-author Jacob Braunwalder, a researcher in Troup's laboratory, says
that "if they were using cannabis for self-medication, it wasn't doing what
they thought it was doing."

The questionnaire used in the study was developed by co-author Jeremy
Andrzejewski. Called the Recreational Cannabis Use Evaluation, the
questionnaire delved into users' habits, including whether they smoked
cannabis or used stronger products such as hash oils or edibles.

The researchers say that inconsistencies in previous studies are better
understood when considering how cannabis use is reported. "Phytocannabinoid
type and strength is not consistent between studies," they say, "and there
have been significant changes in the strength of these products post-
legalization."

**' Infrequent users have stronger relationship with negative mood'**

Troup and colleagues say that it is important to point out that they looked at
the residual effects of cannabis use, not administration of specific doses.

However, they do note that their results "suggested that cannabis use had an
effect on measurements of mood disorder symptomatology. In particular, those
who used cannabis less frequently, the casual user group, had the strongest
correlations with overall score and negative effect on the CES-D [Center for
Epidemiological Studies depression scale]."

Interestingly, the researchers did not observe a relationship with pre-anxiety
symptoms in the cannabis user groups, compared with controls.

The researchers emphasize that their study does not conclude that cannabis
causes depression or anxiety. It also does not show that cannabis cures these
conditions. However, they add that their analysis displays a need for further
study regarding how cannabis affects the brain.

Andrzejewski adds that "there is a common perception that cannabis relieves
anxiety," but this has not been fully backed by research.

"It is important not to demonize cannabis, but also not to glorify it," adds
Troup. "What we want to do is study it, and understand what it does. That's
what drives us."

Concluding their study, the researchers write:

"Our data indicate that infrequent users have a stronger relationship with
negative mood. Our data suggested that those that use cannabis casually scored
higher on the CES-D scale for depression, and consequently could be at greater
risk for developing pre-depression symptomology compared to both chronic users
and controls."

It is important to note that the study has limitations, including:

  * Sample size
  * Control for phytocannabinoids in terms of strength and type
  * Confounding variables such as multiple drug use and alcohol consumption
  * The self-report design
  * A limited interpretation of depression due to lack of clinical evaluation.

Still, the researchers say that their study "provides a starting point from
which to design controlled experiments to further investigate the relationship
between mood and cannabis use in a unique population."

_Source: http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/314823.php Dec. 2014_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Health,USA :

**ABSTRACT**

**Background**

It has long been established that smoking tobacco during pregnancy causes
increased risk of miscarriage, increased placental problems, reduction of
birth weight, and a variety of birth defects [1].

In light of the recent legalization of marijuana in Colorado, Washington,
Alaska and Washington, D.C., we felt it important to establish and publicize
the causative relationship between cannabis usage and embryological outcomes.
The main psychoactive cannabinoid in marijuana is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), which has a half-life of approximately 8 days in fat deposits and can
be detected in blood for up to 30 days before becoming entirely eliminated
from the blood [2]. These characteristics act as a direct risk factor to the
developing embryo, as the maternal tissues act as reservoirs for THC and other
cannabinoids.

Certain drugs cross the placenta to reach the embryo in the same manner as
oxygen and other nutrients [3]. Drugs consumed during pregnancy can act
directly on the embryo, or they can alter placental function, which is
critical for normal growth and development.

Ingestion of drugs can interfere with these functions, resulting in
compromised fetal development and growth [3]. THC readily crosses the
placenta, which, in conjunction with slow fetal clearance, results in
prolonged fetal exposure to THC, even after consumption is discontinued [2].

The use of marijuana in early pregnancy is associated with many of the same
risks as tobacco, including miscarriage, congenital malformations, and
learning disabilities [4]. Adverse effects of marijuana use during pregnancy
have been exacerbated over the years, as THC levels in marijuana have
increased nearly 25-fold since 1970 [5]. This paper looks to examine recent
studies on cannabinoids and embryonic development in order to establish the
mechanisms through which these cannabinoids act.

_Source: Friedrich, Joseph et al. “The Grass Isn’t Always Greener: The Effects
of Cannabis on Embryological Development.” BMC Pharmacology & Toxicology 17
(2016): 45. PMC. Web. 21 Apr. 2017._

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects on foetus, babies,
children and youth :

Kuei Y. Tseng was awarded $1.95 million by NIH for a five-year study of
"Adolescent Maturation of the Prefrontal Cortex: Modulation by Cannabinoids."
Regular marijuana use by teens can stop the brain from maturing, according to
a new study by scientists at Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and
Science, North Chicago, IL. Published March 4 in the journal Molecular
Psychiatry, the study is the first to establish a causal link between repeated
cannabinoid exposure during adolescence and an interruption of the normal
maturation processes in the prefrontal cortex, a region in the brain's frontal
lobe, which regulates decision making and working memory and undergoes
critical development during adolescence.

The findings apply to natural cannabinoids, including those in marijuana, and
a new generation of more potent, synthetic cannabinoid products. THC, the
compound in marijuana that produces feelings of euphoria, is of particular
concern. The chemical can be manipulated, resulting in varying concentrations
between marijuana strains – from 2 to 28 percent. A higher concentration of
THC and increasing use by younger teens poses a greater risk for long term
negative effects, the study finds. Kuei Y. Tseng, MD, PhD, associate professor
of cellular and molecular pharmacology at the Chicago Medical School at RFUMS
and principal investigator of the study, blames the CB1 cannabinoid receptor,
which governs neuronal communication, for the drug's long -lasting effect.

Tseng and his team of researchers used rat models in testing the effect of
cannabinoid exposure during narrow age windows and analyzed the way
information is later processed by the adult prefrontal cortex. They discovered
that when CB1 receptors are repeatedly activated by cannabinoids during early
adolescence, development of the prefrontal cortex stalls in that phase. The
window of vulnerability represents two thirds of the span of adolescence. Test
animals showed no such effect when exposure occurred in late adolescence or
adulthood.

"We have conclusively demonstrated that an over activation of the CB1 receptor
during the window equivalent to age 11 to 17 in humans, when the prefrontal
cortex is still developing, will inhibit its maturation and have a long
lasting effect on its functions," Tseng said.

The study shows how chronic cannabis use by teens can cause persistent
behavioral deficits in adulthood, including problems with attention span and
impulse control. The findings also add to prior research that draws a
correlation between adolescent marijuana abuse and the development of
schizophrenia.

The discovery, which comes as a growing number of states are considering
legalization of marijuana for both medicinal and recreational use, calls for
the attention of physicians who prescribe medical marijuana and policy makers
who, according to Tseng, "will have to establish regulations to take advantage
of the beneficial effects of marijuana while minimizing its detrimental
potential."

Researchers are focusing on developing outcome measures to reveal the degree
of frontal lobe maturation and history of drug exposure. The challenge now,
Tseng said, is to find ways to return the frontal lobe back to a normal state
either through pharmacological or cognitive interventions.

"Future research will tell us what other mechanisms can be triggered to avoid
this type of impairment of the frontal lobe," Tseng said. "Ultimately, we want
to restore the prefrontal cortex."

Supported by RFUMS, the research was funded primarily through NIH Grant
R01-MH086507 to Tseng and also by a 2012 seed grant from the Brain Research
Foundation.

_Source: https://www.rosalindfranklin.edu/news/profiles/study-shows-marijuana-
use-interrupts-adolescent-brain-development/ 4th March 2017_

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various effects
on foetus, babies, children and youth,Effects of Drugs (Papers),Youth :

I am not a long-time user. I used casually for about six months, but then
suddenly had a terrible experience with marijuana-induced psychosis. I had
moved from a state where is was illegal, to Washington. A dispensary sold me
something incredibly strong just recently, in March. It was a joint mixed with
a marijuana wax- I didn’t even know what that was. I was SO naive, but there
is literally NOTHING out there that lets consumers know that ANYthing even
remotely bad can happen.

As long as I didn’t drive under the influence, what could go wrong? I thought
all pot was “safe.” The irony is that I am nearly 40, a stay-at-home mom with
honor roll kids, no history, ZERO history with drug usage, or ANY depression,
mental illness etc etc.. NONE. I never used marijuana before I moved to
Washington. I literally just set out to listen to music and unwind while I got
the house clean….awaiting the arrival of my husband who was gone on a business
trip. My kids were on Spring break, at a friend’s house.

About halfway through I felt very dizzy and unbalanced… So I thought I just
needed to sit down, or maybe eat.. I looked at the glass of wine I had poured…
and dumped it in the drain…. Then I had a sudden disturbing image of myself
biting THROUGH the wine glass… It came over and over. Bite the glass….. the
words wouldn’t leave my head…. I’m biting glass. My heart began to race, my
hands began to shake. I felt freezing cold, yet was sweating. Then I was
feeling a sudden surge of Adrenalin and was panic stricken. I began having
suicidal ideations, in MINUTES…

**Shooting Myself and Biting Glass**

Over and over and over… shoot yourself… bite through the glass… shoot
yourself…and much worse.. it was as if a tape of my worst nightmares were
playing over and over and over again in my head…and it was just as physical as
it was psychological….. With absolute sincerity, I tell you that I barely made
it through that night alive, and even the subsequent days and weeks… I still
suffered terrible suicidal ideation……….

NEVER, ever did I have suicidal thoughts or feelings in my life. I am happy,
well-adjusted, and a warm, outgoing person with lots of friends and a solid
marriage.

Within days I began researching, because I KNEW what I had experienced was
from smoking…again, I reiterate, I had nothing else in my system or history to
indicate otherwise….and there it was.. All the research indicating that it WAS
the pot.. Marijuana-induced psychosis is a proven thing and all too common.
There is ZERO safety put in place in these recreational pot stores. They don’t
warn a consumer about strength, concentration or side effects. It as if you
are buying a glass of milk to them!! I later found out that marijuana wax is
known as a “dab” and I am still unsure of what they really are…

No Warnings Against Psychosis! The ER in Olympia Washington sees on average
TWO cases of marijuana-induced psychosis a DAY!! Yet we don’t hear of this!?
Why not? I would have NEVER tried any medicine or drink that could even
remotely do this to me, but thought I was using something as harmless as a
glass of wine because they say it is. I can’t even fully describe the horror
of that night as it’s very, very hard to revisit. Thank you for warning
people. I am glad I was able to use some of the resources and information you
have shared to help recover…….People need to know. Marijuana can be deadly. I
almost lost everything to very casual use.

I am lucky to have health insurance and lucky that my husband could be with
me. My husband had to take an entire week off to stay home with me! Again how
fortunate I am and I’m in the position to have someone that could do that.

I am lucky in that I am NOT an addict or addicted to it. So not using isn’t an
issue….. I would never smoke pot again, but the suicidal ideation was so
intense and such a terrible and traumatic experience…. It is hard to describe
how horrific it is was and I’d rather be tortured than ever experience that
again…. I just never thought that was even possible…. From BK, Washington

_Source: http://www.poppot.org/2017/04/14/biting-glass-biting-my-way-
delirium/_

Please share this post with every concerned parent you know! The Parents
Against Pot website has many very useful and interesting articles and
testimonies and we would thoroughly recommend anyone interested in the
arguments for and against the use of marijuana (pot) to log on to:
http://www.poppot.org

Filed under: Brain and Behaviour,Cannabis/Marijuana,Drug use-various
effects,Parents :

**Marijuana Legalization Proposals Die in Committee**

[Alexandria, VA, April 12, 2017] - Yesterday, an alliance of concerned
citizens, public health experts, and safety officials soundly defeated two
marijuana legalization bills in Maryland. The bills, which would have
permitted commercial pot shops in communities throughout the state, died
without a vote in the Maryland Senate last night. SAM Executive Vice President
Jeff Zinsmeister and Maryland-based neuroscientist and SAM Science Advisor
Dr.Christine Miller testified in Annapolis last month, urging the legislature
to reject marijuana legalization and commercialization. AAA Mid-Atlantic also
testified against the bills, citing traffic safety concerns due to drugged
driving increases in states that have legalized marijuana.

"This is a major victory in the effort to put public health and common sense
before special interests," said SAM Executive Vice President Jeff Zinsmeister.
"The costs of legalization, including more stoned drivers on the roads causing
fatalities, more people being driven into treatment for addiction, and higher
regulatory costs far outweighed any benefit Maryland would see. The Big
Marijuana lobbyists came into Maryland touting the notion that marijuana
legalization would fix our criminal justice system and rake in millions - but
Maryland smartly concluded that legalization actually exacerbates these
issues. All they had to do was look to Colorado, where more minority youth are
being arrested for marijuana and the state deficit is growing."

"We believe that science and research, not profit, should drive what marijuana
laws look like in our state," said Dr. Christine Miller, a Maryland
neuroscientist and member of SAM's Science Advisory Board. "The pro-marijuana
lobby was looking to profit by selling a harmful, addictive substance that
would harm our communities and endanger public safety. I'm proud that
evidence-based policy putting health first prevailed in Maryland yesterday."

Evidence demonstrates that marijuana - which has skyrocketed in average
potency over the past decades - is addictive and harmful to the human brain,
especially when used by adolescents. Moreover, in states that have already
legalized the drug, there has been an increase in drugged driving crashes and
youth marijuana use. States that have legalized marijuana have also failed to
shore up state budget shortfalls with marijuana taxes, continue to see a
thriving black market, and are experiencing a continued rise in alcohol sales.

_Source: info@learnaboutsam.org April 2017_

Filed under: Cannabis/Marijuana,Global Drug Legalisation Efforts,USA :

Back to top of page

Powered by **WordPress**

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

