

### Editions

Africa Australia Canada Canada (français) España France Global Perspectives
Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States

### Sections

  * Home
  * Arts + Culture
  * Business + Economy
  * Cities
  * Education
  * Environment + Energy
  * FactCheck
  * Health + Medicine
  * Politics + Society
  * Science + Technology

### Search

### Services

  * Events
  * Job board
  * Newsletter
  * Read on Play Newsstand
  * Read on Apple News
  * Read on Flipboard

### Information

  * Who we are
  * Our charter
  * Our team
  * Our audience
  * Partners and funders
  * Republishing guidelines
  * Contact us
  * Donate
  * Friends of The Conversation
  * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
  * Privacy policy
  * Terms and conditions
  * Corrections

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)

  * __
  * Edition:

Available editions

Australia __

  * Africa
  * Canada
  * Canada (français)
  * España
  * France
  * Global Perspectives
  * Indonesia
  * New Zealand
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

  * Job Board

  * Donate

  * Become an author

  * Sign up as a reader
  * Sign in

  * __ Get newsletter 

  * __
  * __
  * __

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)
Search

__

Academic rigour, journalistic flair

  1. Arts + Culture
  2. Business + Economy
  3. Cities
  4. Education
  5. Environment + Energy
  6. FactCheck
  7. Health + Medicine
  8. Politics + Society
  9. Science + Technology

### __Follow Topics

  1. Health Check
  2. Weekly Dose
  3. Science or Snake Oil
  4. Research Check
  5. Indigenous health
  6. Cancer
  7. Health policy
  8. Skin
  9. Sugar

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

# **It’s official: one joint of cannabis makes you lazy … but only in the

short term **

September 2, 2016 9.00pm AEST

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock

# **It’s official: one joint of cannabis makes you lazy … but only in the

short term **

September 2, 2016 9.00pm AEST

____ Will Lawn, _UCL_

### Author

  1. ![](/assets/author/width170_default-19ec5bd0b0425d75df0ad1707d18c36b.jpg) Will Lawn 

Post-doctoral researcher, UCL

### Disclosure statement

Will Lawn received funding from the BBSRC.

### Partners

![University College

London](https://images.theconversation.com/institutions/1885/logos/logo-1423469087.png?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=170&h=170)

University College London provides funding as a founding partner of The
Conversation UK.

View all partners

Republish this article

![](/assets/call-to-actions/republish-ca547a7c5135cc6d1a28933dc8b6823c.png)
Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under Creative Commons
licence.

  * __ Email
  * __ Twitter
  * __ Facebook
  * __ LinkedIn
  * __ WhatsApp
  * __ Messenger

> I was gonna go to work but then I got high  
>  I just got a new promotion but I got high  
>  Now I’m selling dope and I know why  
>  ‘Cause I got high  
>  Because I got high  
>  Because I got high  
>

Afroman’s 2001 hit Because I Got High tells a potentially important story:
smoking cannabis makes you lazy and demotivated. In fact, the fable of the
lazy stoner has been around for decades. But is there good evidence in support
of it?

Two studies we have been working on have investigated the claim that cannabis
leads to reduced motivation. We found that when you give people the equivalent
of one spliff’s worth of cannabis, under controlled conditions in a
laboratory, they are less willing to work for money. In other words, they are
not as motivated as usual. However, we also compared people who are addicted
to cannabis with a control group (non-cannabis drug users). We found that when
neither group had used drugs for at least 12 hours, they did not differ in
their motivation for money.

Our results suggest that when you have recently smoked cannabis, it reduces
your motivation in the short-term. On the other hand, long-term cannabis use
may not impair your motivation, as long as you stop smoking it for at least 12
hours.

## 'Amotivational syndrome’

In the late 1950s and 1960s, as cannabis became a popular recreational drug,
academic reports of cannabis’s “amotivational syndrome” appeared. Clinicians
stated that “regular marihuana [sic] use may contribute to the development of
more passive, inward turning, amotivational personality characteristics”.
However, these reports simply relied on observations of cannabis users and
their lazy behaviour. Research was needed to investigate the short and long-
term effects of cannabis.

Early research into the short-term effects of cannabis on motivation
surprisingly found both motivating and demotivating effects of cannabis.
Having said that, these studies were poorly controlled and sometimes rather
bizarre in their design; one involved getting people stoned and asking them to
make stools as quickly as possible. A more recent study gave cannabis to
people in a placebo-controlled experiment and reported reduced motivation for
money. However, this experiment used a very small sample of five participants.

Our new study used a double-blind, placebo-controlled design to examine the
effects of cannabis on motivation for money in a larger sample of 17
participants. Through a balloon, participants inhaled cannabis vapour on one
occasion and a placebo cannabis vapour on a separate occasion. Straight after,
they completed a task designed to measure their motivation for earning money.
This was a real-life task as the participants were given money they had earned
at the end of the experiment. In each trial, they could decide whether to
complete low or high-effort options to win varying sums of money. The low-
effort option involved pressing the spacebar key 30 times in seven seconds to
win 50p. The high-effort option involved 100 space bar presses in 21 seconds
for rewards varying from 80p to £2.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/136306/original/image-20160901-1018-15d4cwk.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
One hundred spacebar presses equals more cash. BaLL LunLa/Shutterstock.com

We found that people on cannabis were significantly less likely to choose the
high-effort option. On average, volunteers on placebo chose the high-effort
option 50% of the time for a £2 reward, whereas volunteers on cannabis only
chose the high-effort option 42% of the time. In other words, they had reduced
motivation for the money available when they were stoned. Although it has been
a long-held belief that getting high makes you lazy, this is the first time it
has been reliably demonstrated using a suitable sample size.

## No difference

The question of whether long-term cannabis use makes people demotivated, even
when they’re not high, is a more difficult one to answer. We cannot carry out
randomised controlled trials in which some people are given cannabis for ten
years while another group receive placebo for ten years. That would, of
course, be unethical. Therefore, we have to rely on observational studies,
where we look at associations between natural cannabis consumption and
motivation levels. Some previous research has failed to find a link between
cannabis use and altered motivation, although in one study earlier cannabis
consumption predicted later anhedonia (difficulty experiencing pleasure).

In our observational study (that is, one that does not have an experimental
manipulation), we compared 20 people who were addicted to cannabis against a
control group of 20 people who were not addicted to cannabis. The control
group used other drugs, including MDMA and cocaine, a similar amount to the
cannabis group. These participants completed the same motivation task as in
the previous study after they had been clean of all drugs (apart from tobacco
and caffeine) for at least 12 hours. We found no difference between the groups
in their willingness to work for money. This suggests that long-term cannabis
use may not reduce motivation after 12 hours of abstinence from the drug.

However, there are some important limitations with this study. Firstly, the
sample sizes were small. Secondly, the study was cross-sectional, so we only
investigated the participants at one point in time. An improved study would
have used a longitudinal design, in which people’s motivation and cannabis use
are measured at different time points as they grow up. This would have allowed
for a better understanding of how cannabis consumption affects future
motivation. Longitudinal research is needed to draw stronger conclusions.

What do our results mean to the average cannabis user? After years of being
told that getting high makes you lazier, we’ve provided some of the first
solid evidence that it’s true. Importantly though, it doesn’t eradicate your
motivation altogether – it makes you slightly, yet significantly, more
apathetic. On the bright side, your long-term cannabis use may not erode your
drive like some people claim, so long as you can put your joint down for a
while.

__

  * Marijuana
  * Cannabis
  * Motivation
  * tetrahydocannabinol
  * THC
  * Cannabidiol
  * CBD

  * __ Tweet

  * __ Share
  * __ Get newsletter Newsletter

### You might also like

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Heavy cannabis use in adolescence can affect cognitive development and
educational attainment. Smokers High Life/Flickr

## Heavy pot users more likely to quit school and use other drugs

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Somewhere in this much-incinerated plant lies valuable medicine: perhaps a
treatment for cancer or an antidote to obesity. Prensa 420/Flickr

## Old dope, new tricks: the new science of medical cannabis

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
AAP joint.

## Explainer: What is synthetic cannabis or Kronic?

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Heavy cannabis use is consistently associated with poorer attention and
memory, and increased rates of metal health problems. Pe3k/F/Shutterstock

## Remind me again, how does cannabis affect the brain?

### Most popular on The Conversation

  * Are you burnt out at work? Ask yourself these 4 questions
  * The Reserve Bank will cut rates again and again, until we lift spending and push up prices
  * Why the raids on Australian media present a clear threat to democracy
  * Man’s stressed friend: how your mental health can affect your dog
  * Teachers are more depressed and anxious than the average Australian

  * There are four types of drinker – which one are you?

  * Vital Signs. If we fall into a recession (and we might) we’ll have ourselves to blame
  * 19 years of personal data was stolen from ANU. It could show up on the dark web
  * Explaining Adani: why would a billionaire persist with a mine that will probably lose money?
  * Why the idea of alien life now seems inevitable and possibly imminent

### Events

  * Your Leadership Voice - Women In Focus (Classic) -- Caulfield East , Victoria

  * Your Leadership Voice: Women in Focus -- Caulfield, Victoria

  * Sydney Ideas: Cultural power in the online world -- Sydney, New South Wales

  * Updates in Commercial Leasing -- Melbourne, Victoria

  * RDI Conference 2019 -- Bundoora, Victoria

__ More events

### Jobs

  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/2/logos/width36_logo-1501461860.png)

##### Technical Officer Optics

  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/86/logos/width36_logo-1402876329.jpg)

##### Associate Professor/ Professor In Diagnostic Imaging

  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/13/logos/width36_logo-1446011232.jpg)

##### Csiro Science Leader Digital Integration For Bio Prediction

  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/79/logos/width36_logo-1537164695.jpg)

##### Ph D Scholarship Researching Mental Illness

  * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/1/logos/width36_logo-1520549009.png)

##### Experiential Learning Coordinator

__ More jobs

## The Conversation

###### Community

  * Community standards
  * Republishing guidelines
  * Friends of The Conversation
  * Research and Expert Database
  * __Analytics
  * __Job Board
  * __Events
  * __Our feeds
  * __Donate

###### Company

  * Who we are
  * Our charter
  * Our team
  * Our audience
  * Resource for Teachers
  * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
  * Our blog
  * Partners and funders
  * Resource for media
  * Contact us
  * Work with us

###### Stay informed and subscribe to our free daily newsletter and get the

latest analysis and commentary directly in your inbox.

Email address

_✔_ __![](/assets/spinner-9643e2633c59d728d78b58f465f2fb9c.gif)

###### Follow us on social media

  * __
  * __
  * __

Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections

Copyright (C) 2010–2019, The Conversation Media Group Ltd

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

