

# Psychology Today

  * Find a Therapist 

# Find a Therapist

Therapists v

    
    
    * Therapists
    * Treatment Centers
    * Psychiatrists
    * Support Groups
    

x

Therapists: Log In | Sign Up

  * Get Help 

#### Mental Health

    
    
    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

#### Do I Need Help?

    
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

  * Magazine 

#### Current

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe

#### Recent

    
    
    *     *     *     * Issue Archive
    

  * Today 

#### News

    
    
    * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
    

#### Essential Reads

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)
    

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

#### Trending Topics

    
    
    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All
    

us

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

# Search

Search

Back

Psychology Today

  * Home
  * Find a Therapist
  * Get Help
  * Magazine
  * Today

Back

### Find a Therapist

#### Get Help

  *     * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
  * #### Members

    * Login
    * Sign Up
    * 

Back

### Get Help

#### Mental Health

  *     * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

    
    
    * #### Do I Need Help?
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

Back

### Magazine

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe Issue Archive

Back

### Today

#### News

  *     * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
  * #### Essential Reads

    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

  * #### Trending Topics

    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All

Go

![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/icons/icon-check-circle-gray.svg)
Verified by Psychology Today

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile/public/Christopher-

Bergland.jpg?itok=jSqZPD2h)

### Christopher Bergland

The Athlete's Way

Follow me on Twitter

Friend me on Faceook

# Does Long-Term Cannabis Use Stifle Motivation?

## Habitual use of marijuana linked to lower dopamine levels

Posted Jul 02, 2013

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/article-inline-

half/public/blogs/75174/2013/07/128254-127426.jpg?itok=gYR30qqO)

Researchers have found that levels of dopamine are lower in long-term cannabis
smokers and those who began using the drug at a younger age. Lower dopamine in
a part of the brain called the striatum is linked to less ambition and
motivation at a neuronal level. I have written extensively about dopamine and
endocannabinoids (self-produced cannabis) in _The Athlete’s Way_ over the
years.

The new study, released on July 1, 2013, was conducted by scientists at
Imperial College London, UCL and King's College London. The researchers found
that long-term cannabis users tend to produce less dopamine, a neurochemical
directly linked to motivation and reward. Using PET brain imaging the
researchers found that dopamine levels in a part of the brain called the
striatum were lowest in people who smoke more cannabis and those who began
smoking marijuana at a younger age.

The findings suggest why ‘stoners’ are stereotypically viewed as lacking
motivation to work hard to pursue their dreams or to be ambitious. Do you
think that pot makes people lazy? Have you had personal experience with the
phenomenon of cannabis induced “amotivational syndrome” also-known-as being a
slacker?

There is a strong link between dopamine and the CB-1 and CB-2 cannabinoid
receptors of the brain. Any exogenous substance, like cannabis, hijacks the
pre-existing receptors for the endogenously produced neurochemical. Contrary
to popuar belief, endocannabinoids are more strongly linked to ‘runner’s high’
than endorphins.

Dopamine has long been linked to reward driven behavior like achieving any
type of goal in life or sport. You can increase the levels of both
cannabinoids and dopamine through lifestyle choices without drugs. Setting
goals and achieving them is the best way to keep the dopamine pumping. Regular
aerobic exercise is the best way to get the endocannabinoids pumping.

**Cannabis makes you more prone to “Amotivational Syndrome,” but less prone
topsychosis.**

All of the cannabis users in the study had experienced some psychotic-like
symptoms while smoking marijuana. Researchers describe these symptoms as
“experiencing strange sensations or having bizarre thoughts like feeling as
though they are being threatened by an unknown force.” I call this having a
“bad trip.”

The London researchers studied the level of dopamine production in the
striatum of 19 regular cannabis users and 19 non-users of matching gender and
age. The cannabis users chosen for the study started experimenting with
cannabis between the ages of 12 and 18.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/article-inline-

half/public/blogs/75174/2013/07/128254-127427.jpg?itok=th08q35h)

The researchers found that the younger someone was when he or she started
smoking pot the lower the current levels of dopamine. Also, dopamine was lower
in those who smoked more cannabis and had higher levels of THC in their
bodies. The researchers conclude that these findings suggest that cannabis use
may be the cause of the difference in dopamine levels.

The lowest dopamine levels were seen in users who meet a diagnostic criteria
for cannabis addiction. The link to lower dopamine could be used as a new
measure for what degree someone is addicted to—or abusing—cannabis. The good
news from the study is that these results are most likely reversible. Other
researchers have studied the dopamine release in former long-term cannabis
users and found no differences with people who never abused cannabis.

Other good news from the study was that previous research had shown that
cannabis users have a higher risk of mental illnesses that involve repeated
episodes of psychosis, such as schizophrenia. This study found that smoking
marijuana actually lowered the odds of having repeated episodes of psychosis.
According to lead author Dr Michael Bloomfield, "It has been assumed that
cannabis increases the risk of schizophrenia by inducing the same effects on
the dopamine system that we see in schizophrenia, but this hasn't been studied
in active cannabis users until now.”

Bloomfield adds, "The results weren't what we expected, but they tie in with
previous research on addiction, which has found that substance abusers—people
who are dependent on cocaine or amphetamine, for example—have altered dopamine
systems."

"Although we only looked at cannabis users who have had psychotic-like
experiences while using the drug, we think the findings would apply to
cannabis users in general, since we didn't see a stronger effect in the
subjects who have more psychotic-like symptoms,” Bloomfield says. The
researchers believe that more research needs to be done before drawing final
conclusions.

**Conclusion: Have you ever smoked pot? Does cannabis make you less
motivated?**

Do you smoke pot? If so, how often? What age were you when you started smoking
marijuana? Do you find that cannabis makes you more productive and creative,
or less? Does smoking pot make you paranoid? Different friends of mine seem to
have a wide range of responses to cannabis.

I had a classic bad trip on psychedelic mushrooms when I was in high school. I
felt like the blueprint of my brain was being permanently reconfigured and the
architecture of my mind was being rearranged. It was terrifying. The
psilocybin opened doors of perception that should stay closed, and closed
windows to perceptions of reality that need to stay open.

William Blake once said, “If the doors of perception were cleansed every thing
would appear to man as it is, Infinite. For man has closed himself up, till he
sees all things thro' narrow chinks of his cavern.” Some people—like Jim
Morrison of the DOORS—used this Blake quotation to romanticize being high or
tripping. For me, having a bad trip was the most harrowing experience of my
life. I smoked pot once after that and had a flashback. Needless to say, I was
so spooked by the experience that I haven’t smoked pot since 1983.

Bloomfield concludes that the 'amotivational syndrome' which he describes in
cannabis users is linked to lower levels of dopamine, but acknowledges that
whether such a syndrome exists is still controversial. If you, or someone you
know, are a long-term pot smoker would you agree or disagree with the
scientific findings that abusing cannabis stifles motivation?

For more on the power of self-produced neurochemicals associated with feeling
good and staying motivated please check out my _Psychology Today_ blog The
Neurochemicals of Happiness.

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg) SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg) TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

38 Comments

### I had never been around pot,

Submitted by Fly on the wall on July 2, 2013 - 4:44pm

I had never been around pot, or anyone who used it, until I was in my late
teens, and never tried it until I met my ex-husband when we were both 21. He
had apparently started using it around age 11, and I tried it a couple times
at age 21. He and all his friends ended up like the classic stoner
stereotype....couldn't care about anything if they tried. They just want more
lounging around with pot, beer, and pizza. They don't care how many jobs they
lose over it. I tried it several times and had no effect at all, until I tried
LSD. That had an effect, and pot affected me after that. However, after having
tried several things, I decided the druggie life just wasn't for me, gave it
up, and moved on. It was pretty motivating to hear that before we got married,
he'd been through several jobs because he "couldn't find anything he really
liked", and after we got married, he had "lost 13 jobs due to his drug
problems". Interesting shift in the story, there.

  * Reply to Fly on the wall
  * Quote Fly on the wall

### Yes it stifles societally acceptable motivation - but it doesn't stifle

motivation

Submitted by Anonymous on July 2, 2013 - 6:03pm

I have several observational comments on cannabis use. There are the
youngsters that use it to 'get high' as an escape from the suppressive
environments that they exist within. There are those that use it for there
mental health issues to alleviate anxieties - and the users that I am aware of
are very aware of the potential for paranoia and carefully limit their use.
And there are those who choose to use it as a lifestyle choice as opposed to
alcohol. The adult users that I am aware of, whether they have received a
mental diagnosis or not, are very politically aware and also very creative.
Unfortunately we still adhere to a materialist reductionist scientific model
and constantly assume that the genes have all the answers. We stigmatize 'pot'
users due to the ignorant non-scientifc propaganda that was dispersed over 100
years ago and have a societal consensus that 'drug' use is bad - strange that
doesn't apply to alcohol which is possibly the most detrimental drug that
exists and is still legal. You talk of the carrot and stick model, mainly
relying on the carrot - perhaps some users have decided that they don't like
carrots? The paradigm you are describing is so passe - but mainstream science
is lagging behind.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Yes it stifles societally acceptable motivation - but it doesn't stifle

motivation

Submitted by Anonymous on December 28, 2014 - 8:21am

i totally agree with you. alcohol should be illegal, not marijuana. alcohol
drives people away from sanity, marijuana does not

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Pot vs alcohol

Submitted by John on February 18, 2019 - 5:12pm

Alcohol destroys spiritual capacity which ‘the authorities’ don’t want ya to
have because we might actually figure out what is going on here which is a
manipulation and a fraud!

  * Reply to John
  * Quote John

### flawed study

Submitted by Sue M on February 16, 2016 - 6:55pm

Several years ago, I read about a possible link between dopamine and
addiction. I don't recall the details but the bottom line was that low
dopamine levels were related to addiction, not as a result of drug use but as
a precursor. This study seems to be flawed in that it establishes a "link" but
doesn't control for whether it is the cause or the effect.

  * Reply to Sue M
  * Quote Sue M

### Cannabis

Submitted by Jay on June 12, 2017 - 10:29am

That is just what i was thinking. Isn't it possible that people who are bored
or down (ie low dopamine) will turn to cannabis to feel better?

  * Reply to Jay
  * Quote Jay

### I would need to see more

Submitted by Anonymous on August 11, 2013 - 1:41pm

I would need to see more research on this subject to fully accept the
conclusions of this study because there is one potential flaw: they may be
pointing the arrow of causality in the wrong direction. They are claiming that
using cannabis lowers motivation/dopamine, but it may just be that people with
naturally lower motivation/dopamine are more attracted to cannabis use.  
Like I said, I would need to see more research to confirm either conclusion,
but my personal experience points me more towards believing that cannabis
doesn't inherently demotivate people. Really, it just seems to intensify
whatever you're doing. If you're a demotivated person who likes to sit around
and be bored all the time, it makes being bored more fun. On the other hand, I
know people who completely break the "stoner" stereotype and use cannabis to
help with schoolwork, housework, various hobbies, etc.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Drugs & Alcohol in a nut shell

Submitted by Tim McGowan on November 15, 2013 - 11:56am

I think drugs/alcohol always have this potential, because they can encourage
good or bad habits. The individual decides how he reacts to using these
substances and from there you have a wide range of people that use this
substance to fail or succeed it is just a matter of opinion as to whether you
think one or the other of the individual, because of what they do or what
substance they choose on a daily basis.

  * Reply to Tim McGowan
  * Quote Tim McGowan

### Hi all, Sorry for my English,

Submitted by Experience Man on December 24, 2013 - 7:58am

Hi all,

Sorry for my English, it's long time i haven't practiced.  
I would like to say something :it's really true that smoking cannabis affect
the motivation.  
I used to smoke for long years ago when i was studnet at the university and
the result is that i never succeed my studies.

I didn't smoke for a long period and recently i was curious to taste it again.  
So I smoked Whitewidow, a famous weed, and il felt very anxious and i saw an
obvious lack of motivation.  
I read somewhere that canbis can lower the testosteronne level and so impact
motivation.

I think it 's no a good thing to use drugs.

  * Reply to Experience Man
  * Quote Experience Man

### Is Psychology a Science

Submitted by Stephen Stillwell on December 28, 2013 - 6:39pm

Association is not proof of cause.

Disassociated anecdotal evidence is not empirical.

Dopamine levels may be decreased because the ingested cannabinoids reduce the
need to produce it. Dopamine levels may be reduced from a number of
psychological states, that are commonly self medicated with cannabis, as the
current psychological treatment model is largely ineffective.

Empirical studies do not support the cannabis amotivational syndrome concept,
I'd expect this point to be made clearly by a periodical begging to be
regarded as scientific.

  * Reply to Stephen Stillwell
  * Quote Stephen Stillwell

### Personal Experience

Submitted by Anonymous on January 28, 2014 - 2:29pm

Yes, smoking marijuana changed my life. I lost motivation, became depressed
and now I ruminate constantly.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Thanks for sharing your personal experience.

Submitted by Christopher Bergland on January 28, 2014 - 7:00pm

Dear anonymous, Thank you for taking the time to share your personal
experience with myself and other readers. Have a good night, Christopher
Bergland

  * Reply to Christopher Bergland
  * Quote Christopher Bergland

### Motivation really can be an issue

Submitted by Anonymous on February 8, 2014 - 8:54pm

The other issue I have seen among heavier cannabis users is a tendency to live
in a fantasy world. That said, I think cannabis users may actually be more
emotionally expressive than non-users.

I had an East Indian roommate who said conventional wisdom in India was that
Cannabis was beneficial to older users-and harmful to younger users. I would
like to see that studied--along with just how much harm we see from
occaisional/monthly/weekly use vs. chronic/daily use.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Cannabis and low dopamine and pain

Submitted by Ohms on February 20, 2014 - 7:42pm

We finally are getting marijuana out of the closet. I have been in club med
almost fifty years. Since I was ten, stealing Vodka from our parents and
cigarettes I could buy anywhere. I started pot at twelve to stop smoking
tobacco and quit constant alcohol in my twenties and didn't smoke tobacco for
nine years. Have not done crack or heroin because I saw friends on it (bad
scene). Marijuana users, we have had to deal with countless decades and
centuries of discrimination and prejudice. Not fun and no good will, will come
from that.  
Like anything else, when drug like if its not for you don't do it. End of
story.  
Now science is looking for discernment as they stumble through the complexity
of the molecules in Cannabis. They very much want to synthesize it and
constantly are attempting to replicate it. No pill, so far. Many use pot for
pain and glaucoma but it should do the opposite and increase pain because
dropping lower dopamine levels permits more pain perception.  
I know a community of regular pot smokers that are all successful long term
employed or self employed, house owners, successful at parenting tax payers.
One thing is for sure pot after a few hours will make you sleepy and some fall
asleep immediately after smoking it. The paranoia is more like an adjustment
to a new environment like being on a Ferris Wheel and for some a roller
coaster. It is very short lived experience that usually stops in twenty
minutes max. Roller Coaster feeling people stop smoking pot. Obviously
marijuana alters brain chemistry and its complexity of altering is anything
goes for now including dopamine levels, the Cannabis effects, likely the brain
signals to body glands that change excretions and absorption. There is so much
more to research on level changes and absorption after smoking pot.  
Lazy from pot, personally I have never met anyone. Lazy and smoke pot, now
those I have met and leave them, gone, out of my life. They are bummers, dumb
and numb. Never been my life style, lazy on pot. Lazy people have many
excuses, and one of them, its the pot's fault. We call smoking it inspiration
and for twenty years it has been my pain killer opiate illegally.  
I really liked your article. You admit you had bad experiences from this group
(many strains of Cannabis to treat different diseases) of drug that bounces
around to where its at, a depressant when you have none and a psychoactive
drug when you smoke it again. Thanks for the article, better than most I've
read.

  * Reply to Ohms
  * Quote Ohms

### Close friend I've known since I was nine is chronic pot smoker

Submitted by Anonymous on March 27, 2014 - 9:21am

My friend is a chronic pot smoker and has done very little with his life, even
though he is probably one of the most talented and gifted men I know. Quite
and underachiever for the intellectual gifts he's been given. I love him but
am afraid he threw his life away for pot.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Having grown up in the

Submitted by cmw on April 1, 2014 - 10:23am

Having grown up in the sixties, pot for breakfast, lunch and diner was the
norm. Pot definitely lends itself to lack of motivation in the majority of
frequent smokers. The very nature of the high is one of, "Tripping-out," on
life and everything around you. Like all, "Highs," they play on hedonism.
Especially young people use pot for the escape from stress, the Quick Fix or
Mood Changer for life itself.

  * Reply to cmw
  * Quote cmw

### Long term cannabis use

Submitted by Hammock Guru on April 30, 2015 - 5:56am

I too am a product of the 60s and 70s; starting cannabis use on a near daily
basis at 15. In these last 40 years I managed to put myself through
universities, sometimes on scholarship and sometimes on sweat. Two Masters and
a PhD later, plus decades of observation I'm convinced that with or without
cannabis use a slacker is a slacker - granted, I was 45 when I received
received my DrPH. I have watched both stoners and "straights" succeed and fail
in fulfilling their potential and their dreams in equal measure. It's not
cannabis use that makes the difference. It's Will and Desire. I see little
difference in the 30 something sitting and playing video games and the 30
something sitting and watching Fox News. Both have learned from
societyandfamilies to make decisions based on fear.  
HG

  * Reply to Hammock Guru 
  * Quote Hammock Guru 

### Marijuana Addiction

Submitted by Anonymous on January 20, 2016 - 11:14pm

I totally agree with you. I started smoking when I was 14 and my use only
increased exponentially over time. I was an honors student all throughout high
school, played 2-3 sports for all four years, was a volunteer EMT at the age
of 16, and exercised on my own almost every day. I'm 19 now, and have been
smoking 1-2 times almost everyday since I went to college. I am still an
honors student, have a job, exercise every other day, do jiu jitsu 2-3 times a
week, practice yoga everyday, and engage in my hobbies (gloving and arts and
crafts) frequently. I no longer drink alcohol at all, and my diet is extremely
healthy (whole foods, vegetarian diet, never any OTC medications). Not only do
I smoke just to get high and relax, but I now also use it to help me sleep and
relieve pain from jiu jitsu. It's clear I have a serious cannabis addiction,
but I have never been more satisfied with where I am in life and where I am
going. I strongly believe my addiction hasn't negatively affected my life, or
caused any lack of motivation whatsoever. If anything, I become more
productive when I'm high because I become self conscious of falling into the
popular habit of smoking and doing absolutely nothing. I do homework, arts and
crafts, glove, yoga, chores (that aren't even required of me, I do them to
help out my parents), errands, go to work, exercise and read when I'm high. I
am even more aware of how I treat others (especially my parents). I can't say
that cannabis doesn't lower my self esteem, but it seems as if this only
further motivates me to be even more productive and strive to be the best
person I can be. Today, I worked out, left the gym, smoked a bowl pack in my
car, then decided to go back in and do another 3 sets before I went home. If
you're unmotivated or lazy, then cannabis will only magnify that trait. It
does not cause it.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### It lowered my motivation

Submitted by Anonymous on April 4, 2014 - 11:00am

I believe it lowers motivation. I didn't try pot until I was 17 because I had
no desire. I had a passion for music so i never cared for it, despite the fact
I had been around it for years. But I'm 19 and I've been smoking for 2 years,
I feel like I'm less motivated than I was to make music. I still do it, all
the time... but unfortunately I rarely do it sober. I'm always smoking in the
studio.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Started smoking after university

Submitted by Anonymous on April 16, 2014 - 7:07pm

Most of the research talks about people who started smoking pot in their teens
and early adulthood. What are the effects of pot when you start smoking it
later in life? I think the answer to this question should guide the
legalization of marijuana.

My experience with pot

I had a hard childhood, abusive mother (physically then mentally). I had a
hard time in school because of my dyslexia, I was bullied and had no real
friends to speak of until I reach 11th grade. Despite all of this I made it to
university were I was finally able to make great friends. I worked very hard,
I was involved in lifeguard competition ( 3rd at the nationals) and graduated
loan free and with an average above 3.0

The first time I smoked pot I was 26. I had a husband, a house and a great
job. From then I smoked about 3 to 4 times a year until I was 31. At this
point I started to smoke a joint daily on and off. 1 once per month for 2-3
month and then nothing for about the same. I only trust one person to supply
me and he doesn't live close to me :( I'm not a fan of supporting organize
crime... He grows small amount and only sells to people he knows well. I
started growing my self and can't wait until I don't have to take those month
off. Personally I am happier and more productive when I can have my nightly
hit. I have struggled with depression for as long as I can remember, for me
smoking pot helps.

I'm now 35. I'm still happily married. I have a great well paid job. We are 8
months away of being completely debt free. Bye Bye mortgage and car payment.
All of my friend, except one, have no clue that I smoke and would not believe
it if someone told them that I did.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### having little motivation makes pot more appealing to me

Submitted by Anonymous on August 25, 2014 - 6:25am

I'm an "under achiever" and proud of it. I still do enough to get by quite
comfortably.  
Dope helps me disengage from the futile ambition and strife that society tries
to impose.

What are we all trying to keep up with the Jones for?

When one, for whatever reason feels disaffected by life, it is hard to find
any reason why not to partake in the pleasure of pot.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Smoked every day for a year

Submitted by Anonymous on September 27, 2014 - 3:35pm

I only smoked pot once before college, but started smoking regularly to
relieve pain my freshman year of college. After smoking nearly every day for
over a year, I find that I am lacking in motivation and energy. As a psych and
philosophy double major, this feeling of a lack of desire intrigued me and
caused me to start examining the feeling more thoroughly.

After finding tons of information about the anti-motivational feeling being
ascribed to smoking pot, which I had expected, I've decided to take a break
from smoking, whether permanent or for a short time, in order to test if I can
regain my motivation and desire.

Slowly it is coming back, but it is incredibly difficult to focus on one thing
for too long, and almost physically painful when I try to feel desire or vast
motivation to do something. Perhaps after a few months this will improve, but
I can't say for sure.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### It will come back to normal,

Submitted by Dude on October 27, 2014 - 12:39pm

It will come back to normal, don't worry about it. I smoke a few times a week
(im in psych too ;) ) and as long as you don't use it as an escape, you're
good to go. Use it as a reward after a hard day!

  * Reply to Dude
  * Quote Dude

### Comments on "Does Long-Term Cannabis Use Stifle Motivation?" | Psychology

Today

Submitted by Cynthia on October 8, 2014 - 7:52am

You should therefore try to shop around for the best products offering the
best value.  
Men with this body type need to make sure they keep their exercise routines
regular, since they tend to take their "gifted" genetics too much  
for granted and missed workouts or extra calories can undo all of the hard
work they put into having their ideal body.  
The problem many novice bodybuilders have is that they think they can
circumvent  
the workout process and use bodybuilding supplements  
to build up body mass and stay fit without doing any physical exercise.  
Doing so would set your bodybuilding plan back by days, if not weeks.  
That's why I believe that bodybuilding, just like any other human endeavor, is
for smart people only.

Feel free to visit my blog post; get ripped (Cynthia)

  * Reply to Cynthia
  * Quote Cynthia

### I smoke pot a few times a

Submitted by Dude on October 27, 2014 - 12:25pm

I smoke pot a few times a week. I am 19, started at 18. I'm in second year of
psychology and my semester average is 90%. I have the same job I had two years
ago, I get called a "perfect employee". I have very good relations with my
family, and friends. I'm active on the dating scene. I take dance classes, I
write, I'm planning to do my Masters and Phd and open my own clinic. I do
volunteering twice a week in a lab. And I am a stoner. Weed doesn't change
you. You change the way you want to change, and don't take responsibility, so
you blame weed.

  * Reply to Dude
  * Quote Dude

### Lack of motivation

Submitted by Trivedi Effect on February 25, 2015 - 4:42am

What drives us to achieve our goals? Motivation does. It is important to be
motivated and your advice is spot on There’s plenty more we can do to generate
motivation, but I believe the list above is a good start. Also, keep this in
mind: if your motivation is low it helps to step out of the small picture (the
day-to-day) and remember the big picture – why you are doing what you do.
Allow yourself to be motivated by your bigger vision, and let your goals drive
you. Remembering why you are doing what you do in business can most certainly
help you find some new energy to keep going.

http://www.beliefnet.com/columnists/lessonsfromarecoveringdoormat/2012/02/the-%E2%80%9Ctrivedi-
effect%E2%84%A2.html

  * Reply to Trivedi Effect
  * Quote Trivedi Effect

### Weed Highly Motivates

Submitted by HighlyMotivatedMarijuanaUser on October 29, 2015 - 9:17am

I would say this study is inaccurate and shortsighted. I myself have smoked
marijuana daily (5 to 6 times a day) for the past 15 years, and I have used it
to help me stay motivated and achieve a succesful career in the IT business.
Not only that I know many people like myself in my business who are daily
smokers and who are equally if not more successful.

I'm not saying some folks who smoke do not have a lack of motivation, but the
the lazy stoner is a stereotype and not reality. Millions of people are
functional smoking, and use it to help them focus, alleviate stress, and cope
with depression.

Prior to starting smoking when I was 22, I was depressed lacked motivation,
and felt hopeless. Anti-depressants gave me serious gastrointenstinal
problems, and did not provide the full effects marijuana did.

I recently quit marijuana because of my wife not liking the smell (perhaps the
one downside), and have been off of it now for 2 months, and the feelings or
depression, and lack of motivation are back.

BE CAREFUL WHEN MAKING BLANKET OBSERVATIONS LIKE THIS. Everyone wants to put
people in a box, and there have been countless studies done over the centuries
to reinforce racist and biggoted stereotypes which have been proven
inaccurate. This study is along those same lines.

  * Reply to HighlyMotivatedMarijuanaUser
  * Quote HighlyMotivatedMarijuanaUser

### smoking makes you lazy

Submitted by SamCrow50 on November 23, 2015 - 8:29pm

Science truths transcend belief systems. Personal truths i.e. cultural,
political or religious belief systems drive most of what you read on this
topic.

This is a common debate among us with a long history. Science vs "Belief
systems." It took a while to convince people the earth was not flat. Now try
convincing everyone the earth is not the center of the universe. Wow, imagine
how hard that would be. Liquor and cigarettes should be outlawed. Not pot.

Now we debate over a split pool of 19 smokers and 19 nonsmokers. Is this
methodology such that science would agree? 19 people? LOL

Some facts on me:  
\- I smoke every week.  
\- Started at 33 years old,, many moon ago.  
\- I am a multimillionaire and was not born that way.  
\- I completed 4 triathlons last year.  
\- Smoking makes me lazy. But only after work or before bed. I sleep like a
baby every night. No socially accepted drugs for me at bedtime.  
\- I am a Healthcare professional. No I don't see patients.  
\- Sugar is more dangerous than pot. It certainly kills more people than pot
since this naturally grown plant has never killed a human in all of history.

  * Reply to SamCrow50
  * Quote SamCrow50

### Using this forum to ask for a little help

Submitted by Zona Rosa on November 29, 2015 - 9:31am

Hey I'm Ryan and i couldn't help but notice you are a stoner millionaire, i
know you worked hard for your money and I super respect that. Me and my highly
motivated brother from another mother, Joe, have started a new music project.
We want to know if you'd be interested in funding our project. We are getting
along pretty well but are having some financial issues, basically we need to
have a lump sum to start with, and gain extra funding from there, possibly
through kickstarter. As you will be able to hear soon enough (link below) we
are really onto something that could be very popular. Kind of an indie disco
vibe. Joe and I are really trying to get this off the ground, and would only
need about 5 to 10k to start with. This would ensure that we have enough gear
for live sets, some proper recording gear we are missing, we have a good start
but need more. studio time is also super expensive which we will need to
record vocals and guitar. Hopefully the music will speak for itself. Thanks
for indulging my schpeel, appreciate it. Can't promise you would make that
money back, but you are funding two men's dreams to make something super
positive, and if we do make money we are paying you back, plus added interest.
Thanks.

-Zona Rosa

ps. This is an unfinished track, needs a few things, small edits and needs
vocals, let me know what you think. Thanks again. Weed rules.

https://db.tt/3F0gk7C1

  * Reply to Zona Rosa
  * Quote Zona Rosa

### -

Submitted by Scott Sessmeiter on February 21, 2016 - 11:55pm

From my perspective (46-year old, male, semi-normal) - it has positive and
negative outcomes. It increases my creativity.. but decreases actually getting
sh*t done.

  * Reply to Scott Sessmeiter
  * Quote Scott Sessmeiter

### Where I live it's really

Submitted by Anon on September 1, 2016 - 7:47pm

Where I live it's really common. We sometimes joke at work if they drug tested
our large organization they'd have to let go of most of the employees. It's
about as socially acceptable as drinking, which I think is fine considering
alcoholism while legal is more damaging.

I started smoking a lot after a traumatic event and anxiety. I do worry that
it effects motivation. Anxiety does also though. I don't have a lot of faith
in the pharma industry. I think as one poster mentioned, the head space of
weed (versus pharmaceuticals, coffee, or other legal substances) maybe lends
itself more to the arts than typical 9-5 office work. I think for some users
who work for themselves it probably isn't that bad, especially if they have
another disorder it is treating (like anxiety or adhd). I've known several
people who for example had bad reactions to prescribed adhd medication, and
felt weed was a better option for them with less negative side effects.

No two brains are the same, each person probably reacts differently. There is
also major stigma with pot as a controlled substance that makes probably makes
some research a bit bias.

  * Reply to Anon
  * Quote Anon

### cannabinoid

Submitted by Lin on December 2, 2016 - 10:57pm

This 'article' contains logical fallacies and incorrect information. Please
see wikipedia for more info on endocannabinoids their production and function
in humans & mammals. From http://reset.me/story/beginners-guide-to-the-
endocannabinoid-system/: "...This system, an integral part of our
physiologies, was discovered in the mid-1990s by Israeli researcher Dr. Ralph
Mechoulam who also identified THC as the main active ingredient in cannabis in
the early 1960s. Israel has been one of the most progressive nations for
cannabis research and currently has one of the most advanced medical marijuana
programs in the world...Dr. Mechoulam’s world-changing research discovered two
main receptors, cannabinoid 1 (CB1) and cannabinoid 2 (CB2), that are keyed to
both the endocannabinoids that our body naturally produces and
phytocannabinoids (plant-based) like THC and CBD. Our bodies actually produce
the ECsCB1 receptors are primarily found in the brain...Current research shows
that THC is specifically keyed to the CB1 site. Therefore it is responsible
for the feeling of intoxication that is the most familiar aspect of cannabis.
From a therapeutic standpoint, it’s most important effect is to modulate and
moderate the perception of pain.  
THC moderates pain; this doesn’t mean we leave our finger on the stove, but
that the intensity of the painful feeling is reduced when THC is present in
the CB1 site. This mechanism of action is why THC-rich medicines are so prized
by people with intense pain issues... Additionally, CB1 receptors are not
present in the part of the brain that regulates heart rate and respiration, so
unlike narcotics, there is no lethal dosage threshold for THC, allowing
someone to consume as much is needed for its palliative effects. CB2 receptors
are primarily found in the immune system with the highest concentration
located in the spleen. There is some evidence that the receptors might also be
in the ...parts of the brain...The CB2 receptors are keyed to CBD and works as
an anti-inflammatory agent. The immune-boosting functions of CB2 are far less
understood as research into CBD is just really beginning. It’s only been about
five years since CBD re-emerged in the medical cannabis scene and was
identified through Steephill Labs. The benefits of CBD-rich medicine, with its
anti-spasmodic qualities, is one the most exciting and promising areas of
cannabis medical research... One of the other effects of CBD is that it
moderates the effects of THC. It actually knocks THC off the CB1 receptor, so
if someone is experiencing THC intoxication, a strong dose of CBD can
counteract those effects. The future of CBD-rich medicines is almost
limitless...The fact that there is a system in our body that produces
cannabinoids, and is specifically designed to accept just them, should be
overwhelming proof of cannabis’ efficacy as a medicine. From the pain-killing
effects of THC to the anti-spasmodic and anti-inflammatory properties of CBD,
we have just scratched the surface of a world of possibilities. "  
Again "...CB1 receptors are not present in the part of the brain that
regulates heart rate and respiration, so unlike narcotics, there is no lethal
dosage threshold for THC..." quoted from http://reset.me/story/beginners-
guide-to-the-endocannabinoid-system/  
I would need to see the article(s) this author referenced. Statements he makes
are not footnoted to enable a reader to check the truth of his claims. The
info in the above article seems to show correlation and not cause and effect.
As you can see from the accounts above in the comments section many folk
(including cancer, epilepsy patients, etc) who smoke pot daily are educated
and professional people who work productively, long and hard, and many hours
including exercise, taking care of family and hobbies. He also wrote that "Any
exogenous substance, like cannabis, hijacks the pre-existing receptors for the
endogenously produced neurochemical. Contrary to popuar belief,
endocannabinoids are more strongly linked to ‘runner’s high’ than endorphins."
First of all not just any exogenous substances (external chemicals) have the
chemical ability to plug into the endocannabinoid receptors. However one
exogenous substance that can (the only one I'm aware of, but again no
footnotes-can't check) is natural cannabinoids found in pot plants because it
has the correct chemical structure to fit. He goes on to state that
endocannabinoids (apparently from some unnamed source) are more LINKED to
runner's high. This appears to contradict his claim that people who have
cannabinoids in their bodies (even those that are naturally produced by our
bodies I have to assume) are unmotivated. How are these unmotivated people
able to be runners? It takes a lot of energy and determination to be a runner.
These are some of the difficulties I have found in reading this article.

  * Reply to Lin 
  * Quote Lin 

### Cannabis and ADHD - Motivation Observations

Submitted by T-Dubs on June 11, 2017 - 6:21am

Hello Readers,

ADHD Background (Dopamine Deficiency):

I was diagnosed with ADHD at 15 after experiencing many years of behavioral
issues at school, including an inability to concentrate, restlessness, muscle
tension, short-term memory issues, and unprovoked irritability.

Cannabis Use:

I began smoking weed at 13 and my usage increased very heavily until 17. I
took a break until I was in my 20's, then I started smoking infrequently
again, now I am in my mid 30's and have been smoking very regularly for the
last 5 years. The last 5 years I have been smoking flowers almost everyday,
taking lots of dabs, drinking THC drinks, eating THC edibles, etc. I have
slowed down and stopped on a few occasions for different reasons, but overall
smoke it quite a bit around my responsibilities.

Subjective Experiences and Impact to ADHD Symptoms (Motivation Included):

ADHD Daily Life (Untreated) -

My ADHD symptoms, untreated, make me feel like I am in a constant mental fog
(not an unhappy one though). If something captures my interest enough I get
extremely hyper-focused on it and can do some pretty amazing things. If I am
not interested, I have ZERO motivation and it takes an enormous amount of
self-discipline and awful headaches to make myself do the things that bore the
living hell out of me, like small talk (especially), entertain the public
school system, work a non-rewarding job, or entertain a college education
curriculum lol. When people talk to me, it takes everything I have to focus on
what they are saying and truly hear them.

I love people and this makes me extremely sad most of the time, I want to be
engaging and cannot stop this fog from disrupting my focus. The regular
intense effort to pay attention gives me headaches and makes me feel irritable
for seemingly no reason. Getting belittled my whole life for my lack of focus
and memory probably does not help either and has lead to anxiety issues too,
awesome! Pretty common for us dopamine deficient folks as many people assume
you are choosing this for some reason...I can think and bounce around ideas
and formulate intriguing insights between multiple interesting topics and
figure things out all while holding a conversation with someone, this happens
automatically all day long and is exhausting.

I am happy and love my life, but this disease certainly gets in my way and
causes long periods of depression every few years - relationships pretty much
all get ruined because of it. It is rare I find a friend or partner who is
compassionate towards this issue. They take my occasional irritability, lack
of focus, and need for long periods of alone time personally and it sucks,
really, really bad actually. However, taking legal meth is not an option I
wish to engage with either, been there, done that, Adderall will ruin you
after your tolerance builds up over for a long time, no thanks. Meditation,
exercise, good diet, sunlight, Vitamin D/Iron, structured routine, and goal
setting works just fine, thank you!

ADHD on THC (Smoking Regularly 3 - 5 x Day) -

Immediate relief from anxiety, muscle tension, and restlessness. I feel my
focus and creativity is better as well. However, my motivation can look from
the outside as reduced to a "socially unacceptable" level. In reality, after
being on GO all the time, I really enjoy the relaxation from THC and sometimes
like to chill out and make art, swim, hike, or do whatever at my own pace. I
notice when people think I am being slow or taking my time too much, I just
really do not care, most people are wired as hell on caffeine and my vibe is
in my control. Does this mean I cannot or will not do what I need in life,
absolutely not! THC has never stopped me from achieving my goals or doing what
I know I need to do. Anxiety, depression, and untreated ADHD most certainly
has a more dramatic effect on my motivation. If I smoke too much too often, I
notice I get dependent on THC very quickly. What I mean is, my body already
produces low amounts of dopamine. If I keep getting it from THC regularly, I
always have pretty crappy and even worst ADHD symptoms between smoking
sessions. If I stop smoking, the first 3 days are absolute garbage
(irritability, headaches, insomnia, minor hot flashes), then I am fine -
pretty mild overall, but worth mentioning as I cannot function to well at all
in a social environment during that T-break :)

ADHD on THC (Smoking Nights or Weekends Only) -

If I smoke at night to relax or socially, I do okay, but even this amount
causes me to have issues between sessions. I get immediate mild withdrawal
symptoms (from reduced dopamine) only hours after smoking no matter the
frequency. I believe this is more due to ADHD, but the lowered dopamine effect
from regularly smoking on top of it can be a bit much to function effectively
in society.

Motivation Summary -

For me, the THC has never got in the way of my motivation. I served in the
military in one of the most technical fields available, earned honors in my
training, earned honors in two leadership academies, earned several
prestigious awards for physical fitness, went to war, obtained my Bachelor of
Science in Information Technology, earned several professional IT
certifications, became a Satellite Communications Engineer for a major US
broadcasting company while surpassing all of my peers in promotions 3 years in
a row, received employee of the year from that company, changed careers, did
Web Development for a few years, started my own company, and am almost done
with my Master's of Information Systems degree. So, no I find it hard to
believe that THC itself is making people unmotivated, but it may be plausible
for those who are addicted or have dopamine issues already that THC usage
needs to be monitored. We should not be pretending that THC is some kind of
panacea. This drug or medicine, like any other, needs to be respected and its
effects need to be objectively observed within each person.

Not much research is available on how weed affects people who have ADHD,
especially people who have been diagnosed early on and have also been smoking
since childhood. I hope sharing my experience can help anyone else with ADHD
who uses cannabis. Just watch the dopamine effects and regulate usage, you
will be fine, but you need to be real about any potential addiction signs, it
can creep in quickly. Much love!

  * Reply to T-Dubs
  * Quote T-Dubs

### Motivation to do what?

Submitted by Stripe on July 31, 2017 - 12:17pm

I've been using cannabis pretty regularly since about age 16 in 1996 and I
have to say that it does tend mellow me out, slow me down, and make me as some
might say, unmotivated. But I can assure you I was pretty unmotivated before I
started using cannabis. Articles like this cause me to call into question the
whole notion of what being "motivated" in the modern age really means.
Typically motivation is measured by how determined you are to "succeed" and
"success" in the USA is measured by how much money and materials you have as
opposed to how happy you actually are.

I'm a 37 year old male. I still live with my parents. I don't have any kids. I
don't have a wife, but I have three FWBs, and if they drop off the scene I'll
simply find others. I have a menial part time job that pays the bills and
allows me extra spending money for things like new clothes, vacations, and of
course, more weed. Working part time also allows me lots of free time that I
would never have if I was a "successful" Chicago attorney like my older
brother, who is busy from sunrise to sundown. And you know what? I'm perfectly
happy this way. I don't have to conquer anything or meet any pointless goal.
The rich and poor die alike. I have plenty of good food. I am a vegetarian and
in great physical health for age 37. I still have all my hair and none of it
is grey. In fact, I often get mistaken for being in my 20s.

Some would say that I'm settling for being a loser. Hey, if this is being a
"loser" I'll take it over the eternal legions of "successful" people who are
unhappily married/divorced/cheating and are thousands in debt until they are
3/4 of the way to retirement. I don't see "successful" people as being more
happy than me just because they drive a brand new car and live in a McMansion,
while I drive a 2007 Impala and live with my mommy and daddy.

In fact, most "successful" people seem pretty stressed a lot of the time. I
see it on my Facebook. I've literally watched some of my friends' marriages
end online after one of them was caught cheating. And you know what comes
after that: divorce, courts, alimony, child support...in a word, stress. I've
watched some of them lose their jobs suddenly after going to college for 8
years or whatever and subsequently lose their homes and possessions that they
measured their "success" by. In this sense, motivation and success to achieve
the American dream seem to be avenues to a more stressful life. And once
you're trapped in that vicious cycle of materialism and debt, it's hard to
break free from it.

Me? Stress is almost nonexistent, and the little stress I do have is always
vanquished in the vapor of some tasty Blue Widow or Pineapple Express. And
when I'm feeling down (as we all do from time to time), it perks me right up
better than any cup of coffee I've ever had, and of course no side effects
other than an urge to raid Taco Bell, which as a vegetarian, I do need to be
careful about. So I always keep homemade chips, salsa, and bean dip on hand.

In conclusion, I again call into question of what being "motivated" really
means and what it really amounts to in the end. Again, it just seems like
being motivated to get the family, car, house, etc., is just a path to more
stress and less actual happiness. I'm not here to conquer the world and
wouldn't want to anyway. I'm just here to live and enjoy the short time I have
on this planet. Peace.

  * Reply to Stripe
  * Quote Stripe

### Marijuana and motivation.

Submitted by misteree on October 16, 2017 - 10:11am

I have seen a couple of the best guitar players, talented writers and
musicians go absolutely nowhere because they wouldn't  
stop using. It's been proven that testosterone levels go way  
down, your metabolism changes, your perception changes and  
THC is stored in fat and released as flashbacks, so the user is always in a
form of stupor. Whether the users want to hear it or not, the facts are the
facts.

  * Reply to misteree
  * Quote misteree

### Dependence on the chemical

Submitted by misteree on October 16, 2017 - 10:21am

What needs to be stressed is that no one using can live their  
life without the chemical. They are totally dependent on it giving them the
"high" "motivation" "focus" whatever it may be.  
They aren't repairing the underlying psychological, physical,  
emotional trauma...they are MEDICATING. Majority of the  
world lives without the medicating (you grow up and learn to  
handle problems without chemicals, it's what adult humans do)

  * Reply to misteree
  * Quote misteree

### There will be no right answer

Submitted by Joe on October 23, 2018 - 3:59pm

I don't think the motivation issue will ever have an absolute answer. The
variety of experiences shared in previous comments are a good example. One of
the main reasons for this relativity is intent. The pot smoker who is just
chilling down from a hard day of work is very different to the kid who just
wants to briefly escape from problems at home. Each circumstance will also
have an effect in neurochemical balance.

And then there's individual brain chemistry. Most people who use cocaine
become super wired up. But I know a handful of individuals who snort it and
then go to sleep.  
I also know hardcore surfers who are "potheads" yet functional.  
These are fit and athletic. While pot might mess dopamine levels, it is also
true that the high level of physical activity involved in their sport helps
produce plenty of it.

My humble conclusion is that establishing an absolute, one size fits all rule
is dangerous .

  * Reply to Joe
  * Quote Joe

### It toggles motivation ON for me.

Submitted by x1134x on March 5, 2019 - 4:46pm

I was what you'd describe as a stereotypical "stoner" all through high school.
. . where I never was able to find or use marijuana, because I was in a very
religious community in a very rural area. If anything took any amount of
effort, I'd quit, I had no motivation to achieve my potential, my sole
motivation was to slip by with as little effort as possible i.e. refuse to
turn in homework then ace the tests and challenge the teacher about giving
other kids "A"s who's knowledge of the subject matter in now way exceeded my
own, because of "busy work" designed to reinforce the topics which was
obviously unnecessary since I could ace tests on the subject all day after
learning it one time from reading it. If there was high input tasks like
research papers or term papers, I'd cheat my way through those. This worked
fine up until college calculus 2, and engineering math classes where there's
only 5 questions on a test and getting one wrong meant an instant C on a test,
and I failed classes, lost my college scholarship, and decided I'd finish out
the classes I was passing, then drop out (cuz I was a quitter) and pursue
playing guitar to become a professional musician. I asked my bandmates if they
could find me acid, and they were like "whoah you trip on acid?" and I told
them "no, but I want to get more creative and more into writing", so they
suggested marijuana, to which I went on a right-wing rural area religious
indoctrinated kid tirade about how it was just "stupid" for people to
purposefully inhale smoke (says the guy just asking about acid) and pot makes
you lazy, stupid, stinky, etc. They pointed out the errors of my logic, and
talked me into trying it which I did, and I liked it very much, there was
euphoria, but not a loss of identity or control or knowledge that I'm still
just a normal me who feels better, not a stupid me who feels good but is now
less intelligent. I asked for some more and went home with the purpose of
using it and writing songs. I never got to my guitar, because I smoked out
outside, then needed to clear my table and area of my school books. . . which
I picked up and started reading with an enthusiasm and zeal I'd never had even
leaving home for college to pursue my engineering degree. I loved it, and just
kept reading, and felt compelled that it would be FUN to do the homework RIGHT
NOW. So I did the homework for the next 3 weeks, for four subjects, cleaned my
room, cleaned the kitchen, cleaned the bathroom, and organized my schoolwork
and calendar. I used pot ALL DAY EVERY DAY after that, earned 4.0s in every
class, earned my scholarship back and graduated with my BSEE degree. I didn't
lose the ability to just be exposed to the material once and absorb it
immediately. I just gained the ability to not want to leave campus until I'd
also done all the "busy work" required. Just smoke out in my car in the
parking lot.  
Something about marijuana toggles my motivation to SUPER ON. I can't "get high
and watch a movie". I feel my life wasting away as I SIT. I think of all the
things I could be accomplishing and just have to DO one. On marijuana I can
completely identify with the mindset of a "workaholic". I just keep adding on,
like "I could also do this, and this, and this, and this." It makes scrubbing
bathrooms fun and interesting, and gets you easily over the barrier of "we've
got to do this horrid job, and lets get started NOW".  
Before pot, it didn't seem like the dopamine reward circuitry was WORKING, I'd
do homework for a class I already understand, and turn it in, get a 100% and
think "See that's what I said, I don't need to do this junk", there was never
a positive feeling of accomplishment like there was in spades doing homework
when medicated. Its like my mind now knows if I do these tasks and accomplish
them I'll get a "bonus buzz" so I'm like a rat at the switch trying to push it
over and over.

  * Reply to x1134x
  * Quote x1134x

## Post Comment

Your name

E-mail

The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.

Subject

Comment *

Notify me when new comments are posted

All comments __

Replies to my comment __

Leave this field blank

advertisement

### About the Author

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile_bottom/public/Christopher-

Bergland.jpg?itok=zd744hBD)

**Christopher Bergland** is a world-class endurance athlete, coach, author,
and political activist.

In Print:

The Athlete's Way: Sweat and the Biology of Bliss

Online:

www.theathletesway.com

View Author Profile

Online:

www.theathletesway.com

View Author Profile

### More Posts

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/courtesy_of_conway_lab_nih-144x144-72_0-1161_1161.jpg?itok=onM7zYfb)

## Did Music and Harmonic Sounds Shape the Human Brain?

The human brain may be uniquely tuned for musical pitch, a new study reports.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/auditory_perception_and_the_vagus_nerve-144x144-0_0-1280_1280.png?itok=njS8NQtE)

## Listen Up: Auditory Attention May Rely on Your Vagus Nerve

Diaphragmatic breathing may improve auditory processing via the vagus nerve.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_david_carillet-144x144-0_36-456_456.jpg?itok=IONmrAG6)

## Sleep-Disordered Breathing May Speed Up Aging

Nighttime breathing disorders may accelerate aging, a Harvard study reports.

Continue Reading

advertisement

## Most Popular

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/robot-144x144-0_12-638_638_0.jpg?itok=l0ctuoaj)

Sex Robots and the End of Civilization

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/image1501-144x144-186_0-515_514.jpg?itok=YY3gsGoj)

New Neuroscience Discovery May Disrupt Biology

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-05/sebastian_kaulitzk_medically_accurate_illustration_of_vagus_nerve_gut-brain_axis-144x144-0_0-750_750_0.jpg?itok=Fqgj60gq)

Longer Exhalations Are an Easy Way to Hack Your Vagus Nerve

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/narcissism_pathway_use_danielsampaioneto-144x144-37_64-335_335.jpg?itok=YsR7HbxU)

What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/architecture-buildings-city-220444-144x144-537_0-1334_1337.jpg?itok=cQR3llvb)

The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind

advertisement

## More Like This

  * Studies Show Long-Term Effects of Cannabis on the Brain 
  * Recommitting is the Key to Long-Term Recovery from Alcoholism
  * How Does Practice Hardwire Long-Term Muscle Memory?
  * How to Properly Sustain and Master Your Long-term Pursuits
  * Long-Term Marijuana Dependence Linked to Problems at Midlife

## Find a Therapist

Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from Psychology
Today.

### Cities:

  * Atlanta, GA
  * Austin, TX
  * Baltimore, MD
  * Boston, MA
  * Brooklyn, NY
  * Charlotte, NC
  * Chicago, IL
  * Columbus, OH
  * Dallas, TX
  * Denver, CO
  * Detroit, MI
  * Houston, TX
  * Indianapolis, IN
  * Jacksonville, FL
  * Las Vegas, NV
  * Los Angeles, CA
  * Louisville, KY
  * Memphis, TN
  * Miami, FL
  * Milwaukee, WI
  * Minneapolis, MN
  * Nashville, TN
  * New York, NY
  * Oakland, CA
  * Omaha, NE
  * Philadelphia, PA
  * Phoenix, AZ
  * Pittsburgh, PA
  * Portland, OR
  * Raleigh, NC
  * Sacramento, CA
  * Saint Louis, MO
  * San Antonio, TX
  * San Diego, CA
  * San Francisco, CA
  * San Jose, CA
  * Seattle, WA
  * Tucson, AZ
  * Washington, DC

Are you a Therapist?

Get Listed Today

Psychology Today

![Facebook](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-facebook.svg)

![Twitter](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-twitter.svg)

![Instagram](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-instagram.svg)

## Recent Issues

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Subscribe Today!

  * About
  * Privacy
  * Terms

United States ![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/actions/country-switcher-

body.svg) v

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Psychology Today (C) 2019 Sussex Publishers, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

