

Jump to navigation

![Colorado The Official Web

Portal](https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/co_C_state_web_portal_reverse_rgb.png)

Translate

![Banner for Revenue Web

site](https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/styles/img_banner_941_x_148/public/DOR.png?itok=5v1KH07x)

Skip to main content

  * Home
  * For Customers
    * Send a Question or Concern
    * Quick Answers
    * Citizens' Advocate
    * Divisions
    * Enforcement Division
    * Lottery
    * Division of Motor Vehicles
    * Taxation Division
    * Rulemaking Information
    * Colorado Open Records Act (CORA)
  * For Media
  * For Researchers
    * Statistics and Reports
    * Annual Report
    * General Fund Net Tax Collections
    * Liquor Excise Taxes
    * Local Distribution Reports
    * Marijuana Sales Reports
    * Marijuana Tax Data
    * Motor Fuel Taxes
    * Retail Sales Reports
    * Sales Tax Exemption Study
    * Statistics of Income
    * Tax Profile and Expenditure Reports
    * Voluntary Contributions
    * Statistics Request Form
    * Colorado Open Records Act (CORA)
    * Quick Answers
  * About CDOR
    * Executive Director's Office
    * Organization Chart
    * Hearings Division
    * DMV Hearings
    * Hearing Forms
    * Quick Answers
    * Contact Us
    * Human Resources
  * Contact Us
  * Join the Team
  * Statutorily Required Reports

## You are here

  1. For Researchers › 
  2. Marijuana Tax Data

# Marijuana Tax Data

**_* NOTICE 6/11/2019_** * -- At the Colorado Department of Revenue, we
anticipate reaching an exciting milestone with May's marijuana tax revenue
figures. As a result, we plan to delay the release of both our monthly
marijuana sales and marijuana tax revenue reports by one business day. Please
check back here tomorrow. If you are a member of the media with questions,
please email Shannon Gray, Marijuana Communications Specialist at
shannon.gray@state.co.us.

##

The marijuana tax reports show tax revenue collected monthly as posted in the
Colorado state accounting system.

For more information, please see the Marijuana Taxes | File page.

![](/pacific/sites/default/files/u/34586/0419_MarijuanaTaxDataGraph.png)

The **table below** shows medical and retail marijuana tax and fee collections
totals by calendar year starting in 2014. Although sales of medical marijuana
began prior to 2014, the Department of Revenue did not report tax collection
data until February of 2014, after retail marijuana sales began.

**Marijuana Taxes, Licenses, and Fee Revenue**

**Calendar Year**

| **Revenue By Calendar Year** | **Total Revenue Since Feb 2014**  
\---|---|---

2014 (Feb - Dec)

|

$67,594,323

| $67,597,323

2015

|

$130,411,173

| $198,005,496

2016

|

$193,604,810

| $391,610,306

2017

|

$247,368,473

| $638,978,779  
2018 | $266,529,637 | $905,508,416  
2019 (Jan - Apr) | $87,662,566 | $993,170,982

Updated May 2019

Calendar year is defined as January 1 - December 31

**Detailed monthly summary by tax type to date:** Excel, PDF

The Marijuana Tax Data Reports on this page are not the same as the Marijuana
Sales Reports. The Marijuana Sales Reports show unaudited monthly sales as
self-reported by businesses on State sales returns and do not use Metrc® data
(the Marijuana Enforcement Division's Marijuana Inventory Tracking System).
The Marijuana Tax Data reports show tax revenue collected monthly as posted in
the State's accounting system.

Appropriations and expenditures of marijuana tax collections can be found on
the Disposition of Marijuana Tax Revenue webpage.

DID YOU KNOW? Colorado's Marijuana Enforcement Division released the 2017
Colorado Marijuana Market Size and Demand Study, which provides an updated
view and assessment of Colorado’s marijuana market and improves upon the
original 2014 market study methods. See the report and fact sheet here:
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/enforcement/marijuana-related-reports-studies

**View and download monthly reports below:**

Total Marijuana Taxes, Licenses, and Fees

**These reports show monthly total marijuana tax and fee revenue. Total
marijuana revenue includes:**

  * 2.9% state sales tax on medical marijuana and retail marijuana

    * Retail marijuana is exempt from the state sales tax starting July 1, 2017

    * The first report reflecting this exemption is August 2017

  * State retail marijuana sales tax

    * 10% rate from January 1, 2014 - June 30, 2017; 15% rate starting July 1, 2017

    * The first report reflecting the 15% rate is August 2017

  * 15% state retail marijuana excise tax

  * Marijuana application and license fees

For more information, please see the Marijuana Taxes | File page.

2019

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF

2018

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2017

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2016

  * January Excel, PDF 
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2015

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2014

  * January (Revenue collections began in February 2014)
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

State Sales Tax 2.9%

**These reports show monthly state sales tax (2.9%) revenue from medical
marijuana and retail marijuana by county. Retail marijuana is exempt starting
July 1, 2017. (Note: The first report reflecting this exemption is August
2017.)**

For more information, please see the Marijuana Taxes | File page.

2019

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF

2018

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2017

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2016

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2015

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2014

  * January (Revenue collections began in February 2014)
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

State Retail Marijuana Sales Tax

**These reports show the monthly state and local shares of the state retail
marijuana sales tax revenue.**

  * From January 1, 2014 – June 30, 2017, the state retail marijuana sales tax rate was 10%, the state share was 85% of the total tax collected, and the local government share was 15% of the total tax collected

  * Starting July 1, 2017, the state retail marijuana sales tax rate is 15%, the state share is 90% of the total tax collected, and the local government share is 10% of the total tax collected. (Note: The first report reflecting the 15% rate is August 2017.) 

For more information, please see the Marijuana Taxes | File page.

2019

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF

2018

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2017

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2016

  * January Excel, PDF
  * February Excel, PDF
  * March Excel, PDF
  * April Excel, PDF
  * May Excel, PDF
  * June Excel, PDF
  * July Excel, PDF
  * August Excel, PDF
  * September Excel, PDF
  * October Excel, PDF
  * November Excel, PDF
  * December Excel, PDF

2015

  * January 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * February 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * March 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * April 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * May 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * June 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * July 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * August 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * September 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * October 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * November 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * December 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF

2014

  * January 
    * Revenue collections began in February 2014
  * February 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * March 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * April 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * May 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * June 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * July 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * August 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * September 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * October 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * November 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF
  * December 
    * Distributed to Local Jurisdictions Excel, PDF
    * Sales Tax 2.9% and 10% Excel, PDF

For inquiries regarding these reports, please contact the Office of Research
and Analysis.

Tweet

  * Revenue Home

  * | Send a Concern

  * | Media Center

  * | Website Feedback

  * | Join the Team

  * | Social Media Policy

https://twitter.com/CO_Revenue

https://www.facebook.com/ColoradoRevenue/

© 2019 State of Colorado | Transparency Online | Accessibility

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

