

  * Billionaires 

    * All Billionaires 
    * World's Billionaires 
    * Forbes 400 
    * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
    * China's Richest 
    * India's Richest 
    * Indonesia's Richest 
    * Korea's Richest 
    * Thailand's Richest 
    * Japan's Richest 
    * Australia's Richest 
    * Taiwan's Richest 
    * Singapore's Richest 
    * Philippines' Richest 
    * Hong Kong's Richest 
    * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation 

    * All Innovation 

    * AI & Big Data 
    * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
    * Cloud 100 2018 
    * Consumer Tech 
    * Cybersecurity 
    * Enterprise & Cloud 
    * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
    * Games 
    * Green Tech 
    * Healthcare 
    * Oracle BrandVoice 
    * SAP BrandVoice 
    * Science 
    * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
    * Sharing Economy 
    * Social Media 
    * T-Mobile 
    * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership 

    * All Leadership 

    * Careers 
    * CMO Network 
    * Crowe BrandVoice 
    * Deloitte BrandVoice 
    * Diversity & Inclusion 
    * Education 
    * Entrepreneurs 
    * ForbesWomen 
    * Franchises 
    * Leadership Strategy 
    * Small Business 
    * Under 30 
    * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money 

    * All Money 

    * Banking & Insurance 
    * Crypto & Blockchain 
    * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
    * Fintech 
    * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
    * Investing 
    * Markets 
    * Personal Finance 
    * Retirement 
    * Taxes 
    * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
    * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer 

    * All Consumer 

    * Food & Drink 
    * Hollywood & Entertainment 
    * Media 
    * Real Estate 
    * Retail 
    * SportsMoney 
    * Industry 

    * All Industry 

    * Aerospace & Defense 
    * Energy 
    * Flexport BrandVoice 
    * Manufacturing 
    * Policy 
    * Transportation 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle 

    * All Lifestyle 

    * Arts 
    * Boats & Planes 
    * Capital One BrandVoice 
    * Cars & Bikes 
    * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
    * Dining & Drinking 
    * Forbes Travel Guide 
    * ForbesLife 
    * Watches & Jewelry 
    * Travel 
    * Vices 
    * BrandVoice 

    * AppDynamics 

    * Capital One 
    * Cole Haan 
    * Crowe 
    * Deloitte 
    * ExtraHop 
    * Flexport 
    * Impact Partners 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
    * Oracle 
    * SAP 
    * ServiceNow 
    * T-Mobile 
    * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor 

    * All Advisor 

    * Credit Cards 
    * Personal Loans 
    * Brokerage 
    * Checking Accounts 
    * Savings Accounts 
    * Featured 

    * 30 Under 30 2019 

    * Daily Dozen Briefing 
    * Forbes8 
    * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
    * Forbes Editors' Picks 
    * Forbes Finds 
    * Forbes Insights: AI 
    * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
    * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
    * Forbes Video 
    * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
    * Newsletters 
    * PMI BrandVoice: 3 Ways To Future-Proof Your Business 
    * Tech MD 
    * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work 

# Cannabis Is A Tax Bonanza For States

![Nick

Kovacevich](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a424fa1f742a6a1a953dbcf7bfecd8e?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Nick Kovacevich

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

Markets I write about business and the legal cannabis industry.

  * Share to facebook __
  * Share to twitter __
  * Share to linkedin __

A customer prepares to pay for an order with cash on the first day of retail
recreational marijuana sales at the Cultivate Holdings dispensary in
Leicester, Massachusetts, U.S., on Tuesday, Nov. 20, 2018. Cultivate and New
England Treatment Access, in Northampton received final regulatory approval
Friday from the state Cannabis Control Commission to open this week. They will
be the first commercial marijuana stores to operate in the eastern U.S.
Photographer: Scott Eisen/Bloomberg

© 2018 Bloomberg Finance LP

_With every election, new states legalize some form of cannabis. That’s
proving to be good for their bottom lines. _

During the recent midterm elections, much of the country was focused on the
growing divide between red and blue. But smart investors were focused on a
different color — green, as in the color of cannabis. Michigan became the 10th
state to legalize recreational use, while Utah and Missouri became the 32nd
and 33rd states to legalize medical cannabis. The rising green tide promises
new streams of tax revenue and job growth.

The states that have legalized are rightly optimistic about the potential for
cannabis taxes to start helping pay for their roads, schools and local
governments. Take Michigan, where recreational cannabis will be taxed at 10%.
The state has estimated it will generate $737.9 million in additional tax
revenue in the first four years after legalization. That’s enough to meet the
budget for the state’s police force for an entire year, or plug its shortfall
in funding for special education.

Some states are already reaping the benefits of legalization. Nevada is
pouring $42.5 million in taxes (far exceeding original predictions) from the
latest fiscal year into its Rainy Day Fund, which had been close to running
dry. Colorado and Washington, which were the first two U.S. states to legalize
recreational use, collected nearly $250 million and $320 million respectively
in cannabis-related taxes and fees in 2017.

State revenues are also looking up on the East Coast: Massachusetts has
forecast that recreational cannabis sales will generate $216 million in the
first two years. Since the state’s first cannabis shops sold more than $2.2
million worth of products during the first five days of sales, this does not
appear to be blind optimism.

These tax revenue numbers are impressive, but it is still early days. The size
of the legal cannabis market could grow to a whopping $25 billion by 2025,
_according to_ New Frontier Data. Bulging state purses could help get the
market there even more quickly. If states see their neighbors capturing
millions more per year from the burgeoning industry, it should theoretically
burnish the economic case for legalization, and accelerate the process.

The U.S. cannabis industry is also generating new jobs. There have already
been 80,000 new jobs created in California because of cannabis sales,
producing a $3.5 billion increase in labor income, according to a study by ICF
International.

And the University of Illinois has found that the taxation and regulation of
cannabis could create nearly 24,000 new jobs and generate over $500 million in
new revenue for that state. The entire cannabis industry has the potential to
create more than 300,000 new jobs by 2020.

To keep the ball rolling, states need to work out the kinks in their cannabis
programs. Ohio, for example, was banking on hundreds of millions of dollars of
additional revenue when it legalized cannabis in 2015, but the state still has
not managed to roll out its legal cannabis program.

Then there’s the problem of setting up the correct tax structure: too low and
the state will miss out on revenue; too high and users could be tempted by the
black market. It is tough to get it right the first time round, and as states
tinker with the tax formula, it will mean that forecasting revenue from
cannabis sales will initially be more art than science.

However, the biggest obstacle to a fair, smooth-functioning and lucrative tax
regime for cannabis is that same old story: the product’s illegality at the
federal level. Some form of cannabis may now be legal in two-thirds of the
states, but at the federal level it’s still considered a Schedule 1 drug in
the same category as heroin.

That forces cannabis companies to conduct transactions mostly in cash, which
can make paying the correct taxes difficult and auditing those companies even
harder.

And despite being technically viewed as outlaws by their own federal
government, cannabusinesses sometimes hand over nearly all of their profits to
the taxman. There are stories of them regularly paying an effective tax rate
of up to 90%, compared to the rate of around 30% paid by other businesses.
This is largely because of a single sentence in Tax Code 280E that disallows
standard tax deductions such as rent, utilities and labor for cannabis trade
or business expenses.

The green wave is beginning to deliver that long-promised tax bonanza — but
there’s still a long way to go.

![Nick

Kovacevich](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5a424fa1f742a6a1a953dbcf7bfecd8e?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Nick Kovacevich

Contributor

I am the CEO and cofounder of KushCo Holdings, Inc. (OTCQB: KSHB), the parent
company to a diverse group of business units that are transformative leaders
in the cannabi...

Read More

  * Print
  * Site Feedback
  * Tips
  * Corrections
  * Reprints & Permissions
  * Terms
  * Privacy

  * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.

  * AdChoices

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

