

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

  * Comments & replies 
  * Public profile 
  * Account details 
  * Emails & marketing 

* * *

  * Membership 
  * Contributions 
  * Subscriptions 

* * *

  * Sign out 

Search

  * switch to the International edition 
  * switch to the UK edition 
  * switch to the US edition 
  * switch to the Australia edition 

current edition: International edition

  * News 
  * Opinion 
  * Sport 
  * Culture 
  * Lifestyle 

Show More __

  * __News
    * World news 
    * UK news 
    * Science 
    * Cities 
    * Global development 
    * Football 
    * Tech 
    * Business 
    * Environment 
    * Obituaries 
  * __Opinion
    * The Guardian view 
    * Columnists 
    * Cartoons 
    * Opinion videos 
    * Letters 
  * __Sport
    * Football 
    * Cricket 
    * Rugby union 
    * Tennis 
    * Cycling 
    * F1 
    * Golf 
    * US sports 
  * __Culture
    * Books 
    * Music 
    * TV & radio 
    * Art & design 
    * Film 
    * Games 
    * Classical 
    * Stage 
  * __Lifestyle
    * Fashion 
    * Food 
    * Recipes 
    * Love & sex 
    * Health & fitness 
    * Home & garden 
    * Women 
    * Men 
    * Family 
    * Travel 
    * Money 

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

  * Make a contribution 
  * Subscribe 

  * __International edition

    * switch to the UK edition 
    * switch to the US edition 
    * switch to the Australia edition 
  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 
  * The Guardian app 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * Pictures 
  * Newsletters 
  * Today's paper 
  * Inside the Guardian 
  * The Observer 
  * Guardian Weekly 
  * Crosswords 
  * Facebook 
  * Twitter 

  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 

  * World 

  * UK 
  * Science 
  * Cities 
  * Global development 
  * Football 
  * Tech 
  * Business 
  * Environment 
  * Obituaries 

More

Drugs

This article is more than **1 year old**

# Religious leaders get high on magic mushrooms ingredient – for science

This article is more than **1 year old**

Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore enlists priests, rabbis and a Buddhist
to test the effects of psychedelic drugs on religious experience

Hannah Devlin Science correspondent

@hannahdev

Sat 8 Jul 2017 07.30 BST Last modified on Fri 14 Jul 2017 17.45 BST

  * Share on Facebook
  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email

![The experiment aims to assess whether a transcendental experience alters the

participants’ religious

thinking.](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/4e83b3f710949ba6d82614821d6d3f93dd1786b9/0_1019_3125_1875/master/3125.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=a844b18f5a0e9fca650436ac45db4c2d)

The experiment aims to assess whether a transcendental experience alters the
participants’ religious thinking. Photograph: Fredrik Skold/Alamy

A Catholic priest, a Rabbi and a Buddhist walk into a bar and order some magic
mushrooms. It may sound like the first line of a bad joke, but this scenario
is playing out in one of the first scientific investigations into the effects
of psychedelic drugs on religious experience – albeit in a laboratory rather
than a bar.

Scientists at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore have enlisted two dozen
religious leaders from a wide range of denominations, to participate in a
study in which they will be given two powerful doses of psilocybin, the active
ingredient in magic mushrooms.

Dr William Richards, a psychologist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore,
Maryland who is involved in the work, said: “With psilocybin these profound
mystical experiences are quite common. It seemed like a no-brainer that they
might be of interest, if not valuable, to clergy.”

The experiment, which is currently under way, aims to assess whether a
transcendental experience makes the leaders more effective and confident in
their work and how it alters their religious thinking.

Despite most organised religions frowning on the use of illicit substances,
Catholic, Orthodox and Presbyterian priests, a Zen Buddhist and several rabbis
were recruited. The team has yet to persuade a Muslim imam or Hindu priest to
take part, but “just about all the other bases are covered,” according to
Richards.

After preliminary screening, including medical and psychological tests, the
participants have been given two powerful doses of psilocybin in two sessions,
one month apart.

The sessions will be conducted in a living room-like setting at New York
University and Johns Hopkins in Baltimore with two “guides” present. The
participants will be given the drug and then spend time lying on a couch,
wearing eyeshades and listening to religious music on headphones to augment
their inward spiritual journey.

“Their instruction is to go within and collect experiences,” Richards said,
after presenting his work at the Breaking Convention conference in London this
month. “So far everyone incredibly values their experience. No one has been
confused or upset or regrets doing it.”

A full analysis of the outcomes will take place after a one-year follow-up
with the participants, whose identities are being kept anonymous. “It is too
early to talk about results, but generally people seem to be getting a deeper
appreciation of their own religious heritage,” he said. “The dead dogma comes
alive for them in a meaningful way. They discover they really believe this
stuff they’re talking about.”

There is also a suggestion that after their psychedelic journey, the leaders’
notions of religion shifted away from the sectarian towards something more
universal. “They get a greater appreciation for other world religions. Other
ways up the mountain, if you will,” said Richards.

“In these transcendental states of consciousness, people seem to get to levels
of consciousness that seem universal,” he added. “So a good rabbi can
encounter the Buddha within him.”

The notion that hallucinogenic drugs can bring about mystical experiences is
not new and was previously studied in a famous Harvard study known as the
“Good Friday experiment”. The study involved a group of seminary scholars
being given psilocybin during the Easter-season service to see how it altered
their experience of the liturgy. The latest work is thought to be the first
involving religious leaders from different faiths.

Is this work really science, though? Richards argues that it is, saying that
the team is using detailed psychology questionnaires and independent raters in
their assessments.

The John Hopkins team are one of several research groups around the world
making the case for using psychedelic drugs, such as psilocybin, LSD and MDMA,
in psychiatry. Psilocybin has been shown to be remarkably effective at lifting
acute anxiety in cancer patients at the end of life, while other current
trials are looking at the use of psychoactive drugs in treating conditions
ranging from post-traumatic stress disorder to severe depression and
alcoholism.

As the use of mind-expanding drugs makes the transition from counter-culture
to mainstream medicine, scientists take different views on how the field
should be presented to the outside world.

Ben Sessa, a clinical psychiatrist and researcher at Imperial College London,
has urged journalists to focus on the “rigorous science”. “Are you going to
focus on the tie-dye and the dreads … or are you going to look at the cutting-
edge neuroscience here?” he asked. “I can’t tell you how to do your job, but
if I was you, I’d not look back to the past, I’d look to the future.”

Others are more openly enthusiastic about the broader, non-medical, uses of
psychedelic drugs. “My wild fantasy is that, probably some time after I’m long
dead, these drugs are used in seminary training, rabbinical training,” said
Richards, who began research into psychedelics in the 1960s. “Why shouldn’t
the opportunity be there to explore deeply spiritual states of consciousness
in a legal way?”

Topics

  * Drugs 

  * Religion 

  * news 

  * Share on Facebook

  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email
  * Share on LinkedIn
  * Share on Pinterest
  * Share on WhatsApp
  * Share on Messenger

  * Reuse this content

## View all comments >

Order by

  * newest
  * oldest
  * recommendations

Show 25

  * 25
  * 50
  * 100
  * All

Threads

  * collapsed
  * expanded
  * unthreaded

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## Most popular

  * World 
  * UK 
  * Science 
  * Cities 
  * Global development 
  * Football 
  * Tech 
  * Business 
  * Environment 
  * Obituaries 

  * Contact us

  * Complaints & corrections
  * SecureDrop
  * Work for us
  * Privacy policy
  * Cookie policy
  * Terms & conditions
  * Help

  * All topics

  * All writers
  * Digital newspaper archive
  * Facebook
  * Twitter

  * Advertise with us

  * Search UK jobs
  * Dating
  * Discount Codes

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Drugs%2CScience%2CReligion%2CWorld+news%2CUS+news)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

