

Dual Diagnosis

All calls to Foundations Recovery  
Network are confidential. Get help today 615-490-9376

  * About Us
  * Contact Us

  * Locations

  * Treatment
    * What is Dual Diagnosis?
    * Co-occurring Disorders Treatment
    * Alcohol Treatment
    * Finding Help
    * Guide to Drug Detox
    * Interventions
    * Recovery Support Alternatives
    * Managing Medications: ADHD/ADD
    * Managing Medications: Antidepressants
    * Managing Medications: Bipolar Disorder
    * Managing Medications: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
    * Testing and Assessments
    * Types of Therapy
    * Apps for Addiction Recovery and Mental Health
  * Drug Addiction
    * Alcohol Addiction
    * Benzodiazepine Addiction
    * Heroin Abuse
    * Insurance Information
    * Prescription Drug Addiction
    * Study: Addiction is a Brain Disease
  * Mental Disorders
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    * OCD
    * Panic & Anxiety
    * Personality Disorder
    * PTSD
    * Schizoaffective Disorder
    * Drug-Induced Psychosis
  * Our Research
  * Resources & Publications

    * National Research Statistics: Charts & Graphs
    * When Someone You Love Has Mental Illness
    * Childhood Trauma and Addiction
    * Want to Suggest Treatment to a Loved One? Read This First
    * Addiction & Mental Illness: Does One Cause the Other?
    * When It’s More Than Just an Alcohol Problem
    * Stigma Remains as Illegal Drug Use Increases
    * 'Mental Health Days' Are Real
    * All Articles & Publications
  * Home

  * Locations
  * Treatment
    * What is Dual Diagnosis?
    * Co-occurring Disorders Treatment
    * Alcohol Treatment
    * Finding Help
    * Guide to Drug Detox
    * Interventions
    * Recovery Support Alternatives
    * Managing Medications: ADHD/ADD
    * Managing Medications: Antidepressants
    * Managing Medications: Bipolar Disorder
    * Managing Medications: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
    * Testing and Assessments
    * Types of Therapy
    * Apps for Addiction Recovery and Mental Health
  * Drug Addiction
    * Alcohol Addiction
    * Benzodiazepine Addiction
    * Heroin Abuse
    * Insurance Information
    * Prescription Drug Addiction
    * Study: Addiction is a Brain Disease
  * Mental Disorders
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    * OCD
    * Panic & Anxiety
    * Personality Disorder
    * PTSD
    * Schizoaffective Disorder
    * Drug-Induced Psychosis
  * Our Research
  * Resources & Publications
    * National Research Statistics: Charts & Graphs
    * When Someone You Love Has Mental Illness
    * Childhood Trauma and Addiction
    * Want to Suggest Treatment to a Loved One? Read This First
    * Addiction & Mental Illness: Does One Cause the Other?
    * When It’s More Than Just an Alcohol Problem
    * Stigma Remains as Illegal Drug Use Increases
    * 'Mental Health Days' Are Real
    * All Articles & Publications
  * About Us
  * Contact Us

  * Home

  * Locations
  * Treatment
    * What is Dual Diagnosis?
    * Co-occurring Disorders Treatment
    * Alcohol Treatment
    * Finding Help
    * Guide to Drug Detox
    * Interventions
    * Recovery Support Alternatives
    * Managing Medications: ADHD/ADD
    * Managing Medications: Antidepressants
    * Managing Medications: Bipolar Disorder
    * Managing Medications: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
    * Testing and Assessments
    * Types of Therapy
    * Apps for Addiction Recovery and Mental Health
  * Drug Addiction
    * Alcohol Addiction
    * Benzodiazepine Addiction
    * Heroin Abuse
    * Insurance Information
    * Prescription Drug Addiction
    * Study: Addiction is a Brain Disease
  * Mental Disorders
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    * OCD
    * Panic & Anxiety
    * Personality Disorder
    * PTSD
    * Schizoaffective Disorder
    * Drug-Induced Psychosis
  * Our Research
  * Resources & Publications
    * National Research Statistics: Charts & Graphs
    * When Someone You Love Has Mental Illness
    * Childhood Trauma and Addiction
    * Want to Suggest Treatment to a Loved One? Read This First
    * Addiction & Mental Illness: Does One Cause the Other?
    * When It’s More Than Just an Alcohol Problem
    * Stigma Remains as Illegal Drug Use Increases
    * 'Mental Health Days' Are Real
    * All Articles & Publications
  * About Us
  * Contact Us

# Long-Term Health Risks Associated

HomeAlcohol AddictionLong-Term Health Risks Associated

![health risks of alcohol](http://dualdiagnosis.org/wp-

content/uploads/2013/03/Teen-Alcoholism-300x225.jpg)Alcoholism is one of the
leading lifestyle-related causes of disease and death in the United States.
According to statistics from the University of California at San Francisco,
alcohol abuse is responsible for 1,400 disease-related deaths, 17,000 motor
vehicle fatalities and 500,000 injuries in the US each year. The longer you
drink heavily, and the more alcohol you consume, the greater the damage you do
to your body and brain. Chronic alcohol abuse affects every major organ in the
body. It increases your risk of developing debilitating long-term conditions
like diabetes, obesity, liver disease, heart disease, dementia and some forms
of cancer.

At one time, alcoholism was viewed as a vice that could be overcome with
willpower alone. But the medical community now recognizes that alcoholism is a
chronic health condition with relapse rates that are comparable to diseases
like high blood pressure, diabetes or arthritis. Abstinence can't cure
alcoholism, but it can help you avoid some of the serious health risks of this
devastating disease. As with any other long-term health problem, recovery from
alcoholism requires professional support and a personal commitment to staying
sober.

## Physical Health Risks of Alcoholism

When consumed in moderation, alcohol is unlikely to cause long-term health
problems. In fact, there is evidence that light to moderate drinking may
benefit cardiovascular health. But according to _Alcohol Research & Health_ ,
defining safe limits for alcohol consumption isn't as easy as it sounds.
Moderate drinking is defined as no more than one alcoholic beverage per day
for women and no more than two drinks per day for men. However, differences in
body weight, age, tolerance and health condition make it hard to establish
general guidelines.

For someone who has a problem with alcohol, moderate drinking isn't a safe or
sensible option. Alcohol abuse is characterized by heavy, compulsive
consumption. If you're abusing alcohol, you may believe that you're in control
whenever you take a drink, but you probably end up going over your limit more
often than not.

An alcoholic will continue drinking in spite of these severe physical health
risks:

  * Liver disease (alcoholic hepatitis, cirrhosis and liver cancer)
  * Heart problems (chronic heart disease, hypertension, heart attack)
  * Digestive disorders (pancreatitis or gastritis)
  * Neurological disorders (stroke, dementia, memory loss)
  * Cancer (especially of the digestive tract, stomach, liver and breast)

Alcohol dependence is one of the most dangerous risks of alcohol abuse.
Frequent, heavy drinking can make the body physically reliant on alcohol to
function. Once you're chemically dependent on alcohol, you are at risk of the
life-threatening side effects of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (seizures,
delirium, high blood pressure, sudden fever, dehydration, etc.), if you try to
quit without professional support.

**Topics of Interest:**

![History-of-mental-health-treatment-research](http://dualdiagnosis.org/wp-

content/uploads/2013/07/History-of-mental-health-treatment-

research-150x150.jpg) History of Mental Health Treatment

![CryingQ&A](http://dualdiagnosis.org/wp-

content/uploads/2014/08/CryingQA-150x112.png)Q&A With Someone Who Has Been
Through an Intervention

![race-and-recovery](http://dualdiagnosis.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/race-

and-recovery-150x150.jpg)Race and Recovery

## Alcohol Addiction and Mental Health

Long-term alcohol abuse can have a devastating effect on your mental health.
The link between alcoholism and depression has long been acknowledged by
addiction specialists, and the Institute of Alcohol Studies in Great Britain
cautions that alcoholism is one of the leading risk factors for suicide. It's
unclear whether alcohol abuse is a consequence of depression, or whether
depression is caused by heavy alcohol consumption. In many individuals,
alcoholism develops as a way to cope with serious psychiatric disorders, such
as:

  * Major depression
  * Bipolar disorder
  * Schizophrenia

  * Generalized anxiety disorder

  * Obsessive-compulsive disorder
  * Post-traumatic stress disorder

If alcoholism and an underlying psychiatric condition, or a Dual Diagnosis,
are treated by professionals who are trained in integrated addiction care,
your chances of recovery are strong. The treatment centers that make up the
Foundations Recovery Network specialize in helping individuals with co-
occurring disorders build healthy, stable lives. To protect your health now
and in the future, contact our intake specialists for information about our
personalized treatment programs.

## Continue Reading

  * Chapter 4 -- Linkages For Mental Health and AOD Treatment
  * Chapter 3 -- Mental Health And Addiction Treatment Systems: Philosophical and Treatment Approach Issues
  * Mental Health Parity Act, Insurance and Rehab

![](/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/foundations-model.jpg)

## Search Our Site

## Our Treatment Centers

![](https://www.dualdiagnosis.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/michaels-

house-300x146.jpg)

### Michael's House

Michael's House is a unique drug and alcohol treatment facility located in the
beautiful San Jacinto Mountains in Palm Springs, California.

Details

  * ![](/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/integrated-treatment.jpg)
  * ![](/wp-content/uploads/ResearchHub.jpg)

## Further Reading About Long-Term Health Risks Associated

  * Abuse and Pregnancy
  * Alcohol in America
  * Alcoholism and Anxiety Disorder
  * Alcoholism Nature vs. Nurture
  * Are Heavy Drinkers Alcoholics?
  * Binge Drinking and Depression
  * Dilated Cardiomyopathy
  * Disease Theory of Alcoholism
  * Guide to Living With an Alcoholic
  * Historical Figures and Addiction
  * Is There a Cure for It?
  * Liver Damage Caused by Drinking
  * Long-Term Health Risks Associated
  * Risks of Alcohol Poisoning
  * Risks of Alcohol Poisoning
  * The Science of a Hangover
  * Using a Breathalyzer at Home
  * What Is a Functional Alcoholic?
  * What Is Wet Brain?
  * Women and Alcoholism

Dual Diagnosis logo

Co-occurring mental health conditions and substance abuse affect nearly 8.9
million yearly. Only 7.4% receive appropriate treatment. Few programs
specialize in treating dual diagnosis. Research reveals that people with co-
occurring disorders need specialized integrated treatment.

### Quick Links

  * Co-occurring Disorders
  * Dual Diagnosis
  * Chronic Depression
  * Obsessive Compulsive
  * Bipolar Disorders

###

  * Post Traumatic Stress
  * Schizoaffective Disorder
  * Borderline Personality
  * Panic and Anxiety
  * Prescription Drugs

### General Information

  * Contact Us
  * Black Bear Lodge
  * The Oaks at La Paloma
  * Michael's House
  * Privacy Policy
  * Statement of Ethics

(C)2019 Copyright Foundations Recovery Network.  
All Rights Reserved.

615-490-9376

Foundations Recovery Network

Supported by **Foundations Recovery Network** | 1000 Health Park Drive, Suite
400 Brentwood, TN 37027

Dual Diagnosis

Call to speak with a treatment admissions counselor

615-490-9376

Dual Diagnosis

Integrated Treatment of Substance Abuse & Mental Illness

All Calls Are Confidential 615-490-9376

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

