

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know » Want to know
more? Some FAQs about Marijuana

# Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know

Email Facebook Twitter

## Want to know more? Some FAQs about Marijuana

### What is marijuana? What is cannabis?

Marijuana refers to the dried leaves, flowers, stems, and seeds from the
_Cannabis sativa_ or _Cannabis indica_ plant. The terms cannabis and marijuana
are often used interchangeably. Extracts from the plant can be made into hash
oil or wax. Cannabis products contain the mind-altering chemical
_delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol_ (THC). They can also contain more than 400
other chemicals.

### How do people use marijuana?

People who use marijuana may roll loose marijuana leaves into a cigarette
(called a joint) or smoke it in a pipe or a water pipe, often referred to as a
bong. Some people mix marijuana into foods (called edibles) or use it to brew
a tea. Another method is to slice open a cigar and replace some or all of the
tobacco with marijuana, creating what is known as a blunt. Some people are
vaping --using electronic vaporizers (called e-vaporizers or vapes) that allow
people to inhale vapor and not smoke. Another popular method on the rise is
vaping THC-rich resins extracted from the marijuana plant, an often dangerous
practice called dabbing.

![Mother and daughter reading

together.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/momanddaughter.jpg)

### How many teens use marijuana?

NIDA's annual Monitoring the Future survey reports that marijuana use has
remained stable over the past few years among 8th, 10th, and 12th grade
students. About 10 percent of 8th graders, 26 percent of 10th graders, and 37
percent of 12th graders reported using marijuana in the last year. At the same
time, teens are developing more positive attitudes about using marijuana, with
71 percent of high school seniors saying they do not view regular marijuana
smoking as very harmful.9

Researchers have found that the use of marijuana and other drugs usually peaks
in the late teens and early twenties, then declines in later years. Therefore,
marijuana use among young people remains a natural concern for parents and is
the focus of continuing research, particularly regarding its impact on brain
development, which continues into a person's early twenties. Researchers are
studying how long marijuana's effects last and if the changes could be
permanent.

### How does marijuana produce the high?

When people smoke marijuana, they feel its effects almost immediately. The
psychoactive chemical THC spreads to every organ in the body, including the
brain, and attaches to specific receptors on nerve cells. This affects the
areas of the brain that control pleasure, memory, thinking, concentration,
movement, coordination, appetite, pain, and sensory and time perception.

THC is structurally similar to chemicals produced naturally by the body,
called _endocannabinoids,_ which play a role in normal brain development and
function. Because of the endocannabinoid system's wide-ranging influence over
many critical functions, marijuana can have multiple effects--not just on the
brain, but on a person's general health. Some of these effects last only as
long as marijuana is in the body while others may build up over time to cause
longer-lasting problems, including addiction.

Although detectable amounts of THC can remain in the body for days or even
weeks after use, the noticeable effects of smoked marijuana usually last from
1 to 3 hours. If consumed in foods, the effects come on slower and can last
for many hours.

### What are marijuana's effects on the brain, body, and behavior?

**Short-term effects (while using or right after using)**

  * learning, attention, and memory problems 
  * distorted perception (sights, sounds, time, touch) 
  * poor coordination and motor skills 
  * increased heart rate 
  * anxiety, paranoia 
  * psychosis (not common) 

**Effects that last longer than the short term (a few days) but may not be
permanent**

  * learning and memory problems 
  * sleep problems 

**Long-term effects (effects of repeated use)**

  * risk of marijuana addiction 
  * long-term learning and memory problems 
  * if heavy use begins during youth 
  * risk for chronic cough, bronchitis 
  * risk of schizophrenia in some people with higher genetic risk 
  * in rare cases, risk of recurrent episodes of severe nausea and vomiting 

![This graph shows that daily marijuana use is more common among 12th graders

than daily cigarette use. In 1997, 24.6% of 12th graders smoked cigarettes

daily and 1.9% used marijuana daily. In 2017, 4.2% of 12th graders smoked

cigarettes daily and 5.9% used marijuana daily.

](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/content_image_landscape/public/daily_marijuana_use.gif?itok=uCD3-4Xm)

### What determines how marijuana affects an individual?

Marijuana can be addictive. People who begin using being before 18 are more
likely to develop marijuana use disorder than adults. 2

Like any other drug, marijuana's effects on a person depends on many factors,
including the person's previous experience with the drug or other drugs,
biology (e.g., genes), how the drug is taken, and the drug's potency (its
strength).

### How important is marijuana potency?

Potency--the amount of THC contained in the marijuana--has been increasing
steadily in the past few decades as marijuana farmers respond to market
demand. These findings are based on analyses of marijuana samples seized by
law enforcement.

So what does this actually mean? For someone new to the drug, it may mean
exposure to higher concentrations of THC, with a greater chance of a negative
or unpredictable reaction. For those more experienced with marijuana, it may
mean a greater risk for addiction if they are exposing themselves to high
doses on a regular basis. However, the full range of consequences linked with
marijuana's higher potency is not well understood. It is unknown how much
people who use marijuana adjust for the increase in potency by using less.

### Does using marijuana lead to other drug use?

The majority of people who use marijuana do not go on to use other "harder"
substances, like cocaine or heroin. However, some research shows that people
often try marijuana before trying other substances.10 We also know from animal
studies that rats given repeated doses of THC show heightened behavioral
responses and altered brain activation not only when further exposed to THC,
but also when exposed to other drugs such as morphine.11 Researchers are now
looking at the possibility that exposure to marijuana as a teen can cause
changes in the brain that make a person more likely to get addicted to
marijuana or other drugs, such as alcohol, opioids, or cocaine.

It is important to point out, however, that research has not fully explained
any of these observations, which are complex and likely to involve a
combination of biological, social, and psychological factors.

### Does smoking marijuana cause lung cancer?

Because edibles contain marijuana are often unlabeled or poorly labeled, teens
can use too much waiting for the high and end up in the emergency room with
side effects.

Studies have not found an increased risk of lung cancer in marijuana smokers
compared with nonsmokers. However, marijuana smoke does irritate the lungs and
increases the likelihood of other lung and breathing problems.12,13 Moreover,
many people who smoke marijuana also smoke cigarettes, which do cause cancer,
and research suggests that quitting tobacco can be harder if the person uses
marijuana.

### Can marijuana produce withdrawal symptoms when someone quits?

Yes. Many people who use the drug long-term and then stop have symptoms that
are similar to those of nicotine withdrawal--irritability, sleep problems,
anxiety, decreased appetite and various forms of physical discomfort--which
may prompt relapse (a return to drug use). Withdrawal symptoms are generally
mild and peak a few days after use has stopped. They gradually disappear
within about 2 weeks.14,15 While these symptoms do not pose an immediate
threat to health, they can make it hard for someone to stop using the drug.
Because withdrawal is not as obvious or as painful as withdrawal symptoms from
some other drugs such as opioids, many people do not realize that stopping
marijuana use can cause withdrawal symptoms.

### How harmful is K2/Spice (or "synthetic cannabinoids")?

Synthetic cannabinoids, which are sometimes also called K2 or Spice, consist
of many human-made mind-altering chemicals that are either sprayed on dried,
shredded plant material to be smoked, or sold as liquids to be inhaled in
e-vaporizers. These chemicals are called cannabinoids because they have
chemicals that act on the same brain cell receptors as THC, but are often much
more powerful and unpredictable. Because of this similarity, synthetic
cannabinoids are sometimes misleadingly called "synthetic marijuana" (or "fake
weed"), and are often labeled "not fit for human consumption." Many are now
illegal, but their manufacturers are constantly creating new chemical
compounds to sidestep legal restrictions. Their effects, like the ingredients,
often vary, but emergency rooms report large numbers of young people appearing
with rapid heart rates, vomiting, and negative mental responses including
hallucinations after using these substances. Some states are reporting an
increased number of overdose cases involving synthetic cannabinoid products
where users are experiencing severe bleeding, likely due to product
contamination.

### Are there treatments for people addicted to marijuana?

Behavioral therapies are available and are similar to those used for treating
other drug or alcohol addictions. These include motivational enhancement
therapies to develop people's own motivation to stay in treatment; cognitive
behavioral therapies to teach strategies for avoiding drug use and its
triggers (and for effectively managing stress); and motivational incentives,
which provide vouchers or small cash rewards for showing up for treatment and
staying drug free.

Most teens don't use marijuana.

There are currently no medications approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for treating marijuana addiction, although promising
research is under way to find medications to treat withdrawal symptoms and
ease craving and other effects of marijuana.

### What are other risks related to marijuana that my child should know?

Many parents and teens may not have thought about some of these risks:

Regular marijuana use affects the brain and leads to impaired memory,
judgment, and motor skills.

  * As with many misused drugs, marijuana use interferes with judgment, which can lead to risky behaviors. For example, someone using marijuana might drive under the influence or ride with someone else who is intoxicated and get into a car crash, or might engage in risky sexual behavior and contract a sexually transmitted infection. 
  * Regular marijuana use has been linked with increased risk for several mental problems, including depression, anxiety, suicidal thoughts, personality disturbances, and psychosis. Whether or not marijuana causes these problems, or is a response to them, is still unknown. More research is needed to confirm and better understand these links. 
  * Research suggests that marijuana use during pregnancy may be linked to future developmental and hyperactivity disorders.16 -19 However, the fact that pregnant women who use marijuana are also more likely to smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol makes it difficult to determine exactly how much of these effects are due to marijuana. In addition, some research suggests that after pregnancy, THC passes into the breast milk of nursing mothers in moderate amounts.20 More research is needed to learn how this affects the baby's developing brain. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends against using marijuana during pregnancy. 

### Is marijuana medicine?

Research shows that some chemicals in marijuana, THC as well as cannabidiol
(CBD), could have medical uses. The FDA has approved some THC-based
medications to treat nausea in patients undergoing chemotherapy and to help
patients with AIDS gain an appetite. However, these medications are not
smoked. The FDA has also approved a CBD oil-based medication to treat rare and
severe forms of epilepsy. Additional clinical trials are being conducted to
develop medications that contain THC and/or CBD for pain relief and seizure
disorders.

### How can I tell if my child has been using marijuana?

Parents should be aware of changes in their child's behavior, such as not
brushing hair or teeth, skipping showers, changes in mood, and challenging
relationships with family members, and a change in friends. In addition,
changes in grades, skipping classes or missing school, loss of interest in
sports or other favorite activities, changes in eating or sleeping habits, and
getting in trouble in school or with law enforcement could all be related to
drug use--or may indicate other problems. See the list of specific warning
signs for marijuana use below.

If your child is using marijuana, he or she might:

  * seem unusually giggly and/or uncoordinated 
  * have very red, bloodshot eyes or use eye drops often 
  * have a hard time remembering things that just happened 
  * have drugs or drug paraphernalia--drug-related items including pipes and rolling papers--possibly claiming they belong to a friend if confronted 
  * have strangely smelling clothes or bedroom 
  * use incense and other deodorizers 
  * wear clothing or jewelry or have posters that promote drug use 
  * have unexplained lack of money or extra cash on hand 

![This shows 4 pictures of brain scans from different angles, shaded in red,

yellow, blue, purple, and

green.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/content_image_landscape/public/brain_images.jpg?itok=PZIQvnOi)

Using cutting-edge imaging technology, scientists from the Adolescent Brain
Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study will look at how childhood experiences,
including use of any drugs, interact with each other and with a child's
changing biology to affect brain development and social, behavioral, academic,
health, and other outcomes. As the only study of its kind, the ABCD study will
yield critical insights into the foundational aspects of adolescence that
shape a person's future.

These brain images show the reward-related circuity in the cortical and
subcortical regions of the brain that tend to be more active when a person is
successful at achieving a reward. While all of the images show the regions of
the brain that are active to reward, the regions in yellow and red are the
most active.

_Courtesy of the ABCD Study. Adapted from Casey et al., 2018._  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2018.03.001

Prev Index Next

This page was last updated July 2018

![Want to know more? Some FAQs about

Marijuana](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/parents_mj_facts_thumb.png)

## Contents

  * A Letter to Parents
  * Talking to Your Kids: Communicating the Risks
  * Want to know more? Some FAQs about Marijuana
  * Starting the Conversation
  * Other Useful Resources
  * NIDA Truth Poll
  * References

## Get this Publication

  * Español
  * PDF (7MB)
  * ePub (253KB)
  * Kindle (566KB)
  * Order

## Ordering Publications

Call **1-877-643-2644** or:  
![NIDA Drug

Pubs](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/feat_drug_pubs%281%29.png)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, July 24). Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/marijuana-facts-parents-need-to-know

NIDA. "Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know." _National Institute on Drug
Abuse_ , 24 Jul. 2018, https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/marijuana-facts-
parents-need-to-know.

NIDA. Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know. National Institute on Drug Abuse
website. https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/marijuana-facts-parents-need-
to-know. July 24, 2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Featured Publications

![Cover art for Opioid Facts for

Teens](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/opioidsforteenscover.jpg?itok=j4M3QgvB)

Opioid Facts for Teens

![Science of Addiction

Cover](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/soa_cover_2018_0.gif?itok=ZFYtyFxC)

Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction

![](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/pinkandblue_pr_1.jpg?itok=y-uXmu4a)

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...

![Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to

Know](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/featured_pubs_cover/public/parents_mj_facts_cover.png?itok=doAsxOEp)

Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

