

Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for Delivery or Pick-Up

  * Home

Subscribe

5 November 2018 / culture

# Dispensary vs Street Weed: Is Dispensary Weed Better?

_Even in states like California, many weed lovers are sticking to their
dealers. Here’s why._

By Brittney Sanger, Herb

We’ve come a long way since street weed. Growing up, you had to go to a dealer
to get your bud and be happy with what he or she gave you. You didn’t know
what you were smoking, but weed was weed and that was good enough. Now that
weed is legal in 30 US states, not to mention all across Canada, weed shopping
is like shopping for groceries, except much more fun, obvs.

Weed smokers living in prohibition states don’t know that life, though, as
they are still stuck buying herb the good old-fashioned way. For now,
dispensary weed is just a dream that many are wishing would come true. At the
same time, plenty of people remain skeptical about legal weed. The thought of
dispensary bud paints a pretty picture, but there’s just one question: is it
actually better than the local hookup?

**Dispensary vs Street Weed: The Pros**

Dispensary weed has its pros for sure. You get to go to an actual store, which
can be as low-key as a neighborhood coffee shop or as high-end as the Apple
store—and you get to pick out exactly what you want. Every dispensary has a
menu that lists all the strains they have available, as well as other products
like wax, edibles, etc. Having a selection is a huge win not only because you
can always try new things, but also because you know what you’re consuming and
how much. That’s especially helpful for medicinal consumers who want to find
the right strain to relieve them from their ailment and for the high-chasing
crowd who is after the bud with the highest potency.

Dispensary weed is a sweet luxury to have, but that doesn’t always mean it’s
better than street weed. If you find the right dealer and you’re loyal,
they’ll usually hook you up with extra green. Moreover, some dealers will
front you weed, meaning they’ll let you get your bud right then and there and
pay them back later. That’s a blessing when you’re broke but need to smoke.

Buying bud from a dealer is also familiar and comfortable for many. You get to
know them over time, and they become much more of a best friend than a bud
man. And if they like you, they’ll even smoke you up on occasion.

**Street Weed vs Dispensary: The Cons**

Of course, the free smoke sessions and sweet hookups don’t come without risks.
Street bud is illegal to buy, sell, and smoke. If you’re caught, then the best
case scenario is that you pay a fine. But the more you distribute and possess,
the worst it gets, and you could face mandatory jail time, drug tests, rehab,
and more as a consequence.

Let’s not forget about the hoops you have to jump through to get street bud.
For one, you have to be able to get in touch for your dealer, which can be
easier said than done. You are always on their time. Not to mention, it’s
easier for them to rip you off, unless you’re the type to whip out the scale
on somebody.

Dispensary bud sounds like the perfect alternative to street bud, but even it
has its downs, one of them being the price. Dispensary weed is more often than
not more expensive than street weed not only because it’s higher quality
(depending on who you ask) but also because it’s taxed. Besides that, it’s
regulated, and there are rules as to how much you can buy, possess, etc.,
which vary state to state.

In California, for example, you used to be able to get ounces for as little as
$200. Dispensaries on the grey market would sell flower in these huge
canisters and you could just tell them how much you wanted. But now, with
California’s new recreational market, bud has to be packaged in a very
particular kind of way. That means, for the most part, you’re looking at
buying each eighth individually and they often are in the $60 range.

**Is Dispensary Weed Better?**

The thing about street bud is that it’s always going to be around, regardless
of how many states embrace legal marijuana. Until the end of time, there will
be people who have a special place in their heart for the local weed dealer
and will never turn to anywhere else for their supply. After all, it’s that
guy or gal that’s been serving them for years, not the dispensary that just
popped up down the road.

Dispensary weed is legal, but legal doesn’t always mean better. What it all
boils down to is the cannabis consumer, their preferences, and their
lifestyle. Not everyone needs a crazy selection of weed products. All they
want is what they know and love. Then again, a lack of choices has more limits
than benefits for certain users. With street weed, it’s nearly impossible to
monitor your dose, which is everything when you’re sensitive to high doses of
THC.

The dispensary vs street weed debate is far from over. If we’re honest, it
will probably never end. For now, it’s hard to say which is the better bud as
many of us have yet to get our hands on a legal nug. The good news is that
legal or not; there’s weed for everybody, so be thankful for your dealer, and
your budtender, too.

### Subscribe to Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for

Delivery or Pick-Up

Get the latest posts delivered right to your inbox

Subscribe
![Herb](/culture/content/images/2018/02/xherb.jpg.pagespeed.ic.aoPeYhPj-u.jpg)

#### Herb

Read more posts by this author.

Read More

-- Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for Delivery or Pick-
Up --

### culture

  * 5 Must-Read Books for Cannabis History Lovers
  * So Your Friend Got Too High on Cannabis — Here’s How to Help Them
  * 5 Ways to Relax when You’re Too Busy

See all 99 posts →

## 3 Best Cannabis Products for Thanksgiving

Thanksgiving is quickly approaching and though many of us like to go home for
the holidays it causes great stress for the rest of us. By Nicole Flanigan
Thanksgiving often brings everyone in

  * Team Muncheez 

![Team

Muncheez](/culture/content/images/2018/08/xprofile.png.pagespeed.ic.F7FmYCV5QF.png)

1 min read

news

## Amazon is Donating Money to Legalize Weed

Make a purchase, support your favorite herb. By Zack Fenech, Herb Thinking of
spending some of your hard-earned bread on Amazon? How about helping one of
the most important organizations to the legalization

  * Herb 

![Herb](/culture/content/images/2018/02/xherb.jpg.pagespeed.ic.aoPeYhPj-u.jpg)

1 min read

![Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for Delivery or Pick-

Up

icon](data:image/png;base64,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)
Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for Delivery or Pick-Up

--

Dispensary vs Street Weed: Is Dispensary Weed Better?

Share this

Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for Delivery or Pick-Up
(C) 2019 Latest Posts Ghost

# Subscribe to Muncheez | Find Legal Cannabis, Marijuana, Weed & CBD for

Delivery or Pick-Up

Stay up to date! Get all the latest & greatest posts delivered straight to
your inbox

Subscribe

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

