

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile
    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out

### Cancer Topics

  * Bladder Cancer
  * Brain Cancer
  * Breast Cancer
  * Cervical Cancer
  * Colorectal Cancer
  * Leukemia & Lymphoma
  * Lung Cancer
  * Melanoma
  * Multiple Myeloma
  * Ovarian Cancer
  * Pancreatic Cancer
  * Prostate Cancer

### Cancer Guide

  * Overview
  * Diagnosis
  * Treatment
  * Chemotherapy
  * Immunotherapy
  * CAM
  * Living With
  * Remission

### More Cancer Resources

  * News
  * Reference
  * Slideshows
  * Quizzes
  * Videos
  * Questions & Answers
  * Message Board
  * Find an Oncologist
  * Cancer Tests
  * Cancer Treatments
  * Cancer Remission
  * Cancer A-Z

  * Cancer

  * News

![](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/mobile/icons/target_icon.png)

#### Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

# Pot Smoke: Less Carcinogenic Than Tobacco?

Researchers Say THC May Curb Cancer-Causing Effects of Marijuana Smoke

From the WebMD Archives

Oct. 17, 2005 -- Although tobacco smoke and marijuana smoke are chemically
very similar, a new report argues that their cancer-causing effects may be
very different.

Both tobacco and cannabis smoke contain the same cancer-causing compounds
(carcinogens). Depending on what part of the plant is smoked, marijuana can
contain more of these harmful ingredients.

But a recent review of studies on the effects of marijuana and tobacco smoke
suggests that the cancer-promoting effects of these ingredients is increased
by the tobacco in nicotine and reduced by the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) found
in cannabis.

Previous studies have shown that THC can inhibit carcinogens in mice, and the
report suggests it may have the same protective effect against the carcinogens
found in smoke in humans. But researchers warn that even if THC lessens the
effects of these cancer-causing ingredients, cannabis smoke remains
carcinogenic.

## The Role of THC

In the article, published in _Harm Reduction Journal_ , researcher Robert
Melamede, PhD, of the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, argues that
tobacco smoke and marijuana smoke are not equally cancer-causing.

Research shows that nicotine and THC act on related pathways in the body, but
they bind to different receptors to activate these pathways. For example,
Melamede says the cells of the lungs are lined with nicotine receptors but do
not appear to contain receptors for THC.

He says that may explain why marijuana use has not been linked to lung cancer
as cigarette smoking has.

However, Melamede says the effects of cannabis and cannabis-like compounds are
complex and sometimes contradictory. The long-term effects of marijuana on an
aging population of users are not known; the effects may become similar to
what we see with tobacco. Also, marijuana is frequently used in combination
with tobacco and the two drugs may interact in yet unknown ways.

WebMD Health News Reviewed by Louise Chang, MD on October 17, 2005

#### Sources

SOURCES: Melamede, R. _Harm Reduction Journal_ , Sept. 22, 2005; vol 2. News
release, BioMed Central.

Â© 2005 WebMD, Inc. All rights reserved.

### Top Picks

  * Chemo: 3 Things You Need to Know
  * Lower Your Risk of Cancer
  * Liver Cancer: Symptoms, Tests, and Treatments
  * How Immunotherapy for Cancer Works
  * Cancer Remission: What Does It Mean?
  * Preparing for Chemotherapy

### further reading

  * Slideshow: Lung Cancer Risks -- Myths and Facts
  * Slideshow: Commonly Abused Drugs
  * Video: How Does Smoking Marijuana Hurt Your Brain?
  * Recreational Marijuana FAQ
  * Medical Marijuana in Colorado
  * Infertility: Tobacco, Marijuana, and Other Drugs
  * What Is Marijuana Abuse?
  * Marijuana Topics

### Today on WebMD

![man holding lung

xray](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2011/10_2011/lung_cancer_vaccine/110x70_lung_cancer_vaccine.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Lung Cancer Symptoms

What you need to know.

![stem

cells](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/stem_cell_transplant_for_blood_cancer_slideshow/110x70_stem_cell_transplant_for_blood_cancer_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Stem Cell Transplants

How they work for blood cancers.

![woman wearing pink

ribbon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/04_2012/breast_cancer_reclassified/110x70_breast_cancer_reclassified.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Breast Cancer Quiz

Separate fact from fiction.

![woman kissing

dog](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/ease_cancer_side_effects_ref_guide/110x70_ease_cancer_side_effects_ref_guide.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Cancer Side Effects

And how to best treat them.

### Recommended for You

![Jennifer Goodman Linn self-

portrait](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/community/ill_be_bald_or_fat_but_not_both/69x75_ill_be_bald_or_fat_but_not_both.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Blog

#### 'I'll Be Bald Or Fat But Not Both'

![what is your cancer

risk](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/cancer/69x75_thumbnail_what_is_your_cancer_risk_v01.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) HEALTH CHECK

#### What Is Your Cancer Risk?

![breast cancer overview

slideshow](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/cancer/69x75_thumbnail_breast_cancer_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### Breast Cancer: Symptoms, Treatment

![doctor and

patient](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/what_is_metastatic_prostate_cancer_15_ref_guide/69x75_what_is_metastatic_prostate_cancer_15_ref_guide.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### All About Prostate Cancer

![bald woman smelling

flowers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/complementary_cancer_treatment_slideshow/69x75_complementary_cancer_treatment_slideshow_alt.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### Complementary Treatment for Cancer

![lung cancer overview

slideshow](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/cancer/69x75_thumbnail_lung_cancer_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### A Visual Guide to Lung Cancer

![ovarian cancer overview

slideshow](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/cancer/69x75_thumbnail_ovarian_cancer_overview_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### Ovarian Cancer Explained

![blood

test](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/cml_treatment_guide_ref_guide/69x75_cml_treatment_guide_ref_guide.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) Article

#### Treatments for Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia

### Tools & Resources

  * Common Cancer Treatments
  * Assess Your Cancer Risk
  * Breast Cancer: A Visual Overview
  * Dealing with Chemo Nausea
  * Lung Cancer: The Big Picture
  * How Friends Can Help Post-Diagnosis

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

