

Skip to main content

![Home](/themes/custom/drugpolicy/logo.png)

## Quick Links

  * Blog.
  * For Media.
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube

## Main navigation

  * Issues.
    * About the Drug War.
    * History of the Drug War
    * Drug War Statistics
    * Making Economic Sense
    * New Solutions for Drug Policy
    * The International Drug War
    * Reforming Marijuana Laws.
    * Legalization & Regulation
    * Medical Marijuana
    * Criminal Justice Reform.
    * Drug Decriminalization
    * Mass Criminalization
    * Race & the Drug War
    * Women & the Drug War
    * LGBTQIA+ People & the Drug War
    * Asset Forfeiture Reform
    * Harm Reduction.
    * Discrimination
    * Overdose
    * Naloxone
    * Good Samaritan Laws
    * Supervised Consumption Services
    * Syringe Access
    * Drug Checking
    * Protecting Youth.
    * Families
    * Drug Education
    * Student Aid
    * Safer Partying
  * Drug Facts.
    * Marijuana
    * Heroin
    * MDMA (Ecstasy, Molly)
    * Cocaine
    * Methamphetamine
    * LSD
    * Psilocybin Mushrooms
    * Synthetic Opioids (Fentanyl)
    * Synthetic Cannabinoids (Spice, K2)
    * Synthetic Cathinones (Bath Salts, Flakka)
  * Take Action.
    * Action Alerts
    * Become a Member
    * Attend an Event
    * Contact Your Elected Officials
    * Key States
    * Shop to Support DPA
    * Ways to Give
  * Resources.
    * Browse Resources
    * Drug Education Resources
    * Resources for Academics
    * Online Resource Library
    * Recommended Books
    * Treatment, Counseling & Legal Help
  * About Us.
    * Vision & Mission
    * History of DPA
    * Our Victories
    * Staff & Board
    * Departments & State Offices
    * Jobs & Internships
    * Advocacy Grants from DPA
    * International Drug Policy Reform Conference
    * Membership
    * Annual Report
    * Member Newsletter
    * Financial Documents

Search

_Search this site_ _Close search panel_

Donate _⁠⁠ _

__

# Marijuana Legalization and Regulation

There is more public support for marijuana law reform than ever before with
new polls showing more than half the country is in favor of legalizing
marijuana. The Drug Policy Alliance (DPA) believes marijuana should be removed
from the criminal justice system and regulated like alcohol and tobacco.

## Current Marijuana Laws in the U.S.

**Where in the U.S. is marijuana legal?**

![States where marijuana is legal](/sites/default/files/marijuana-

map_11-8-18_0.png)

See where medical marijuana is legal.

* * *

### What do we know so far about marijuana legalization in 8 states and

Washington, DC?

**Read our January 2018** **report** to learn how and why marijuana
legalization is working so far.

* * *

## 2019 Legalization Initiatives

#### Federal Initiatives

Senator Cory Booker (NJ) introduced the Marijuana Justice Act in the U.S.
Senate and Representatives Barbara Lee (CA-13) and Ro Khanna (CA-17)
introduced the companion bill in the U.S. House to end federal marijuana
prohibition, support racial justice, and help repair communities most
devastated by the war on drugs.

**Learn more about the Marijuana Justice Act.**

#### State Initiatives

DPA is currently working on marijuana legalization campaigns in New Jersey,
New Mexico and New York. Learn more about these campaigns and join us to
support marijuana reform.

New Solutions Marijuana Reform Campaign  
We are working to legalize, tax and regulate marijuana like alcohol for adults
in New Jersey. New Jersey’s marijuana laws have had a disproportionate impact
on communities of color. Marijuana legalization in New Jersey must be fair and
equitable and must address past disproportionate harms to communities of
color.

Grow New Mexico  
DPA has been advocating at the state legislature for passage of a
Constitutional Amendment allowing the possession, use, and sales of marijuana
in New Mexico. This will increase tax revenue, generate commerce and support
the agricultural economy.

Start SMART NY – Sensible Marijuana Access through Regulated Trade  
This campaign is dedicated to ending marijuana prohibition in New York. We
believe that it is time to stop the ineffective, racially biased, and unjust
enforcement of marijuana prohibition and to create a new, well-regulated, and
inclusive marijuana industry that is rooted in racial and economic justice.

## Why Should We Legalize?

**Reduce harm**  
The criminalization of marijuana use disproportionately harms young people and
people of color, sponsors massive levels of violence and corruption, and fails
to curb youth access.

**Create jobs**  
Legalizing and regulating marijuana will bring one of the nation's largest
cash crops under the rule of law. This will create jobs and economic
opportunities in the formal economy instead of the illicit market.

**Save money**  
Scarce law enforcement resources will be better used to ensure public safety
while reducing corrections and court costs. State and local governments would
acquire significant new sources of tax revenue from regulating marijuana
sales.

**Promote consumer safety**  
Marijuana product testing is becoming a standard requirement for legalized
marijuana markets. This means consumers are better informed about the
marijuana they use.

![](/sites/default/files/cannabis-flowers-testing_1783_0.jpg) Cannabis flowers
with quality testing results on display at a dispensary.

**DPA product safety recommendations**

  * Consumers should consider requesting information on any pesticides, fungicides, fertilizers, or any other residual solvents that could remain on flowers after the cultivation process.
  * Consumers should be sure to inquire about the potency and dosage of an edible product, especially if they are a novice consumer or if the package is not clearly labeled.
  * Testing for mold, fungus, bacteria, and other microbial organisms should be required to ensure safety and quality. The effects of consuming some of these chemicals, especially in the immunocompromised, could be significant.
  * Flowers and other cannabis products sold to consumers should include cannabinoid profiles on labels, including the content of THC, CBD and other major cannabinoids, and the number and concentration of doses. This is especially important for edible products, which can contain widely varying doses of cannabis.

Marijuana Legalization and Regulation

## Featured Resources

From Prohibition to Progress: A Status Report on Marijuana Legalization

Marijuana Facts

Marijuana Decriminalization and Legalization (English/Spanish)

More Resources

## Related News

Press Release

####

06.03.19

Tuesday in White Plains: Police Chief, School Board Parent, Addiction
Treatment Expert Discuss Marijuana Regulation in New York State

Press Release

####

05.30.19

DPA Statement on Illinois State Senate Passing Legislation to Legalize
Marijuana

Start SMART NY  
www.smart-ny.com

Drug Policy Alliance  
www.drugpolicy.org

Press Release

####

05.07.19

Today in Albany: Mother’s Day Rally for Marijuana Justice

More News

## Take Action

Tell Congress It's Time for Marijuana Justice

### The Marijuana Justice Act would end federal marijuana prohibition, support

racial justice, and help repair communities most devastated by the war on
drugs.

Send Your Message

## Get Updates

Sign up to receive action alerts and news about drug policy reform.

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/press-resources.png)

Press Resources.

Get tips for covering the war on drugs and download DPA staff photos, logos,
marijuana stock photos and b-roll video.

See Resources

![Man at No More Drug War rally](/sites/default/files/2019-06/2018-annual-

report-footer2.jpg)

Annual Report.

The Drug Policy Alliance is entering a critical chapter in its history. ****
We have the momentum to end the drug war. Will you stand with us?

View Report

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/store.png)

Wear Your Support.

Show off your support for drug policy reform with our new Party Safer t-shirts
and tank tops.

Shop Now

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/give-now-2.png)

Give Now.

### Together, we are fighting for responsible drug policy. Join us.

Give Now.

## Footer menu

  * News.
  * Jobs.
  * Store.
  * Contact Us.

![Drug Policy Alliance

Logo](../sites/default/files/We_are_DPAlliance_96_0.png)

**Drug Policy Alliance Headquarters**

131 West 33rd Street, 15th Floor

New York, New York 10001

**P.** 212.613.8020

  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠ ⁠_
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _

  * Privacy Policy.

  * Terms of Use.
  * © Copyright 2019 Drug Policy Alliance. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

