

Skip to content

Effectiviology

Search

Menu

  * Articles
  * Start Here
  * Subscribe
  * Search

# Ad Hominem: How People Use Personal Attacks to Win Arguments

![Ad Hominem Fallacy](https://effectiviology.com/wp-content/uploads/Ad-

Hominem-Fallacy.jpg)

An _ad hominem_ argument is an argument that attacks a person directly,
instead of addressing the point that they are trying to make.

This rhetorical technique is frequently used in discussions on various topics,
so it's important to understand it. In the following article, you will learn
more about ad hominem arguments, see what types of them exist, and understand
what you can do in order to counter them successfully.

## What is an ad hominem argument

An _ad hominem_ argument ( _argumentum ad hominem_ ) is an argument that
attacks a person or a group directly, instead of addressing the point that
they are trying to make.

An example of an ad hominem argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should reconsider the way that we distribute the
federal budget.

>

> **Bob:** I think that you shouldn 't talk about the federal budget, since
you clearly have no idea what you're talking about.

In this example, Bob simply dismisses Alice's claim with a personal insult,
instead of discussing what she said or presenting a valid stance of his own.

Accordingly, ad hominem arguments are a type of an _informal logical fallacy_
, meaning that there is an issue with their premise, that renders them unsound
from a logical perspective. Specifically, the issue with ad hominem arguments
is that they are based on the faulty premise that an attack against the source
of an opposing arguments constitutes as a valid attack against the opposing
argument itself.

As such, ad hominem arguments are categorized as a subtype of the _fallacy of
irrelevance_ , since they contain information that is not directly relevant to
the discussion at hand. More specifically, ad hominem arguments are a subtype
of the _genetic fallacy_ , since the person using them is arguing against a
certain stance in an indirect manner, by attacking its source.

Note that in some cases, arguments against the source of information _can_ be
relevant to the discussion. As long as they are relevant, and as long as the
person who's using them explains _why_ they are relevant, the use of such
arguments isn't logically fallacious.

As such, an argument directed at a person becomes a fallacious ad hominem
attack only when it is not directly relevant to the discussion at hand, or
when the person who's using it fails to demonstrate why it's relevant.

In the next section, you will learn about the various types of ad hominem
arguments. Then, you will learn the basic techniques that you can use to
counter and defeat this sort of arguments.

## Types of ad hominem arguments

There are several different types of ad hominem arguments. What they all have
in common is that the person using these arguments is attacking their opponent
directly, by using information that is irrelevant to the discussion, instead
of addressing the point that their opponent is trying to make.

As such, the difference between the various types of ad hominem arguments is
that each of them attacks the source of the opposing argument in a different
way. Some of these attacks are relatively sophisticated, and can even be
rendered reasonable using a few modifications, while others are simply crude
and abusive, and should never appear in proper discourse.

### Poisoning the well

_Poisoning the well_ is a rhetorical technique where someone presents
unrelated negative information about their opponent, with the goal of
discrediting everything that their opponent says.

An example of a 'poisoning the well' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education.

>

> **Bob:** You 're a fascist, so clearly we shouldn't listen to what you have
to say about education.

### Credentials fallacy

The _credentials fallacy_ is a logical fallacy which occurs when someone
dismisses an argument and attacks its source directly, by stating that the
person who made that argument doesn't have sufficient credentials in the field
being discussed.

An example of the 'credentials fallacy' is the following:

> **Alice:** studies have overwhelmingly shown that you should vaccinate your
children.

>

> **Bob:** you 're not a doctor, so there's not reason for me to listen to
you.

### Appeal to motive (circumstantial ad hominem)

An _appeal to motive_ (the main type of _circumstantial ad hominem_ ) is an
argument that dismisses a certain stance, by questioning the motives of the
person who supports it.

An example of an 'appeal to motive' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education.

>

> **Bob:** You’re only saying that because you want to show support for the
president that you voted for.

### Appeal to hypocrisy (tu quoque)

An _appeal to hypocrisy_ (also known as _tu quoque_ ) is an argument that
attempts to discredit a person, by suggesting that their argument is
inconsistent with their previous acts.

An example of an 'appeal to hypocrisy' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education.

>

> **Bob:** You clearly don’t even care about public education, since you sent
your own kids to a private school.

### Tone policing

_Tone policing_ is an attack that focuses only on the manner in which a person
makes an argument, instead of addressing the argument itself.

An example of a 'tone policing' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education. The current situation is unacceptable in many of the poorer areas
of the country, and children are suffering because of it.

>

> **Bob:** Okay, okay, no need to get so worked up over these things.

>

> **Alice:** But what do you think about the situation?

>

> **Bob:** I think that you shouldn’t be so emotional about it.

### Traitorous critic fallacy (argumentum ergo decedo)

The _traitorous critic fallacy_ (also known as _argumentum ergo decedo_ ) is a
logical fallacy which involves telling a person who criticized something that
they should stay away from whatever it is they are criticizing, if they don't
approve of the current situation.

An example of a 'traitorous critic' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that as a country, we’re not spending enough on
healthcare.

>

> **Bob:** Well if you don’t like it here, then you should just leave and go
somewhere where they have the kind of healthcare that you want.

### Association fallacy

The _association fallacy_ is a logical fallacy which occurs when someone is
attacked based on their supposed connection to something which is unrelated to
the discussion at hand.

An example of an 'association fallacy' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education.

>

> **Bob:** Well, the Nazis also thought that, so you’re like the Nazis.

### Abusive fallacy

The _abusive fallacy_ is a logical fallacy which occurs when an argument
simply attacks a person in a direct and abusive manner, instead of addressing
the point that they are trying to make.

An example of an 'abusive fallacy' argument is the following:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education.

>

> **Bob:** I think that you’re a moron and that nobody cares about your
opinion.

## How to counter ad hominem arguments

The main issue with ad hominem arguments is that they focus on information
that is irrelevant to the discussion at hand, but that they also present this
information in a manner which could nevertheless influence the result of the
discussion.

As such, you have several options to choose from when it comes to countering
ad hominem arguments:

  * **Point out the irrelevance of the ad hominem attack.** You can do this by pointing out that the personal attack has nothing to do with the argument at hand, and by calling out your opponent on their use of this fallacy. It's best to not become defensive when doing this, and if necessary, you should go on the offense and ask your opponent to justify _why_ their personal attack on you is relevant to the discussion.
  * **Respond to the attack.** In some cases, you might want to fully address the ad hominem attack, even if it 's not directly relevant to the discussion at hand. This is a reasonable course of action when the attack has to do with factors such as your motives, which might be relevant to the discussion somehow, but it's generally not recommended in cases when the attack is strictly personal or abusive, and has nothing to do with the discussion.
  * **Ignore the attack.** You can choose to keep the discussion going, while refusing to engage with the personal attack that your opponent made. This can work in some cases, and especially when ignoring the personal attacks makes you appear more credible, by showing that you refuse to stoop to your opponent 's level. However, in some cases this isn't a viable option, and especially when you feel that not responding will imply that you agree with whatever was said against you, even if it's not relevant to the discussion.
  * **Acknowledge the attack and move on.** This is similar to ignoring the ad hominem attack, except that you first acknowledge the attack in order to show that you don’t care about it, before moving on with the discussion. This doesn’t necessarily mean that you have to agree with the attack; rather, it means that you have to show that you 're aware of it, which might look better than ignoring it entirely. To do this, you can use language such as "I get it that _you think_ that I’m X, but that doesn’t have anything to do with what we 're discussing here, so I'm not going to address it".

Keep in mind that in some cases, you can choose to counterattack with personal
attacks of your own when your opponent uses an ad hominem attack against you.
However, this means that you are resorting to logically fallacious arguments,
so think carefully before you choose to do this.

Furthermore, stooping to your opponent's level and responding to personal
attacks against you with personal attacks of your own can reflect badly on you
in the eyes of others, and generally destroys any chance of engaging in a
productive dialogue.

The one way in which it can be relatively acceptable to respond to an ad
hominem attack with an attack of your own is to you use a similar form of the
attack that was used against you, in order to show that such an attack
presents information that is irrelevant to the discussion at hand. For
example:

> **Alice:** I think that we should increase the federal spending on
education.

>

> **Bob:** You’re only saying that because you want to support the president
that you voted for.

>

> **Alice:** Not really, just as I hope you 're not arguing against it only
because you want to support the president that _you_ voted for.

Most importantly, remember that ad hominem attacks are _personal_ , but
shouldn’t be taken as such. As such, whichever approach you choose to use in
order to counter these arguments, make sure to remain calm, and to not let
this type of attack get to you, since that’s one of the main reasons why
people will use it against you in the first place.

## How to avoid using ad hominem arguments yourself

As we saw so far, ad hominem arguments are arguments that are fallacious
because instead of addressing the opposing arguments, they attack the source
of those arguments, in a way that is irrelevant to the discussion.

As such, to avoid using ad hominem arguments yourself, you should avoid using
arguments that attack your opponent directly, unless you can do so in a proper
manner, using information that is directly relevant to the discussion, and
whose relevance you can justify.

Doing this will strengthen your case, and will ensure that you only bring up
issues with the source of the opposing argument when it is appropriate and
reasonable to do so.

For example, consider a situation where you are debating a scientist whose
stance might be biased due to the source of his funding.

Simply calling the scientist a "greedy liar" is an abusive ad hominem attack,
and doesn't contribute to the discussion, which is why it should be avoided.

Conversely, pointing out the conflict of interest that the scientist has,
while also providing examples of how such conflicts of interest affected
people in the past, and explaining how this conflict of interest could be
affecting the scientist's opinion in the present, can be a perfectly
reasonable argument to include in the discussion.

## Summary and conclusions

  * An ad hominem argument is an argument that attacks a person directly, instead of addressing the point that the person is trying to make.
  * These arguments are logically fallacious, because they rely on presenting irrelevant information, in an attempt to discredit a certain argument by attacking its source.
  * Though questioning the source of information can certainly be valid in some cases, this type of argument is fallacious in cases where the attack has nothing to do with the discussion at hand, or in cases where the person using it fails to demonstrate how it relates to the discussion.
  * There are various types of ad hominem arguments, and each of them attacks people in a different way, such as by calling them hypocrites, by questioning their motives, or by telling them to stay away from the issue if they disagree with the current state of things.
  * To counter ad hominem arguments, you can either point out the logical flaw in the argument, respond to the attack, ignore the attack entirely, or briefly acknowledge the attack and then move on. In some cases, you can also counterattack with a similar personal argument, in order to show that such an attack is irrelevant to the discussion at hand.

* * *

### Other things you might find interesting:

  * False Authority: When People Rely on the Wrong Experts
  * The Fallacy Fallacy: Why Fallacious Arguments Aren't Necessarily Wrong
  * The Masked-Man Fallacy: Twisting Arguments Through Invalid Substitutions

Categories Logical Fallacies Post navigation

## Recent Posts

  * The Just-World Hypothesis: On the Belief that Everyone Gets What They Deserve
  * The Appeal to Emotion: Persuasion Through Feelings Rather than Facts
  * The Zero-Sum Bias: When People Think that Everything is a Competition
  * It's Better to Be Smart than to Be Right
  * Premature Optimization: What It Is and How to Avoid It

## Topics

  * Game Theory
  * Health & Wellbeing
  * Logical Fallacies
  * Mental Performance
  * Optimal Learning
  * Practical Philosophy
  * Productivity
  * Social Psychology
  * Useful Skills
  * Writing

## Content

  * Home
  * Start Here
  * Articles

About | Contact | Privacy | Terms | (C) 2019 Effectiviology

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

