

Subscribe

#### Health News

Fact Checked

# Can Marijuana Kill You?

Written by Gigen Mammoser on August 31, 2017

The parents of a young New Jersey man say marijuana caused the death of their
son. However, most experts say you can’t die from cannabis alone.

![marijuana death](//i0.wp.com/images-

prod.healthline.com/hlcmsresource/images/News/1989-Marijuana_Death_of_Man-1296x728-header.jpg?w=1155)Share
on Pinterest

Two New Jersey parents believe marijuana caused their son’s death.

Medical experts are skeptical.

Kristina Ziobro discovered her son, Michael, 22, unconscious on his bedroom
floor on April 10.

She called 911, but by the time emergency personnel arrived her son was
already dead.

The state’s medical examiner later discovered the presence of cannabis in
Michael Ziobro’s bloodstream.

Kristina Ziobro and her husband also discovered medical marijuana in their
son’s room.

“He was such an advocate,” Kristina Ziobro said on NBC’s “Today” show. “He
thought it was wonderful. He thought it was safe. He just thought it was
natural and organic and it ended up killing him.”

## The debate over marijuana safety

Despite the parents’ belief, the Union County medical examiner, Dr. Junaid
Shaikh, said he’s unsure what, if any, role marijuana had in their son’s
death.

What is clear is that Michael Ziobro experienced a severe cardiac event, but
there is currently no evidence to support that the event was triggered by
marijuana use.

His death certificate does not list cannabis as the cause of death.

The Ziobros have since tried to pursue the cause of their son’s death with
state legislators and police.

In a letter to New Jersey State Senator, Thomas Kean, Shaikh wrote:

“Although there is scarce research that indicates smoking cannabis can evoke
cardiovascular complications, one is unable to attribute the ‘Cause of Death’
was due to smoking cannabis.”

For a drug to be listed as the primary cause of death, it must actually cause
the death through overdose rather than simply being a potential contributing
factor.

Marijuana advocates point out there are zero reported cases of marijuana-
induced death.

“It is well-established in the world medical literature that cannabis is
incapable of causing death by lethal overdose,” Paul Armentano, the deputy
director of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws
(NORML), told Healthline.

He cites, among others, one study that concluded, “There are no cases of fatal
cannabis poisoning in the human medical literature.”

## Risky behaviors

Dr. Edward J. Newton, a professor of emergency medicine at the University of
Southern California and an expert in drug overdose, said that while marijuana
has “a good safety record” from an overdose perspective, there are other risks
involved with use.

“The complications are more that the person becomes delusional and impaired in
terms of their judgement. Their risk-taking behavior increases, so they put
themselves at risk of trauma mainly, rather than a physiological problem with
the drug itself,” Newton told Healthline.

Newton emphasized that driving while under the influence, or other risky
behaviors when using marijuana, are much more likely to result in harm and
death than any direct effect of the drug on the body.

The psychoactive effects of marijuana can also be concerning, but not
necessarily harmful.

Colorado reported an increase in the number of emergency room visits related
to cannabis for visiting tourists.

Some were due to automobile accidents, while others were due to episodes of
tachycardia, anxiety, or paranoia.

## More concerns with more availability

Questions surrounding the safety and regulation of marijuana in the United
States have soared recently as more states have legalized the drug for both
recreational and medicinal purposes.

In the case of Michael Ziobro’s death, the question, more specifically, is:
What are the deleterious effects of marijuana on the cardiovascular system?

Can marijuana cause a heart attack?

The short answer is yes, but the likelihood is rare, one study determined.

“Yes, cannabinoids can temporarily influence cardiovascular function, like
blood pressure. But these responses are generally mild and not life-
threatening, and subjects quickly become tolerant to them,” said Armentano,
who has written about the subject at length.

A controversial study from earlier this month from the School of Public Health
at Georgia State University, concluded that marijuana use is associated with a
threefold risk of death from hypertension.

However, marijuana advocates called that study’s conclusions spurious, and
questioned the legitimacy of their methodology.

What is known in the medical literature is that smoking marijuana can affect
things like heart rate and blood pressure. Experts say individuals with
certain heart conditions, especially older adults, should be judicious in
smoking marijuana.

Armentano referenced two separate longitudinal studies examining marijuana use
and cardiovascular health.

The first, published this year, followed more than 5,000 individuals for 25
years, beginning in the mid-1980s.

“Compared with no marijuana use, cumulative lifetime and recent marijuana use
showed no association with incident CVD [cardiovascular disease], stroke, or
transient ischemic attacks, coronary heart disease, or CVD mortality,” the
authors of that study wrote.

Researchers involved in another longitudinal study from last year involving
1,037 individuals who were followed for 38 years came to a similar conclusion.

“We found no association between cannabis and cardiovascular risks [e.g., high
blood pressure, higher cholesterol], which may appear at odds with evidence
that cannabis use increases risk for cardiovascular complications,” the
authors wrote.

But Michael Ziobro was a young man, without any obvious risk factors. The
reason for his death remains a mystery.

Shaikh suggested that Ziobro’s death may have involved certain genetic
factors, and urged the family to undergo testing for hereditary causes for his
sudden cardiac arrhythmia.

The Ziobro family said they are following that advice, but they are adamant in
believing marijuana caused their son’s death, and want the public to know the
risks.

Written by Gigen Mammoser on August 31, 2017

## related stories

  * 5 Things to Know About Marijuana Use and Your Fertility

  * Does Weed Kill Brain Cells? And 5 Other Things to Know

  * A Simple Guide to the Endocannabinoid System

  * Science Debunks Myth that Marijuana Accelerates Weight Gain

  * Sativa vs. Indica: What to Expect Across Cannabis Types and Strains

### Read this next

  * 5 Things to Know About Marijuana Use and Your Fertility

In order to understand marijuana’s effect on fertility and help doctors better
counsel their patients, researchers published five things to know about…

READ MORE

  * Does Weed Kill Brain Cells? And 5 Other Things to Know

Medically reviewed by Alan Carter, PharmD

Researchers haven't determined whether smoking weed kills brain cells, but
that hasn't stopped some groups from comparing the substance to nicotine…

READ MORE

  * A Simple Guide to the Endocannabinoid System

Medically reviewed by Alan Carter, PharmD

The endocannabinoid is a complex system that still isn't fully understood.
We'll go over what experts do know about it, including how it works, the…

READ MORE

  * Science Debunks Myth that Marijuana Accelerates Weight Gain

Forget the munchies. Researchers say marijuana users actually gain weight more
slowly than others.

READ MORE

  * Sativa vs. Indica: What to Expect Across Cannabis Types and Strains

Medically reviewed by Alan Carter, PharmD

Sativa and indica are the two main types of cannabis plants. The often-applied
rule of thumb is that sativas are more invigorating and energizing…

READ MORE

  * Sensation of a Marijuana High: Smoking, Edibles, and Vaping

Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, CRNP

A marijuana high is associated with feelings of relaxation and contentment,
though negative reactions are also possible. Learn about what the…

READ MORE

  * Marijuana and COPD: Is There a Connection?

Medically reviewed by Daniel Murrell, MD

Marijuana smoke has many of the same chemicals as tobacco, but the link
between marijuana use and COPD is not as clear. Learn what research says.

READ MORE

  * Beginner’s Guide to Marijuana Strains 

Medically reviewed by Debra Rose Wilson, PhD, MSN, RN, IBCLC, AHN-BC, CHT

Not all cannabis is created equal. Different strains of cannabis produce
different effects, and thus can be used for different reasons. If marijuana…

READ MORE

  * How Long Does Weed (Marijuana) Stay in Your System?

Medically reviewed by Zara Risoldi Cochrane, PharmD, MS, FASCP

Weed is detectable in bodily fluids for up to 30 days after last use. For
daily users, weed may be detectable for several months after last use. The…

READ MORE

  * Is Weed Addictive? 

Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, CRNP

According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, about 30 percent of
marijuana users may have some sort of marijuana use disorder. It's estimated…

READ MORE

CMS Id: 131162 Client Version: 2f11b5e4fc22e1032561896600c9682c6daed4c0 Build
Number: 31158

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035868&cv=2.0&cj=1undefined)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

