

  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/facebook-white.svg)
  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/twitter-white.svg)
  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/linkedin-white.svg)
  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/youtube-white.svg)

![Tax Foundation](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/tf-logo-long.svg)

Subscribe Contribute

Search

![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/hamburger.svg)

  * Federal Taxes

### Individual and Consumption Taxes

    
    
    * Income and Payroll Taxes
    * Capital Gains and Dividends Taxes
    * Tax Expenditures, Credits, and Deductions
    * Estate and Gift Taxes
    * Excise and Consumption Taxes
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    * Entrepreneurship
    

### Business Taxes

    
    
    * Corporate Income Taxes
    * Small Business, Pass-throughs, and Non-profits
    * Cost Recovery
    * International Taxes
    * Expenditures, Credits, and Deductions
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    * Tariffs and Trade
    

### Recent Proposals

    
    
    * Wealth Tax
    * Financial Transactions Tax
    * Harris LIFT Tax Credit
    * Rent Relief Tax Credit
    * Estate Tax
    * SALT Deduction
    

### Major Publications

    
    
    * 2019 Tax Brackets
    * Tax Freedom Day
    * Tax Plan Calculator
    * The U.S. Tax Burden on Labor
    * The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act: Explained
    * Putting a Face on America's Tax Returns
    * Business in America
    

  * State Taxes

### Personal and Sales Taxes

    
    
    * Individual Income Taxes
    * Property Taxes
    * Sales Taxes
    * Sales Tax Holidays
    * Internet Sales Taxes
    * Estate and Gift Taxes
    * Credits and Deductions
    * Alternative Minimum Tax
    

### Business Taxes

    
    
    * Corporate Income Taxes
    * Small Business Taxes
    * Gross Receipts and Margin Taxes
    * Capital Gains and Dividends Taxes
    * Property Taxes
    * Credits and Deductions
    * State Business Tax Climate Index
    * Location Matters
    

### Excise Taxes

    
    
    * Cigarette and Tobacco Taxes
    * Sugar, Snack, and Soda Taxes
    * Marijuana Taxes
    * Alcohol Taxes
    * Gas and Transportation Taxes
    * Hotel and Tourism Taxes
    * Cellphone and Wireless Taxes
    

### Major Publications

    
    
    * Facts and Figures
    * State Business Tax Climate Index
    * Location Matters
    * State-Local Tax Burden Rankings
    * State Tax Reform Books
    * Chart Books
    * State Tax Maps
    

  * Global Taxes

### Individual and Consumption Taxes

    
    
    * Income and Payroll Taxes
    * Capital Gains and Dividends Taxes
    * Excise and Consumption Taxes
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    

### Business Taxes

    
    
    * Corporate Income Taxes
    * Cost Recovery
    * Taxation Of Multinational Businesses
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    

### Tax Proposals, Comparisons, and the Economy

    
    
    * Country Proposals
    * EU Proposals
    * International Proposals
    * Comparative Studies of OECD Countries
    * Global Trends
    * Digital Services Taxes
    

### Major Publications

    
    
    * International Tax Competitiveness Index
    * A Comparison of the Tax Burden on Labor in the OECD
    * Sources of Government Revenue in the OECD
    * Corporate Tax Rates Around the World
    * Capital Cost Recovery across the OECD
    * Opportunities for Pro-Growth Tax Reform in Austria
    * Global Tax Maps
    

  * Economic Analysis

### Legislative Proposals

    
    
    * State and Local Tax Deduction
    * 70% Top Tax Rate
    * LIFT Tax Credit
    * Cost-of-Living Refund Act
    * Real Corporate Profits Tax
    * Raise the SALT Deduction Cap
    

### Campaign Proposals

    
    
    * Wealth Tax
    * Estate Tax
    * LIFT Tax Credit
    * Real Corporate Profits Tax
    

### Taxes and the Economy

    
    
    * Research and Analysis
    * Tax Model Overview and Methodology
    

### Major Publications

    
    
    * 2019 Tax Brackets
    * Tax Plan Calculator
    * Mapping the Impact of Tax Reform
    * Options for Reforming America’s Tax Code
    

  * Tax Law
  * Blog
  * About Us

### Join the Tax Foundation Giving Society

![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/giving-

clubs.svg)

Help us achieve a world where the tax code doesn't stand in the way of
success.

Join Us

### About Us

The Tax Foundation is the nation’s leading independent tax policy nonprofit.
Since 1937, our principled research, insightful analysis, and engaged experts
have informed smarter tax policy at the federal, state, and global levels. For
over 80 years, our goal has remained the same: to improve lives through tax
policies that lead to greater economic growth and opportunity.

### Learn More

    
    
    * Our Impact
    * Principles
    * Staff
    * Board
    * Financials
    * Media
    * Careers
    * Internships
    * Events
    * Contact
    

  * Federal Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

Individual and Consumption Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-

content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Income and Payroll Taxes
    * Capital Gains and Dividends Taxes
    * Tax Expenditures, Credits, and Deductions
    * Estate and Gift Taxes
    * Excise and Consumption Taxes
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    * Entrepreneurship
    

Business Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Corporate Income Taxes
    * Small Business, Pass-throughs, and Non-profits
    * Cost Recovery
    * International Taxes
    * Expenditures, Credits, and Deductions
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    * Tariffs and Trade
    

Recent Proposals ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Wealth Tax
    * Financial Transactions Tax
    * Harris LIFT Tax Credit
    * Rent Relief Tax Credit
    * Estate Tax
    * SALT Deduction
    

Major Publications ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * 2019 Tax Brackets
    * Tax Freedom Day
    * Tax Plan Calculator
    * The U.S. Tax Burden on Labor
    * The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act: Explained
    * Putting a Face on America's Tax Returns
    * Business in America
    

  * State Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

Personal and Sales Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-

wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Individual Income Taxes
    * Property Taxes
    * Sales Taxes
    * Sales Tax Holidays
    * Internet Sales Taxes
    * Estate and Gift Taxes
    * Credits and Deductions
    * Alternative Minimum Tax
    

Business Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Corporate Income Taxes
    * Small Business Taxes
    * Gross Receipts and Margin Taxes
    * Capital Gains and Dividends Taxes
    * Property Taxes
    * Credits and Deductions
    * State Business Tax Climate Index
    * Location Matters
    

Excise Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Cigarette and Tobacco Taxes
    * Sugar, Snack, and Soda Taxes
    * Marijuana Taxes
    * Alcohol Taxes
    * Gas and Transportation Taxes
    * Hotel and Tourism Taxes
    * Cellphone and Wireless Taxes
    

Major Publications ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Facts and Figures
    * State Business Tax Climate Index
    * Location Matters
    * State-Local Tax Burden Rankings
    * State Tax Reform Books
    * Chart Books
    * State Tax Maps
    

  * Global Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

Individual and Consumption Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-

content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Income and Payroll Taxes
    * Capital Gains and Dividends Taxes
    * Excise and Consumption Taxes
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    

Business Taxes ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Corporate Income Taxes
    * Cost Recovery
    * Taxation Of Multinational Businesses
    * Tax Compliance and Complexity
    

Tax Proposals, Comparisons, and the Economy ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-

content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Country Proposals
    * EU Proposals
    * International Proposals
    * Comparative Studies of OECD Countries
    * Global Trends
    * Digital Services Taxes
    

Major Publications ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * International Tax Competitiveness Index
    * A Comparison of the Tax Burden on Labor in the OECD
    * Sources of Government Revenue in the OECD
    * Corporate Tax Rates Around the World
    * Capital Cost Recovery across the OECD
    * Opportunities for Pro-Growth Tax Reform in Austria
    * Global Tax Maps
    

  * Economic Analysis ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

Legislative Proposals ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * State and Local Tax Deduction
    * 70% Top Tax Rate
    * LIFT Tax Credit
    * Cost-of-Living Refund Act
    * Real Corporate Profits Tax
    * Raise the SALT Deduction Cap
    

Campaign Proposals ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Wealth Tax
    * Estate Tax
    * LIFT Tax Credit
    * Real Corporate Profits Tax
    

Taxes and the Economy ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * Research and Analysis
    * Tax Model Overview and Methodology
    

Major Publications ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

    
    
    * 2019 Tax Brackets
    * Tax Plan Calculator
    * Mapping the Impact of Tax Reform
    * Options for Reforming America’s Tax Code
    

  * Tax Law

  * Blog

  * About Us ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/down-caret.svg)

Our Impact

Principles

Staff

Board

Financials

Media

Careers

Internships

Events

Contact

Subscribe Contribute

  * ![Facebook Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/facebook.svg)
  * ![Twitter Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/twitter.svg)
  * ![LinkedIn Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/linkedin.svg)
  * ![YouTube Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/youtube.svg)

![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/tf-logo-

long-black.svg)

August 25, 2014

# Taxing Marijuana: The Washington and Colorado Experience

![](https://files.taxfoundation.org/20161206204111/JDH-150x150.png)

Joseph Bishop-Henchman

![Twitter Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/twitter.svg)

Joseph Bishop-Henchman

  * ![Print](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/print.svg) Print this page
  * ![Subscribe](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/mail.svg) Subscribe
  * ![Donate](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/donate.svg) Support our work

Download FISCAL FACT No. 437: Taxing Marijuana: The Washington and Colorado
Experience (PDF Download)

### Key Findings

  * Because marijuana can be purchased as a cigarette, an edible, a liquid, or vapor, all with a wide variety of concentrations, a specific excise tax is untenable.
  * Colorado collects tax revenue from marijuana sales through a 15 percent excise based tax on the average wholesale market rate; a 10 percent state tax on retail marijuana sales; a state sales tax of 2.9 percent; varied local sales taxes; and local marijuana taxes such as a 3.5 percent tax in Denver.
  * Washington State collects tax revenue from marijuana sales through a 25 percent tax on producer sales to processors; a 25 percent tax on processor sales to retailers; a 25 percent tax on retailer sales to customers; a state Business & Occupation (B&O) gross receipts tax; a state sales tax of 6.5 percent; and varied local sales taxes. The total effective tax rate to be about 44 percent.
  * Tax collections in Colorado have fallen short of projected revenue estimates, whereas collections in Washington have fallen within the wide range of project revenue estimates.
  * Colorado's marijuana revenue shortfall is due to incorrect projections about the switch from lower-taxed medical marijuana to higher-taxed retail marijuana by consumers.
  * States with possible upcoming ballot initiatives should take note of effective and ineffective methods of taxing marijuana as the issue is likely to expand.

In November 2012, voters in Colorado and Washington State approved legal
retail sales of marijuana, with Colorado sales starting January 1, 2014 and
Washington sales starting June 1, 2014. The ballot initiatives passed by
strong margins (Colorado Amendment 64 passed 55 percent to 45 percent;
Washington Initiative 502 passed 56 percent to 44 percent). Retail sales would
be separate from each state's preexisting medical marijuana programs.

Creating a legal structure out of whole cloth has been challenging. In both
states, sales are for adults age 21 or over, it remains illegal to use in
public and to drive under the influence, and taking marijuana outside the
state is illegal. (Neighboring states are still impacted, however.[1]) In
Washington, adults can purchase up to one ounce of "bud" (the flowering part
of the plant), 16 ounces of edible solids, 72 ounces of edible liquids, or 7
grams of concentrates or lotions. In Colorado, residents can purchase up to
one ounce of any kind of marijuana product and non-residents can purchase up
to a quarter of an ounce. Sellers must be licensed and must meet health and
safety requirements, employers can still ban use by employees, and Washington
capped the number of retail locations. The product is still against federal
law, which in turn keeps the nascent industry on a cash basis and may lead to
punitive federal tax treatment.[2]

Taxing marijuana presents unique challenges, because the product takes so many
different forms. Excise taxes on other products are historically imposed at a
specific amount regardless of the retail price. Examples include the federal
gasoline tax of 18.4 cents per gallon and the federal cigarette tax of $1.0066
per pack. Because marijuana can be purchased as a cigarette, an edible, a
liquid, or vapor, all with a wide variety of concentrations, a specific excise
tax is untenable.

### **Colorado**

Colorado's marijuana tax is structured as a 15 percent excise tax on the
"average market rate" of wholesale marijuana, plus a 10 percent state tax on
retail marijuana sales, plus the state sales tax of 2.9 percent, plus local
sales taxes, plus local marijuana taxes such as a 3.5 percent tax in
Denver.[3] When these taxes are added up, in Denver for example, a $30 eighth
of pot (1/8 oz.) will have about $8.59 in taxes tacked onto it, or about a 29
percent overall tax rate.[4] (By comparison, the equivalent tax on cigarettes
is about 31 percent and on beer only about 8 percent.[5])

Six months of legal retail marijuana sales have generated $21.8 million in tax
revenue plus another $10.1 million in taxes on medical marijuana in that time
period (see Table 1).[6] For the new fiscal year that began July 1, 2014,
state analysts project $30.6 million in revenue.[7] These amounts have fallen
short of earlier estimates. During the initiative campaign, voters were told
marijuana excise taxes would boost revenues by $70 million per year, with the
first $40 million each year dedicated to school construction and leaving $30
million for enforcement and general state funds.[8] As early as April 2013,
the nonprofit research group Colorado Futures Center prophetically warned that
actual revenue would be unlikely to even meet that $40 million need each year,
leaving nothing for enforcement costs.[9]

State officials are investigating the causes for the revenue shortfall.
Retailers were slow to open, impacting revenue collections. State economists
say they were wrong in assuming that retail marijuana would cannibalize
medical marijuana sales, which have actually remained steady.[10] The
Department of Revenue suggests that tax differentials are a key reason,
because medical marijuana purchases are subject only to state and local sales
taxes (after paying a $15 registration fee), a tax rate one-third of that
imposed on retail marijuana.[11] Visitors holding an out-of-state
identification card have been responsible for 44 percent of retail sales.[12]
The analysis found a disconnect between legal supply (77 metric tons) and
surveyed demand (130 metric tons), estimating that the gray market (home
growing and caregivers) is supplying approximately 46 metric tons and the
black market is supplying approximately 7 metric tons (6 percent of total
demand).[13]

### **Table 1. Colorado Tax and License Collections from Marijuana Sales, 2014

($ thousands)**

|

Jan

|

Feb

|

Mar

|

Apr

|

May

|

Jun

|

**Total**

---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 

15% Wholesale Tax

|

195

|

339

|

609

|

734

|

1,135

|

969

|

**3,983**

10% Retail Tax

|

1,401

|

1,434

|

1,898

|

2,217

|

2,070

|

2,473

|

**11,496**

2.9% Sales Tax

| | | | | | |

_Medical_

|

913

|

1,022

|

999

|

919

|

927

|

830

|

**5,612**

_Retail_

|

416

|

438

|

569

|

639

|

642

|

700

|

**3,406**

Licenses

| | | | | | |

_Medical_

|

496

|

754

|

794

|

622

|

867

|

1,040

|

**4,573**

_Retail_

|

96

|

103

|

108

|

139

|

72

|

507

|

**2,932**

**Total**

|

**3,519**

|

**4,092**

|

**4,980**

|

**5,273**

|

**5,715**

|

**6,522**

|

**32,002**

Note: Retail license total includes $1.9 million in startup revenue collected
prior to January. Totals may not sum due to rounding.  
Source: Colorado Department of Revenue.

### **Washington**

Washington State imposes a 25 percent tax on producer sales to processors,
another 25 percent tax on processor sales to retailers, and a further 25
percent tax on retailer sales to customers, plus the state Business &
Occupation (B&O) gross receipts tax, plus the state sales tax of 6.5 percent,
plus local sales taxes. Moody's calculated the total effective tax rate to be
about 44 percent.[14] By comparison, Washington taxes cigarettes at about 104
percent and beer at about 11 percent (recently cut from 16 percent).[15]

The first month of legalization resulted in $3.8 million in sales and about $1
million in tax revenue. The Washington State Liquor Control Board, in charge
of the program, estimates two-year marijuana tax revenue for the 2015-17
biennium will be $122,459,893; for the 2017-19 biennium it will be
$336,898,396. Voters were told legalization could bring in _as much as_ $1.9
billion over five years; Sharon Foster of Washington State Liquor Control
Board notes that many people took that as the revenue estimate. So while
actual collections are within the wide range suggested to voters, they will
likely be on the lower end.

### **Other Jurisdictions**

Other jurisdictions are considering joining Colorado and Washington in votes
on November 4 of this year. Alaska voters will decide Measure 2, which
legalizes marijuana and imposes a $50 per ounce wholesale tax (equivalent to
about a 21 percent tax).[16] Oregon voters will decide Measure 91, which
legalizes marijuana and imposes a $35 per ounce wholesale tax (equivalent to
about a 15 percent tax).[17] The District of Columbia will decide Initiative
71, which legalizes possession of small amounts of marijuana, and the D.C.
Council is considering a separate regulation and tax bill.[18]

These proposals are likely just the beginning. Joe Brenzy of the Nevada
Cannabis Industry Association told legislators at the Council of State
Governments annual meeting that proponents are pushing ballot initiatives in
the near future for Arizona, California, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, and
Nevada, and legislative efforts in Delaware, Hawaii, Maryland, New Hampshire,
Rhode Island, Texas, and Vermont. Brenzy also predicted the end of federal
marijuana prohibition by 2020, based on how long it took alcohol prohibition
to end in the 1930s. When asked by a legislator why marijuana proponents are
going around legislators, Brenzy said they have been given no choice. He
expressed eagerness to work with legislators, but in states where a majority
of people support legalization and legislators won't consider it, proponents
have the resources to go straight to voters and will do so. He said 25 states
will have legal retail marijuana sales within 5 years, which can be
interpreted as either a prediction or a goal.

* * *

[1] _See, e.g._ , Trevor Hughes, _In tiny Nebraska towns, a flood of Colorado
marijuana_ , USA Today, June 11, 2014,
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/06/11/colorado-marijuana-
exports/9964707/; Harriet Baskas, _Marijuana at airports: Colo., Wash. adjust
to new law_ , USA Today, June 20, 2014,
http://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/flights/2014/06/18/marijuana-colorado-
washington-tsa-airports/10681759/; Matt Ferner, _Keep Your Legal Weed in
Colorado, Say Cops in Neighboring States_ , Huffington Post, May 28, 2014,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/05/28/colorado-marijuana_n_5405422.html;

[2] _See, e.g._ , Joseph Henchman, _Tax Code Disallows Business Deductions for
Marijuana Sales_ , Tax Foundation Tax Policy Blog, Feb. 6, 2014,
https://taxfoundation.org/blog/tax-code-disallows-business-deductions-
marijuana-sales; Tyler Dennis  & Scott Eastman, _IRS Penalties Force Colorado
Marijuana Retailers to Face Higher Tax Burdens_ , Tax Foundation Tax Policy
Blog, July 11, 2014, https://taxfoundation.org/blog/irs-penalties-force-
colorado-marijuana-retailers-face-higher-tax-burdens.

[3] _See_ Colorado Department of Revenue, _Information for Cultivators_ ,
http://www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite/Revenue/REVX/1251649610680; Jeremy P.
Meyer, _Denver Voters Backing 3.5 Percent Tax on Pot_ , Denver Post, Nov. 5,
2013, http://www.denverpost.com/breakingnews/ci_24461037/denver-voters-
weigh-3-5-percent-marijuana-tax.

[4] _See, e.g._ , Global Index Price for Marijuana, _Colorado, United States_
, http://www.priceofweed.com/prices/United-States/Colorado.html; John Ingold,
_Colorado Voters Approve New Taxes on Recreational Marijuana_ , Denver Post,
Nov. 5, 2013, http://www.denverpost.com/breakingnews/ci_24462839/colorado-
voters-approve-new-taxes-recreational-marijuana.

[5] Cigarette tax calculations derived from Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids,
_State Excise and Sales Taxes Per Pack of Cigarettes_ (June 20, 2014),
http://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/0202.pdf.

[6] _See_ Colorado Department of Revenue, _Colorado Marijuana Tax Data_ ,
http://www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite/Revenue-Main/XRM/1251633259746.

[7] _See_ Colorado Legislative Council Staff, Economics Section, _Focus
Colorado: Economic and Revenue Forecast_ (June 20, 2014) at 29-30,
http://www.leg.state.co.us/lcs/econforecast.nsf/vwFile/1406/$File/14JuneForecast.pdf#page=29.

[8] _See_ Joseph Henchman, _Colorado Begins Legal Marijuana Sales, Collecting
Marijuana Tax_ , Tax Foundation Tax Policy Blog, Jan. 1, 2014,
https://taxfoundation.org/blog/colorado-begins-legal-marijuana-sales-
collecting-marijuana-tax.

[9] _See_ Colorado Futures Center, Charles Brown  & Phyllis Resnick, _The
Fiscal Impact of Amendment 64 on State Revenues_ (Apr. 24, 2013),
https://webcom.colostate.edu/coloradofutures/files/2013/04/CFC-
Amendment-64-Study-final2.pdf.

[10] _See, e.g._ , John Ingold, _Colorado Lawmaker Seeks Marijuana Tax Review
Amid Disappointing Sales_ , Denver Post, Aug. 13, 2014,
http://www.denverpost.com/news/ci_26323416/amid-disappointing-sales-colorado-
lawmaker-seeks-marijuana-tax.

[11] _See_ Colorado Department of Revenue, _Market Size and Demand for
Marijuana in Colorado_ (July 2014), http://goo.gl/yM5T3i.

[12] _See id._

[13] _See, e.g._ , Matt Ferner, _Colorado 's Black Market Is More Complicated
Than It Looks_ , Huffington Post, Aug. 13, 2014,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/08/13/colorado-marijuana-black-
market_n_5669302.html.

[14] _See_ Niraj Chokshi, _Moody 's: Washington might not see the marijuana
tax windfall previously projected_ , Washington Post, July 22, 2014,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/govbeat/wp/2014/07/22/moodys-washington-
might-not-see-the-marijuana-tax-windfall-previously-projected/.

[15] Cigarette tax calculations derived from Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids,
_State Excise and Sales Taxes Per Pack of Cigarettes_ (June 20, 2014),
http://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/0202.pdf; _Washington
state House Democrats drop beer tax, other revenue proposals_ , Associated
Press, Apr. 23, 2013,
http://www.oregonlive.com/politics/index.ssf/2013/04/washington_state_house_democra.html.

[16] _See_ Ballotpedia, _Alaska Marijuana Legalization, Ballot Measure 2
(2014)_ , http://ballotpedia.org/Alaska_Marijuana_Legalization,
_Ballot_Measure_2_ (2014).

[17] _See_ Ballotpedia, _Oregon Legalized Marijuana Initiative, Measure 91
(2014)_ , http://ballotpedia.org/Oregon_Legalized_Marijuana_Initiative,
_Measure_91_ (2014).

[18] _See_ Ballotpedia, _Washington D.C. Marijuana Legalization, Initiative 71
(November 2014)_ , http://ballotpedia.org/Washington_D.C.
_Marijuana_Legalization,_Initiative_71_ (November_2014); Drug Policy Alliance,
_Marijuana Initiative Qualifies for Washington, D.C. November Ballot_ , Aug.
6, 2014, https://www.drugpolicy.org/news/2014/08/marijuana-initiative-
qualifies- washington-dc-november-ballot.

**Was this page helpful to you?**

Yes!

No

**Thank You!**

The Tax Foundation works hard to provide insightful tax policy analysis. Our
work depends on support from members of the public like you. Would you
consider contributing to our work?

Contribute to the Tax Foundation

* * *

**Share This Article!**

![Facebook Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/facebook.svg) ![Twitter Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-

content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/twitter.svg) ![LinkedIn

Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/linkedin.svg) ![Send Email](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-

content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/mail.svg)

**Let us know how we can better serve you!**

We work hard to make our analysis as useful as possible. Would you consider
telling us more about how we can do better?

Give Us Feedback

* * *

### Topics

  * Colorado
  * Washington
  * Excise Taxes
  * Individual and Consumption Taxes
  * Marijuana Taxes

* * *

### Tags

  * marijuana taxes

* * *

## About the Author

![](https://files.taxfoundation.org/20161206204111/JDH-150x150.png)

Joseph Bishop-Henchman

Executive Vice President

Joe Bishop-Henchman is Executive Vice President at the Tax Foundation, where
he analyzes state tax trends, constitutional issues, and tax law developments.
Joe has testified or presented to officials in 36 states, testified before
Congress six times, and has written over 75 major studies on tax policy.

![Twitter Logo](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-

theme/images/icons/twitter.svg) Follow Joseph Bishop-Henchman

* * *

## Related Research

### States Should be Wary of ITEP Marijuana Tax Policy

### Michigan Voters to Decide Legalizing and Taxing Marijuana

### Missouri Voters Face Complicated Choices on Medical Marijuana Taxes

### Gross Receipts Taxes in the Marijuana Industry Found to Cause

Distortionary Effects

### Maine Continues to Discuss Marijuana Legalization Details

### Massachusetts Increases Marijuana Tax Rate

### Help us achieve our vision of a world where the tax code doesn't stand in

the way of success.

Subscribe

Contribute

### About Us

The Tax Foundation is the nation’s leading independent tax policy nonprofit.
Since 1937, our principled research, insightful analysis, and engaged experts
have informed smarter tax policy at the federal, state, and global levels. For
over 80 years, our goal has remained the same: to improve lives through tax
policies that lead to greater economic growth and opportunity.

### More Links

  * Donate
  * Press Room
  * Store
  * Careers
  * Events

### Connect

  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/facebook.svg) Facebook 
  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/twitter.svg) Twitter 
  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/linkedin.svg) LinkedIn 
  * ![](https://taxfoundation.org/wp-content/themes/tf-wp-theme/images/icons/youtube.svg) YouTube 

### Contact Us

Tax Foundation

1325 G St NW  
Suite 950  
Washington, DC 20005

202-464-6200

  * Copyright Tax Foundation 2019
  * Copyright Notice
  * Privacy Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

