

Annonceinfo ![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=16956;cre=img)

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=20064;cre=img)

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=20065;cre=img)

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=20066;cre=img)

![Home](/sites/all/themes/sciencenordic/logo.png)

Search:

  * About ScienceNordic
  * 中文

  * Health

  * Society & Culture
  * Environment
  * Technology
  * Agriculture & Fisheries
  * Natural Sciences
  * Blogs

  * Research & Study

# Heroin clinics improve addicts' lives

May 1, 2012 - 06:44

### State-funded heroin clinics have been set up in several European countries

in recent years. They have all showed signs of success, but there hasn’t been
any research into why – until now.

Keywords: Anthropology, Drugs

SendPDFPrint

By: Jeppe Wojcik

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/440x/addict.jpg)

In 2010, 208 Danes died as a result of drug abuse. That’s the same figure as
for traffic fatalities. One of the purposes of the heroin clinics is to reduce
the number of heroin-related deaths. (Photo: Ulrik Holmstrup)

Danish heroin addicts experience significant improvements in their lives. They
no longer need to stress over finding the next fix and they commit fewer
crimes.

And it's all thanks to the state-funded heroin clinics, according to a
comprehensive new anthropological study.

"Some of the users have better contact with their families. Some have started
to do sports as part of the treatment offer, and others have found the energy
to take care of their own physical illnesses," says Katrine Schepelern
Johansen, a post-doc in anthropology at the University of Copenhagen.

She has interviewed 50 of the 160 users in Denmark's five state-funded heroin
clinics.

##### Positive effects

Heroin clinics are generally regarded as a success because dropout rates are
lower than in, for instance, methodone treatment, and because the clinics keep
more people from committing drug-related crime.

Out of the 26 people who have dropped out of the treatment at the clinics, a
majority dropped out because the wanted to move over to treatment without
heroin.

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/440x/addict1.jpg)

Twice a day, every day of the year, specially trained staff at heroin clinics
provide help for heroin addicts. Pictured is a nurse helping an addict to find
a suitable vein to inject into. (Photo: Ulrik Holmstrup)

The Danish National Board of Health's only report so far on the beneficial
effects of heroin treatment states that the treatment has:

  * Reduced the number of days spent on crimes to a third
  * Increased the number of addicts who find permanent housing by 30 percent
  * Reduced side abuse so that addicts drink 50 percent less alcohol, and the abuse of benzodiazepines such as Valium has been reduced to a third.

A few of the clinic addicts are in some form of employment and have for
instance taken IT courses.

##### Heroin clinics function well abroad - but why?

A Dutch study from 2005 estimated that providing addicts with prescription
heroin could save the state around €13,000 per person per year as a result of
reduced costs for crime control, compensations and the like.

A Swiss study showed that heroin clinics remove four percent of the most
problematic drug addicts from the street annually.

Johansen's study aims to shed light on what the clients and the staff at the
clinics think about the treatment - and thus find out why the treatment is
effective.

Although many other countries have reported positive results from their heroin
clinics, Johansen's study is the first one of its kind. Elsewhere, she says,
most studies have assumed that the effectiveness of the clinics is mainly due
to the pharmacological effects of heroin.

##### The state is the dealer

### Facts

Since 2010 Danish heroin addicts have been offered heroin free of charge at
five clinics spread around the country.

The only requirement is that the clients have previously been in treatment for
heroin addiction.

Heroin treatment isn't only a success story, however.

"The users are frustrated about having to show up at the clinic twice a day
every day of the week, and that they're being monitored before, during and
after treatment," says Johansen.

Another common source of frustration for the users is that they have to inject
the heroin themselves, although the clinic staff is trained to give injections
and are allowed to help the users find suitable veins.

Similarly, it's also frustrating for the staff that they are not allowed to
help with the injection when the addicts are struggling to find a suitable
vein.

Providing the addicts with heroin also presents staff members with a dilemma,
since they're used to giving injections with the intent of healing.

In general, however, the staff and the addicts agree that the benefits of
heroin treatment outweigh the drawbacks, says the researcher.

##### Treatment requires individual goals

### Facts

The purpose of heroin clinics, according to Katrine Schepelern Johansen, is to
reduce the damage and the crime related to illegal heroin abuse and to keep
addicts off the streets, enabling them to live calmer lives that are easier to
control.

The researcher divides the clients at heroin clinics into three groups:

  1. A (small) group that wants to cut down on their heroin use with a view to quitting the habit completely and create a new life for themselves
  2. A group that wants to replace their previous illegal heroin abuse with a legal one without crime, but who have no plans to fight their heroin addiction
  3. Addicts who visit the clinics to satisfy their heroin addiction. In addition to the their heroin addiction, they are also addicted to other drugs, such as cocaine and cannabis

Since the clients vary greatly, successful treatment requires individual
goals, says the researcher, arguing that there's not much point in making it a
goal to get the users off drugs if it's an unattainable task from the start.

Johansen has seen with her own eyes what positive side effects can be gained
from this kind of treatment:

"Through my interviews I have seen that those who are in treatment have
improved their lives. Less stress has made it easier for them to get through
the day," she says.

Later this year, Johansen will publish a report about her study.

* * *

Read this article in Danish at videnskab.dk

Country Denmark

Translated by

Dann Vinther

#### Related content

Treatment of drug abuse: Here’s what works Heavy use of addictive drugs among
disabled Dope leads to dungeon and the dole Young people say no to weed
Blocking the effects of heroin

Tweet

#### External links

Katrine Schepelern Johansen's profile (in Danish only)

View the discussion thread.

![EmediateAd](http://ad1.emediate.dk/eas?cu=16957;cre=img)

### Society & Culture - partner news

  * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/1_320.jpg)

### Passion trumps love for sex in relationships

News from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and
Technology

  * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/1140957650migranter_0.jpg)

### Migrants are their country’s best and brightest

News from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and
Technology

  * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/taktisk-spill-foto-colourbox-1100x551_0.jpg)

### Men sometimes act less interested in sex – in order to get it

News from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and
Technology

  * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/t284_01_0786urnes-768x467_0.jpg)

### What do the animals in stave church ornamentation signify?

News from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and
Technology

  * ![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/72x54/fig4keramikk_web_0.jpg)

### Toss it if it’s 481 years old – but not if it’s a year older

News from Gemini, NTNU Trondheim - Norwegian University of Science and
Technology

### Inside news

  * May. 29

### Women in the armed forces – changes over time

  * Sep. 17

### Join in on the Norwegian National Science Week, 17–28 September

  * Jul. 8

### Research pays off for companies and society

  * Jul. 4

### New minimum basic funding requirements in Norway

  * Jul. 2

### Visiting Oslo? Guided campus tours

All inside news

  * Denmark
  * Sweden
  * Norway
  * Finland
  * Iceland

### Follow ScienceNordic on

Facebook Twitter News feed

## Today's selected stories

### Cancer drug doesn’t work for chronic fatigue

June 10, 2019 in Health

Cancer drug rituximab has no effect on chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS),
according to a Norwegian study.

Read more

![](http://sciencenordic.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/300x225/1323994805_0.jpg)

### Latest news

Jun. 10

### Cancer drug doesn’t work for chronic fatigue

Jun. 7

### Why do schizophrenia patients die earlier than other people?

Jun. 5

### Therapy can help men stop domestic violence

Jun. 4

### What the Swedes learned from the terrorist attack in Stockholm

Jun. 1

### The EU raises the standard of Norwegian gender equality policies

May. 31

### Why do Norway and Greece have radically different traffic mortality rates?

May. 29

### Men are stricter than women when it comes to sick leave

May. 28

### From lethal spider toxins to eco-friendly pesticides

(C) ScienceNordic.com Email: editor@sciencenordic.com

**ScienceNordic offices:**  
Copenhagen: c/o Videnskab.dk, Trekronergade 26, 2500 Valby, Denmark. Phone +45
70 70 17 88  
Oslo: c/o Forskning.no, Postbox 5 Torshov, 0412 Oslo, Norway. Phone +47 22 80
98 90

**ScienceNordic.com - Independent news on research in the Nordic countries**

Denmark Norway Sweden Finland Iceland

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

