

  * Alcoholism
    * Alcoholic Types
    * Effects of Use
    * Mixing with Drugs
    * Comorbidity
    * For Women
    * About Teens
    * Those Disabled
    * By Profession
    * By Race
    * Pregnancy Issues
    * About DUIs
    * Laws & Legal
    * Statistics
    * Withdrawal Signs
    * Binge Drinking
  * Treatment
    * Help an Alcoholic
    * Options
    * Co-Occurring
    * Centers
    * Intervention
    * Detox
    * Medications
    * Outpatient
    * PHP
    * IOP
    * Inpatient
    * Therapy
    * Aftercare
    * Relapse Prevention
    * AA
  * Resources
    * BAC Calculator
    * Behavioral Health Academic Scholarship
  * Guides
  * FAQ
  * About AAC

  * Alcoholism

    * Alcoholic Types
    * Effects of Use
    * Mixing with Drugs
    * Comorbidity
    * For Women
    * About Teens
    * Those Disabled
    * By Profession
    * By Race
    * Pregnancy Issues
    * About DUIs
    * Laws & Legal
    * Statistics
    * Withdrawal Signs
    * Binge Drinking
  * Treatment
    * Help an Alcoholic
    * Options
    * Co-Occurring
    * Centers
    * Intervention
    * Detox
    * Medications
    * Outpatient
    * PHP
    * IOP
    * Inpatient
    * Therapy
    * Aftercare
    * Relapse Prevention
    * AA
  * Resources
    * BAC Calculator
    * 2019 Behavioral Health Academic Scholarship
  * Guides
  * FAQ
  * About AAC

Call 888-685-5770 Who Answers? Who answers the helpline calls.

Call American Addiction Centers to find help with alcoholic rehab.

# The Physical & Psychological Effects of Alcohol

Home / The Physical & Psychological Effects of Alcohol

![contributor

avatar](/app/uploads/2019/02/xNicolleMonico.jpg.pagespeed.ic.iDlSQLjl2s.jpg)
Written by: Nicolle Monico

Reviewed by: Sophie Stein, A.P.R.N.

Last updated on May 24, 2019

According to the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), an
estimated 14.4 million Americans ages 12 and older had an alcohol use disorder
(AUD) in the past year.1 However, only an estimated 1.1 million Americans ages
12 and older with a diagnosable AUD in the past year received substance use
treatment in the past year.2

Regardless of whether you consider yourself a social drinker or have a
diagnosed AUD, there are both short- and long-term physical and psychological
consequences to overdrinking.

## Short-Term Effects

Although a person may not be abusing alcohol regularly, they can still
experience its short-term effects on the mind and body. The liver can
metabolize about one standard drink of alcohol per hour.3 However, this can
vary depending on a number of factors, including the individual's age, weight,
liver function, and gender.9 Typically, consuming more than one beverage per
hour can lead to intoxication, raising an individual's blood alcohol content
(BAC) with each drink.3

The effects of alcohol can range from mild, such as skin flushing, to more
severe symptoms such as passing out or vomiting. Other short-term effects can
include: 3,4,13

  * Lowered inhibitions, leading to poor social judgment.
  * Trouble concentrating.
  * Loss of coordination.
  * Loss of critical judgement.
  * Dulled perception, especially vision.
  * Mood swings.
  * Reduced core body temperature.
  * Raised blood pressure.
  * Passing out.
  * Vomiting.

Break free from alcoholism.

Learn how by calling us today.

Call 1-888-685-5770 Who Answers?Who answers the helpline calls.

## Long-Term Effects

Drinking too much over time can cause chronic physical and mental health
issues. Heavy drinking can cause or contribute to liver damage, cardiovascular
disease, and multiple types of cancer.5,7,13 Long-term effects of excessive
drinking may include: 5,11,13,16

  * Diminished gray matter and white matter in the brain.
  * Memory loss.
  * Loss of attention span.
  * Trouble learning.
  * Alcoholic hepatitis.
  * Liver fibrosis.
  * Steatosis (i.e., fatty liver).
  * Throat, mouth, larynx, breast, liver, colorectal, or esophageal cancer.
  * High blood pressure
  * Cardiomyopathy
  * Stroke
  * Irregular heart beat

## Alcohol Poisoning

Binge drinking is a dangerous practice that can cause physical harm. The
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) classifies binge
drinking as a drinking pattern that leads to a blood alcohol concentration
(BAC) level of 0.08 g/dL and above.6 For adult women, that's typically around
4 drinks (5 for adult men) within a couple hours of each other.6

Drinking too much can lead to alcohol poisoning. Signs of alcohol poisoning
include:18

  * Confusion.
  * Nausea and vomiting.
  * Slowed or irregular breathing.
  * Cyanosis, or a blue-tinted skin.
  * Pale skin.
  * Low body temperature, or hypothermia.
  * Unconsciousness.
  * Seizures.

It is extremely important to call 911 if you feel a person is experiencing
alcohol poisoning. Alcohol poisoning can cause permanent brain damage and even
death. A person's BAC can keep rising after they stop drinking and even after
they pass out.18

## Physical Effects

Chronic heavy drinking is associated with many serious health problems.5 Below
are some of the ways alcohol may affect the body:

**Liver:** One of the possible severe medical consequences of chronic alcohol
abuse is liver disease. Over time, with consistent alcohol abuse, the liver
may become inflamed and/or scarred. Conditions such as fatty liver, alcoholic
hepatitis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis may develop. A person may also develop
liver cancer. 5,7,8 ****

**Digestive system:** Alcohol can wear down the lining of the stomach and
increase the production of stomach acid, which can contribute to ulcers.24
Alcohol may also alter nutrient breakdown, absorption, transportation,
storage, and excretion, leading to nutrient deficiencies and/or trouble fully
using nutrients. For example, thiamine deficiency is common and can lead to
serious neurological issues. Alcohol can also impair blood sugar control.10
****

**Pancreas:** Alcohol prompts pancreatic production of harmful substances,
which can lead to pancreatitis. Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas
that impairs digestion. 5 ****

**Central nervous system (CNS)** _:_ Thiamine, or vitamin B1, deficiency
associated with chronic heavy drinking can lead to Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome. Symptoms may include confusion, impaired coordination, learning
problems, and memory difficulties. Liver disease can also harm the brain,
resulting in symptoms such as sleep changes, alterations in mood, personality
changes, depression, anxiety, impaired concentration, and incoordination. Too
much alcohol may also hinder new brain cell growth.16 ****

**Cardiovascular (CV) health:** Drinking alcohol has complicated impacts on
cardiovascular health. In 2016, alcohol-related CV diseases caused an
estimated 593,000 deaths globally. 12 Consuming too much alcohol is linked to
high blood pressure, irregular heartbeat, trouble pumping blood through the
body, blood clots, stroke, cardiomyopathy (sagging, stretched heart muscle),
or heart attack.5,13 Excessive alcohol use, both directly and through
malnutrition, can also lead to anemia.19 ****

**Reproductive health:** Consuming too much alcohol can lead to reproductive
problems, including erectile dysfunction and irregular menstruation.20 Both
men and women may have reduced fertility with long-term, heavy
drinking.21Women who drink while pregnant are at increased risk for
miscarriage, stillbirth, or having a child with a fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder (FASD).14 ****

**Bones:** Alcohol abuse can cause a calcium imbalance in the body, which is
an important nutrient to maintain healthy bones. Consuming too much alcohol
can also cause a disruption to the production of vitamin D, which is needed
for calcium absorption. Lack of calcium increases the risk of osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis increases the risk of bone fractures, which can cause serious
pain and disability.15 ****

## Psychological Effects

When it comes to the brain, alcohol acts as a depressant to the CNS. However,
it can have inconsistent effects, exciting users under some conditions and
sedating users under other conditions. Excitement, typically at lower doses,
may be due to alcohol suppressing the inhibitory parts of the brain. Functions
such as breathing, speech, thought, memory, and movement can be impacted by
consuming alcohol. Mental effects may include mood changes, decreased
inhibitions, relaxation, impaired judgment, slowed reaction times, difficulty
remembering, confusion, and loss of consciousness.3 Chronic use of alcohol can
lead to changes in the brain, as described in previous sections.

Excessive alcohol use, even if not chronic, can lead to alcohol-induced
psychiatric syndromes, such as alcohol-induced depressive disorder, alcohol-
induced bipolar disorder, alcohol-induced sleep disorder, alcohol-induced
psychotic disorder, and more.17,22 These disorders are temporary and can occur
after significant intoxication and/or withdrawal.22

Alcohol use disorder is also linked to several mental illnesses which can
develop separately from the disorder and may even predate it, such as major
depression, some anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and
others.17 These disorders may increase the likelihood of alcohol-related
issues, possibly due, in part, to using alcohol as a self-medicating
substance.17,23 There also may be common underlying risk factors that increase
the likelihood of both substance use disorders and mental illnesses.23

## Finding Treatment

Alcohol use disorders, or alcoholism, occur on a spectrum, and each person is
unique. If you or someone you know is ready to discuss treatment, our
admissions navigators are available 24/7 to speak with you today. The type of
treatment that will be most suitable for you will likely be influenced by your
alcohol history, other substance use history, previous attempts at treatment,
any co-occurring medical and/or mental health conditions, and your current
situation.

### More Articles on the Effects of Alcohol

  * The Term Beer Goggles
  * Kindling from Withdrawal
  * Effects On Your Memory
  * Sexual Assaults On Campus
  * Kidney Disease
  * Tuberculosis
  * Fatty Liver Disease
  * Epilepsy & Seizures
  * Gout

### Sources

[1]. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
(2017). The National Survey on Drug Use and Health. 10.

[2]. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
(2017). Results from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed
Tables.

[3]. Mark Keller, George E. Vaillant. (2018). Alcohol consumption.
_Encyclopedia Britannica_.

[4]. Dubowski, Kurt. ResearchGate. (2019). Stages of acute alcoholic
influence/intoxication blood alcohol concentration grams/100 ml stage of
alcoholic influence clinical signs/symptoms.

[5]. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAA). (n.d.).
Alcohol's Effects on the Body.

[6]. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAA). (2019).
Drinking Levels Defined.

[7]. MedlinePlus. (2019). Alcoholic liver disease.

[8]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). Liver Cancer.

[9]. Better Health Channel. (2012). Know The Facts.

[10]. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (1993). Alcohol and
Nutrition. _Alcohol Alert._ _No. 22(346)._ _ _

[11]. Pfefferbaum, A., Sullivan, E. V., Mathalon, D. H., Shear, P. K.,
Rosenbloom, M. J., & Lim, K. O. (1995). Longitudinal changes in magnetic
resonance imaging brain volumes in abstinent and relapsed alcoholics.
_Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research_ , _19_ (5), 1177-1191.

[12]. World Health Organization. (2018). Global status report on alcohol and
health 2018. 73-74.

[13]. Piano MR. (2017). Alcohol's Effects on the Cardiovascular System.
_Alcohol Res_. 38(2):219 -241.

[14]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2018). Alcohol Use in
Pregnancy.

[15]. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases.
(2018). What People Recovering From Alcoholism Need To Know About
Osteoporosis.

[16]. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. (2004). Alcohol's
Damaging Effects on the Brain. _Alcohol Alert. No. 63_.

[17]. Ramesh Shivani, M.D., R. Jeffrey Goldsmith, M.D., and Robert M.
Anthenelli, M.D. (2002). Alcoholism and Psychiatric Disorders. _Alcohol
Research & Health. 26(2): 90-98._ _ _

[18]. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAA). (2018). A
Word About Alcohol Poisoning. _Parents: Help Your Teen Party Right at
Graduation, NIH No. 07-5641._ _ _

[19]. Ballard, H. S. (1997). The hematological complications of alcoholism.
_Alcohol health and research world_ , _21_ , 42-52.

[20]. Mayo Clinic. (2018). Alcohol Use Disorder.

[21]. Van Heertum, K., & Rossi, B. (2017). Alcohol and fertility: how much is
too much?. _Fertility research and practice_ , _3_ (1), 10.

[22]. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic And Statistical
Manual Of Mental Disorders (5th ed.).

[23]. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAA). (2018).
Comorbidity: Substance Use Disorders and Other Mental Illnesses.

[24]. Mayo Clinic. (2018). Peptic ulcer.

## Further Reading

  * Blood Alcohol Concentration In the Body
  * The Dangers of a Blackout
  * Blurred or Double Vision
  * The Aches & Pains of a Hangover
  * The Effects of Alcohol on Your Memory
  * What Causes Slurred Speech from Drinking?
  * What Are Alcohol Shakes or Tremors?
  * Spins from Drinking Too Much
  * Feeling Warmer and Flushed Skin
  * Fighting When You Are Drunk
  * Alcohol Acting as a Blood Thinner
  * High Blood Pressure Concerns
  * Risk of Heart Attack
  * Kindling Due to Alcohol Withdrawal
  * The Difference Between Tolerance & Dependence

Am I an alcoholic?

Take the quiz! Have you been drinking?  
Calculate your BAC

Break free from alcoholism.

Learn how by calling us today.

Call 888-685-5770 Who Answers? Who answers the helpline calls.

American Addiction Centers, Inc.

Alcohol.org is an American Addiction Centers, Inc. subsidiary. Not sure what
this means? Learn more about AAC.

Recovery is Worth Fighting For.  
We'll Help You.

Call 888-685-5770 Who Answers? Who answers the helpline calls.

I need to talk to someone now

![](https://www.alcohol.org/app/themes/alcohol-org/dist/images/phone-icon.svg)
888-685-5770

Who Answers? Who answers the helpline calls.

(C) Alcohol.org 2019 &bullet; All Rights Reserved.

  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use
  * Sitemap

×

## HOW OUR HELPLINE WORKS

For those seeking addiction treatment for themselves or a loved one, the
Alcohol.org helpline is a private and convenient solution.

**Calls to any general helpline (non-facility specific 1-8XX numbers) for your
visit will be answered by American Addiction Centers (AAC).**

We are standing by 24/7 to discuss your treatment options. Our representatives
work solely for AAC and will discuss whether an AAC facility may be an option
for you.

Our helpline is offered at no cost to you and with no obligation to enter into
treatment. Neither Alcohol.org nor AAC receives any commission or other fee
that is dependent upon which treatment provider a visitor may ultimately
choose.

For more information on AAC’s commitment to ethical marketing and treatment
practices, or to learn more about how to select a treatment provider, visit
our About AAC page.

If you wish to explore additional treatment options or connect with a specific
rehab center, you can browse top-rated listings or visit SAMHSA.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times

