
        
                  * Shows
        
          * This Day In History
        
          * Schedule
        
          * Topics
        
          * Stories
        
          *  _Ad Choices_
          *  _Advertise_
          *  _Closed Captioning_
          *  _Copyright Policy_
          *  _Corporate Information_
          *  _Employment Opportunities_
          *  _FAQ/Contact Us_
          *  _Privacy Notice_
          *  _Terms of Use_
          *  _TV Parental Guidelines_
          *  _RSS Feeds_
          *  _Privacy Settings_
          *       *       *       *       * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
          * Shows
          * This Day In History
          * Schedule
          * Topics
          * Stories
        
          *       *       *       *       * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
          * Shows
          * This Day In History
          * Schedule
          * Topics
          * Stories
        

![Inquisition](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_768/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjM4OTQ4MTY5/conrad-

of-marburg-the-inquisitor.jpg)

Publish date:

        
                Nov 17, 2017
        

Updated on

        
                Aug 21, 2018
        

# Inquisition

Author:

        
                History.com Editors
        
          *       *       *       * ## Contents
        
          1. Catharists 
          2. The Job of Inquisitors 
          3. Conversos 
          4. Torquemada 
          5. Spanish Inquisition 
          6. Inquisitor Generals 
          7. Roman Inquisition 
          8. Inquisition in the New World 
          9. End of the Spanish Inquisition 
          10. Sources
        

The Inquisition was a powerful office set up within the Catholic Church to
root out and punish heresy throughout Europe and the Americas. Beginning in
the 12th century and continuing for hundreds of years, the Inquisition is
infamous for the severity of its tortures and its persecution of Jews and
Muslims. Its worst manifestation was in Spain, where the Spanish Inquisition
was a dominant force for more than 200 years, resulting in some 32,000
executions.

## Catharists

The Inquisition has its origins in the early organized persecution of non-
Catholic Christian religions in Europe. In 1184 Pope Lucius III sent bishops
to southern France to track down heretics called Catharists. These efforts
continued into the 14th Century.

During the same period, the church also pursued the Waldensians in Germany and
Northern Italy. In 1231, Pope Gregory charged the Dominican and Franciscan
Orders to take over the job of tracking down heretics.

## The Job of Inquisitors

Inquisitors would arrive in a town and announce their presence, giving
citizens a chance to admit to heresy. Those who confessed received a
punishment ranging from a pilgrimage to a whipping.

Those accused of heresy were forced to testify. If the heretic did not
confess, torture and execution were inescapable. Heretics weren't allowed to
face accusers, received no counsel, and were often victims of false
accusations.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

Bernard Gui wrote the influential guidebook for Inquisitors called "Conduct of
the Inquisition into Heretical Depravity" in the early 14th Century. Gui
himself pronounced over 600 people guilty of heresy and was featured as a
character in Umberto Eco's novel _The Name of the Rose_.

There were countless abuses of power. Count Raymond VII of Toulouse was known
for burning heretics at the stake even though they had confessed. His
successor, Count Alphonese, confiscated the lands of the accused to increase
his riches.

In 1307, Inquisitors were involved in the mass arrest and tortures of 15,000
Knights Templar in France, resulting in dozens of executions. Joan of Arc,
burned at the stake in 1431, is the most famous victim of this wing of the
Inquisition.

## Conversos

In the late 15th Century, King Ferdinand II and Queen Isabella of Spain
believed corruption in the Spanish Catholic Church was caused by Jews who, to
survive centuries of anti-Semitism, converted to Christianity.

Known as Conversos, they were viewed with suspicion by old powerful Christian
families. Conversos were blamed for a plague and accused of poisoning peoples'
water and abducting Christian boys.

Ferdinand and Isabella feared that even trusted Conversos were secretly
practicing their old religion; the royal couple was also afraid of angering
Christian subjects who demanded a harder line against Conversos--Christian
support was crucial in an upcoming crusade against Muslims planned in Granada.

Ferdinand felt an Inquisition was the best way to fund that crusade, by
seizing the wealth of heretic Conversos.

## Torquemada

In 1478, under the influence of clergyman Tomas de Torquemada, the monarchs
created the Tribunal of Castile to investigate heresy among Conversos. The
effort focused on stronger Catholic education for Conversos, but by 1480, the
Inquisition was formed.

That same year, Jews in Castile were forced into ghettos separated from
Christians, and the Inquisition expanded to Seville. A mass exodus of
Conversos followed.

In 1481, 20,000 Conversos confessed to heresy, hoping to avoid execution.
Inquisitors decreed that their penitence required them to name other heretics.
By the year's end, hundreds of Conversos were burned at the stake.

## Spanish Inquisition

Hearing the complaints of Conversos who had fled to Rome, Pope Sextus
proclaimed the Spanish Inquisition was too harsh and was wrongly accusing
Conversos. In 1482 Sextus appointed a council to take command of the
Inquisition.

Torquemada was named Inquisitor General and established courts across Spain.
Torture became systemized and routinely used to elicit confessions.

Sentencing of confessed heretics was done in a public event called the Auto-
da-Fe. All heretics wore a sackcloth with a single eyehole over their heads.
Heretics who refused to confess were burned at the stake.

Sometimes people fought back against the Inquisition. In 1485, an Inquisitor
died after being poisoned, and another Inquisitor was stabbed to death in a
church. Torquemada managed to round up the assassins, burning at the stake 42
people in retaliation.

Torquemada's downfall came when he investigated members of the clergy for
heresy. Complaints to Pope Alexander VI convinced him that Torquemada needed
tempering. Torquemada was forced to share leadership with four other clergymen
until he died in 1498.

## Inquisitor Generals

Diego de Deza took over as Inquisitor General, escalating the hunt for heresy
within cities and rounding up scores of accused heretics, including members of
the nobility and local governments. Some were able to bribe their way out of
imprisonment and death, reflecting the level of corruption under de Deza.

After Isabella's death in 1504, Ferdinand promoted Cardinal Gonzalo Ximenes de
Cisneros, the head of the Spanish Catholic Church, to Inquisitor General.
Ximenes had previously made a mark in Granada persecuting the Islamic Moors.

As Inquisitor General, Ximenes pursued Muslims into North Africa, encouraging
Ferdinand to take military action. Upon seizing African towns, the Inquisition
became established there. Ximenes was dismissed in 1517 after pleas from
prominent Conversos, but the Inquisition was allowed to continue.

## Roman Inquisition

Rome renewed its own Inquisition in 1542 when Pope Paul III created the
Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition to combat
Protestant heresy. This Inquisition is best known for putting Galileo on trial
in 1633.

In 1545, the Spanish Index was created, a list of European books considered
heretical and forbidden in Spain, based on the Roman Inquisition's own _Index
Librorum Prohibitorum_. In other nods to Rome 's concerns, the Spanish
Inquisition focused on the rising population of Spanish Protestants in the
1550s.

In 1556, Philip II ascended the Spanish throne. He had previously brought the
Roman Inquisition to the Netherlands, where Lutherans were hunted down and
burned at the stake.

## Inquisition in the New World

As Spain expanded into the Americas, so did the Inquisition, established in
Mexico in 1570. In 1574, Lutherans were burned at the stake there, and the
Inquisition came to Peru, where Protestants were likewise tortured and burned
alive.

In 1580 Spain conquered Portugal and began rounding up and slaughtering Jews
that had fled Spain. Philip II also renewed hostilities against the Moors, who
revolted and found themselves either killed or sold into slavery.

Philip II died in 1598 and his son, Philip III, dealt with the Muslim uprising
by banishing them. From 1609 to 1615, 150,000 Muslims who had converted to
Catholicism were forced out of Spain.

By the mid-1600s the Inquisition and Catholic dominance had become such an
oppressive fact of daily life in Spanish territories that Protestants avoided
those places altogether.

## End of the Spanish Inquisition

In 1808, Napoleon conquered Spain and ordered the Inquisition there to be
abolished.

After Napoleon's defeat in 1814, Ferdinand VII worked to reinstate the
Inquisition but was ultimately prevented by the French government, which
helped Ferdinand overcome a fierce rebellion. Part of the agreement with
France was to dismantle the Inquisition, which was defunct by 1834.

The last person to be executed by the Inquisition was Cayetano Ripoll, a
Spanish schoolmaster hanged for heresy in 1826.

The Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition still
exists, though changed its name a couple of times. It is currently called the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.

## Sources

God's Jury: The Inquisition and the Making of the Modern World. Cullen Murphy.  
Inquisito. University of Notre Dame.  
The Spanish Inquisition. Cecil Roth.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

Inquisition

### Author

History.com Editors

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/topics/religion/inquisition

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

August 21, 2018

### Original Published Date

November 17, 2017

Tags

terms:

        
                Religion
        

By

History.com Editors

        
                  *       *       *       * #
        

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

#

VIDEOS

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-06-203758-11b67cd-013418)

## Christianity

![Large crowds gather outside St. Peter's Basilica in Rome to hear of the

election of the 260th Pope, Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli. The Italian Cardinal

became Pius

XII.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU5MTYxNjY3Mjk1/history-

rewind-cardinal-pacelli-elected-pope-1939.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-06-203758-11b67cd-013418)

## History Rewind: Cardinal Pacelli Elected Pope 1939

![Catholic cardinals gather at the Vatican in a centuries-old ceremony to

elect a new

pope.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU4MDkwMjg0MzYx/electing-

a-new-pope.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-06-203758-11b67cd-013418)

## Electing a New Pope

![The Swiss Guard are the Pope's highly-trained security

force.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU3ODE4NjM3NjQx/the-

swiss-guard.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-06-203758-11b67cd-013418)

## The Swiss Guard

# ![SIGN UP FOR MORE

HISTORY!](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU3OTM4MTkyNjk0MTI2NTQy/section_header_art_small_signup.svg)

Subscribe for fascinating stories connecting the past to the present.

SIGN UP

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTY1NzE4MzM0MjE5OTg5/section_header_art_medium_street.jpg)

#

RELATED CONTENT

![close-up-of-bible-on-

table-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTc1MjMxMzA1/close-

up-of-bible-on-table-2.jpg)

## The Bible

The Bible is the holy scripture of the Christian religion, purporting to tell
the history of the Earth from its earliest creation to the spread of
Christianity in the first century A.D. Both the Old Testament and the New
Testament have undergone changes over the centuries, _...read more_

![israel-religion-jewish-pesach-

blessing](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjM2MTMwMTIx/israel-

religion-jewish-pesach-blessing.jpg)

## Judaism

Judaism is the world’s oldest monotheistic religion, dating back nearly 4,000
years. Followers of Judaism believe in one God who revealed himself through
ancient prophets. History is essential to understanding the Jewish faith,
which is embedded in tradition, law and culture. _...read more_

![iran-faravahar-am-feuertempel-in-

yazd](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjM3OTY1MTI5/iran-

faravahar-am-feuertempel-in-yazd.jpg)

## Zoroastrianism

Zoroastrianism is an ancient Persian religion that may have originated as
early as 4,000 years ago. Arguably the world’s first monotheistic faith, it’s
one of the oldest religions still in existence. Zoroastrianism was the state
religion of three Persian dynasties, until the _...read more_

![mormon-family-with-two-wives-and-nine-

children](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTAzNzEzNjA5/mormon-

family-with-two-wives-and-nine-children.jpg)

## Mormons

Mormons are a religious group that embrace concepts of Christianity as well as
revelations made by their founder, Joseph Smith. They primarily belong to The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, or LDS, which is headquartered in
Salt Lake City, Utah, and has more than 15 _...read more_

![pentagrams-with-magic-wands-moth-runes-and-

flowers](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgzMjA5NTk4Njg3/pentagrams-

with-magic-wands-moth-runes-and-flowers.jpg)

## Wicca

Wicca is a modern-day, nature-based pagan religion. Though rituals and
practices vary among people who identify as Wiccan, most observations include
the festival celebrations of solstices and equinoxes, the honoring of a male
god and a female goddess, and the incorporation of _...read more_

![young-men-from-the-neighbouring-town-of-barsana-celebrate-holi-with-

coloured-water-and-gulal-

powder](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjQ2OTQzNTYx/young-

men-from-the-neighbouring-town-of-barsana-celebrate-holi-with-coloured-water-

and-gulal-powder.jpg)

## Hinduism

Hinduism is the world’s oldest religion, according to many scholars, with
roots and customs dating back more than 4,000 years. Today, with about 900
million followers, Hinduism is the third-largest religion behind Christianity
and Islam. Roughly 95 percent of the world’s Hindus _...read more_

![TOPIC-Islam-

GettyImages-959196386-promo](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYzMjIyNjUxMTk4Nzc2ODMy/topic-

islam-gettyimages-959196386-promo.jpg)

## Islam

Islam is the second largest religion in the world after Christianity, with
about 1.8 billion Muslims worldwide. Although its roots go back further,
scholars typically date the creation of Islam to the 7th century, making it
the youngest of the major world religions. Islam _...read more_

![reconstructed-capital-museum-opens-in-

beijing](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTY3MjM1OTEz/reconstructed-

capital-museum-opens-in-beijing.jpg)

## Buddhism

Buddhism is a religion that was founded by Siddhartha Gautama (“The Buddha”)
more than 2,500 years ago in India. With about 470 million followers, scholars
consider Buddhism one of the major world religions. The religion has
historically been most prominent in East and Southeast _...read more_

![junipero-serra-religious-statue-in-the-saint-francis-

of](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjMzODM2MzYx/junipero-

serra-religious-statue-in-the-saint-francis-of.jpg)

## California Missions

The California missions began in the late 18th century as an effort to convert
Native Americans to Catholicism and expand European territory. There were 21
missions in all, lasting from 1769 until about 1833. The California missions
began in the late 18th century as an effort _...read more_

Loading…

See More

        
                  * Ad Choices
          * Advertise
          * Closed Captioning
          * Copyright Policy
          * Corporate Information
          * Employment Opportunities
          * FAQ/Contact Us
          * Privacy Notice
          * Terms of Use
          * TV Parental Guidelines
          * RSS Feeds
        

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

