

Bring keyboard focus to Back to Top button using CTRL, ALT and T

Skip to main content View sitemap

![CIHI logo](https://www.cihi.ca/sites/all/themes/de_theme/img/logo.svg)

__Search

__

![Canadian Institute for Health Information. Better data. Better decisions.

Healthier

Canadians](https://www.cihi.ca/sites/all/themes/de_theme/img/logo.svg)

__Search

Log in

  * Help
  * Register

  * English version

  * version Français

  * Access Data and Reports

  * Submit Data and View Standards
  * News, Events and Education
  * About CIHI

__

Main content

Share this particular page on a social media site

Email

Print

# Health spending

In 2018, total health expenditure in Canada is expected to reach $253.5
billion, or $ 6,839 per person. It is anticipated that, overall, health
spending will represent 11.3% of Canada’s gross domestic product (GDP). To
learn more, see our report National Health Expenditure Trends.

To track how health dollars are being spent, we maintain these databases

  * National Health Expenditure Database (NHEX), the primary source of health spending information in Canada
  * Canadian MIS Database (CMDB), the primary source of information on staffing, cost, workload and provision of health services
  * Canadian Patient Cost Database (CPCD), the data source used to estimate costs by patient group

OECD Health Database (Canadian Segment), maintained by CIHI and Statistics
Canada, the data source that includes a consistent series of internationally
comparable data for most of the 1,200 variables contained in the OECD
database.

Combined, these data sources help us provide our stakeholders with trend
analyses and short-term forecasts on health spending in Canada. They also
track hospital financial performance and spending related to patient care.

## Information on Health Spending Data

![](gif/internet/IMG_ANCHOR_ICON_EN) Key reports and analyses  
![](gif/internet/IMG_ANCHOR_ICON_EN) Databases and data sources  
![](gif/internet/IMG_ANCHOR_ICON_EN) Metadata  
![](gif/internet/IMG_ANCHOR_ICON_EN) Methodology

### Key reports and analyses

Trends in Hospital Expenditure, 2005–2006 to 2017–2018 (Feb. 2019)  
Using the Canadian MIS Database (CMDB), examine data and statistics about how
hospital expenditure varies by use of funds and by types of hospital care
services at the provincial, territorial and international levels.

National Health Expenditure Trends, 1975 to 2018 (Nov. 2018)  
This report provides an overview of how much is spent on health care annually,
what and who the money is being spent on, and where the money comes from.

Prescribed Drug Spending in Canada, 2018: A Focus on Public Drug Programs
(Nov. 2018)  
This report provides an in-depth look at public drug program spending using
data from CIHI’s National Prescription Drug Utilization Information System
(NPDUIS).

Understanding Variability in the Cost of a Standard Hospital Stay (May 2017)  
This report explores observed variability in the indicator Cost of a Standard
Hospital Stay, considering such things as staff mix, teaching status and
facility size.

Health Spending — Nursing Homes (Nov 2014)  
This information sheet contains key messages on health spending in nursing
homes including how much is spent, who is providing the care and the role of
the private sector.

### Databases and data sources

**National Health Expenditure Database**

The National Health Expenditure Database (NHEX) collects, processes and
analyzes summary data on all health spending in Canada. It has a wealth of
data, extending back to 1975. The data tables are updated annually and are
available free of charge.

The information facilitates provincial/territorial, national and international
comparative reporting and also supports policy planning, decision-making and
research. It helps answer questions about

  * How much is spent on health care every year
  * What the money is used for and whom it is spent on
  * Where that money comes from

**Canadian MIS Database**

The Canadian MIS Database (CMDB) is the national data source for financial and
statistical information about hospitals and other health service
organizations.  
The information in the CMDB can potentially be used to cost the activities of
health service organizations. It forms the basis of management reporting,
including annual general purpose financial statements, financial ratio
analysis and operational budgeting.

**Canadian Patient Cost Database**

The Canadian Patient Cost Database (CPCD) contains patient-level data from
more than 60 organizations in British Columbia, Ontario and Alberta. Costs
relate to the individual encounter level for inpatient, outpatient, long-term
care, complex continuing care, mental health and rehabilitation services.

**Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Health
Database (Canadian Segment)**

The OECD Health Database (Canadian Segment) is a result of the collaboration
between CIHI and Statistics Canada. It processes a consistent series of
internationally comparable data for most of the 1,200 variables contained in
the OECD database.

The database supports policy planning, decision-making and research, and
facilitates international comparative reporting. The OECD Health Database is
divided into 11 categories and can be downloaded from the OECD's _External
link, opens in new window_ website.

### Metadata

Metadata is information about data. It helps users understand and interpret
data from a specific source.

Find out more about the following data sources:

Canadian MIS Database (CMDB)

Canadian Patient Cost Database (CPCD)

National Health Expenditure Database (NHEX)

OECD Health Database (Canadian Segment)

### Methodology

Data for NHEX is extracted from public documents, including national and
provincial/territorial public accounts and other financial reports. Other
sources include:

  * Private insurance companies
  * The firm AC Nielsen Canada
  * Statistics Canada.

Our methodology for reporting on trends in health spending, including how
spending is categorized, is available in our annual report.

The CMDB records financial and statistical information based on a standardized
chart of accounts. Hospitals and other health service organizations are
expected to submit MIS Standards–compliant financial and statistical data
relating to health services to the CMDB including health regions. Most health
service organizations submit their data through their respective ministries of
health.

Most Canadian data for the OECD Health Database originates from

  * Databases maintained by CIHI and Statistics Canada, such as the health expenditures, health services and health professionals database
  * Demographic and vital statistics databases at Statistics Canada

### We welcome your feedback and questions

Contact us at these email addresses:

  * Canadian MIS Database (CMDB): fsi@cihi.ca
  * Canadian Patient Cost Database (CPCD): fsi@cihi.ca
  * National Health Expenditure Database (NHEX): nhex@cihi.ca
  * Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Health Database (Canadian Segment): oecdcs@cihi.ca

**Have a data inquiry or research question?Make a data request.**

Use CIHI's accessibility request form to request CIHI documentation in an
accessible format for people living with disabilities.

![Canadian Institute for Health Information. Better data. Better decisions.

Healthier Canadians](/sites/all/themes/de_theme/img/logo-footer.svg)

CIHI is an independent, not-for-profit organization that provides essential
information on Canada’s health system and the health of Canadians.

We're celebrating 25 years!

## Access Data and Reports

  * Make a Data Request

## Submit Data and View Standards

  * Submission Support Resources
  * Submission Deadlines and Refresh Dates
  * Codes and Classifications
  * Data Standards
  * Data and Information Quality
  * Methodologies and Decision-Support Tools
  * Support Request (eQuery)

## News, Events and Education

  * News
  * Events
  * Education
  * Media Information
  * Book a CIHI Speaker

## About CIHI

  * Contact Us
  * Your CIHI Account
  * General Help and FAQ
  * CIHI’s Impact
  * Careers
  * Vision and Mandate
  * Corporate Strategies
  * Governance and Accountability
  * Privacy and Security
  * Accessibility
  * Terms of Use

Log in

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

  * Terms of Use

  * Accessibility
  * Privacy and Security
  * Help

_ _ BACK TO TOP

© CIHI 1996 – 2019

![Webstats CIHI

Image](https://webstats.cihi.ca/dcsz0q9x500000gs8m2agy131_1f1f/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=9.3.0&WT.dcssip=www.cihi.ca)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

