

# Fetal viability

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

**Fetal viability** or **foetal viability** is the ability of a fetus to
survive outside the uterus.[1]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Definitions
          * 2 Medical viability
          * 3 Period of viability
            * 3.1 United States Supreme Court
            * 3.2 Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002
            * 3.3 U.S. state laws
          * 4 Limit of viability
          * 5 Factors that influence the chance of survival
          * 6 See also
          * 7 References
          * 8 Further reading
        

## Definitions[edit]

_Viability_ , as the word has been used in United States constitutional law
since _Roe v. Wade_ , is the potential of the fetus to survive outside the
uterus after birth, natural or induced, when supported by up-to-date medicine.
Fetal viability depends largely on the fetal organ maturity, and environmental
conditions.[2] According to Websters Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the
English Language, viability of a fetus means having reached such a stage of
development as to be capable of living, under normal conditions, outside the
uterus. Viability exists as a function of biomedical and technological
capacities, which are different in different parts of the world. As a
consequence, there is, at the present time, no worldwide, uniform gestational
age that defines viability.[3]

According to the McGraw-Hill medical dictionary a _nonviable_ fetus is "an
expelled or delivered fetus which, although living, cannot possibly survive to
the point of sustaining life independently, even with support of the best
available medical therapy."[4] A legal definition states: "Nonviable means not
capable of living, growing, or developing and functioning successfully. It is
antithesis of viable, which is defined as having attained such form and
development of organs as to be normally capable of living outside the uterus."
[Wolfe v. Isbell, 291 Ala. 327, 329 (Ala. 1973)][5]

Various jurisdictions have different legal definitions of viability. In
Ireland, under the Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018,
fetal _viability_ is defined as "the point in a pregnancy at which, in the
reasonable opinion of a medical practitioner, the foetus is capable of
survival outside the uterus without extraordinary life-sustaining measures."
[Definitions (Part 2)(8)][6]

## Medical viability[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Preterm_infants_survival_rates.svg/310px-

Preterm_infants_survival_rates.svg.png)

Preterm infants survival rates based on different
studies[7][8][9][10][11][12].

There is no sharp limit of development, gestational age, or weight at which a
human fetus automatically becomes viable.[1] According to studies between 2003
and 2005, 20 to 35 percent of babies born at 24 weeks of gestation survive,
while 50 to 70 percent of babies born at 25 weeks, and more than 90 percent
born at 26 to 27 weeks, survive.[13] It is rare for a baby weighing less than
500 g (17.6 ounces) to survive.[1] The chances of a fetus surviving increase
3-4% per day between 23 and 24 weeks of gestation and about 2-3% per day
between 24 and 26 weeks of gestation. After 26 weeks the rate of survival
increases at a much slower rate because survival is high
already.[14][15][16][17]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/57/Prenatal_development_table.svg/800px-

Prenatal_development_table.svg.png)

Stages in prenatal development, showing _viability_ and point of 50% chance of
survival ( _limit of viability_ ) at bottom. Weeks and months numbered by
gestation.

Completed weeks of gestation at birth | 21 and less | 22 | 23 | 24 | 25 | 26 |
27 | 30 | 34  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Chance of survival[14] | 0% | 0-3% | 0-5% | 40-70% | 50-80% | 80-90% | >90% |

> 95% | >98%

## Period of viability[edit]

The period of viability refers (traditionally) to the period after the twenty-
eighth week,[18] or more recently the twenty-fourth week, of gestation when a
human fetus is capable of living outside of the womb. Whether the fetus is in
the period of viability has legal ramifications as far as the fetus' rights of
protection are concerned.[19]

It sometimes incorporates weight as well as gestational age.[20][21][22]

### United States Supreme Court[edit]

The United States Supreme Court stated in _Roe v. Wade_ (1973) that viability
(i.e., the "interim point at which the fetus becomes ... potentially able to
live outside the mother's womb, albeit with artificial aid"[23] ) "is usually
placed at about seven months (28 weeks) but may occur earlier, even at 24
weeks."[23] The 28-week definition became part of the "trimester framework"
marking the point at which the "compelling state interest" (under the doctrine
of strict scrutiny) in preserving potential life became possibly controlling,
permitting states to freely regulate and even ban abortion after the 28th
week.[23] The subsequent _Planned Parenthood v. Casey_ (1992) modified the
"trimester framework," permitting the states to regulate abortion in ways not
posing an "undue burden" on the right of the mother to an abortion at any
point before viability; on account of technological developments between 1973
and 1992, viability itself was legally dissociated from the hard line of 28
weeks, leaving the point at which "undue burdens" were permissible variable
depending on the technology of the time and the judgment of the state
legislatures.

### Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002[edit]

In 2002, the U.S. Government enacted the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act.
Whereas a fetus may be _viable_ or not _viable_ in utero, this law provides a
legal definition for personal human life when not in utero. It defines "born
alive" as "the complete expulsion or extraction from his or her mother of that
member, at any stage of development, who after such expulsion or extraction
breathes or has a beating heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite
movement of voluntary muscles"[24] and specifies that any of these is the
action of a living human person. While the implications of this law for
defining viability in medicine may not be fully explored,[25] in practice
doctors and nurses are advised not to resuscitate such persons with
gestational age of 22 weeks or less, under 400 g weight, with anencephaly, or
with a confirmed diagnosis of trisomy 13 or 18.[26][27]

### U.S. state laws[edit]

Forty-three states have laws restricting post-viability abortions. Some allow
doctors to decide for themselves if the fetus is viable. Some require doctors
to perform tests to prove a fetus is pre-viable and require multiple doctors
to certify the findings. The procedure intact dilation and extraction (IDX)
became a focal point in the abortion debate,[28] based on the belief that it
is used mainly post-viability.[29] IDX was made illegal in most circumstances
by the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003, which the U.S. Supreme Court
upheld in the case of _Gonzales v. Carhart_.

## Limit of viability[edit]

The **limit of viability** is the gestational age at which a prematurely born
fetus/infant has a 50% chance of long-term survival outside its mother's womb.
With the support of neonatal intensive care units, the limit of viability in
the developed world has declined since 50 years ago.[30][31]

Currently, the limit of viability is considered to be around 24 weeks,
although the incidence of major disabilities remains high at this
point.[32][33] Neo-natologists generally would not provide intensive care at
23 weeks, but would from 26 weeks.[34][35][36]

As of 2006[update], the two youngest children to survive premature birth are
thought to be James Elgin Gill (born on 20 May 1987 in Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada, at 21 weeks and 5 days gestational age),[37][38] and Amillia Taylor
(an IVF pregnancy, born on 24 October 2006 in Miami, Florida, at 21 weeks and
6 days gestational age).[39][40] Both children were born just under 20 weeks
from fertilization (or 22 weeks' gestation). At birth, Taylor was 9 inches
(22.86 cm) long and weighed 10 ounces (283 grams).[39] She suffered digestive
and respiratory problems, together with a brain hemorrhage. She was discharged
from the Baptist Children's Hospital on 20 February 2007.[39] As of 2013,
Taylor was in kindergarten and at the small end of the normal growth curve
with some developmental delays.[41]

A preterm birth, also known as _premature birth_ , is defined as babies born
alive before 37 weeks of pregnancy are completed.[42] There are three types of
preterm births: extremely preterm (less than 28 weeks), very preterm (28 to 32
weeks) and moderate to late preterm (32 to 37 weeks).[42]

## Factors that influence the chance of survival[edit]

There are several factors that affect the chance of survival of the baby. Two
notable factors are age and weight. The baby's gestational age (number of
completed weeks of pregnancy) at the time of birth and the baby's weight (also
a measure of growth) influence whether the baby will survive. Another major
factor is gender: male infants are slightly less mature[ _clarification
needed_ ] and have a slightly higher risk of dying than female infants.[
_citation needed_ ]

Several types of health problems also influence fetal viability. For example,
breathing problems, congenital abnormalities or malformations, and the
presence of other severe diseases, especially infection, threaten the survival
of the neonate.

Other factors may influence survival by altering the rate of organ maturation
or by changing the supply of oxygen to the developing fetus.

The mother's health plays a significant role in the child's viability.
Diabetes in the mother, if not well controlled, slows organ maturation;
infants of such mothers have a higher mortality. Severe high blood pressure
before the 8th month of pregnancy may cause changes in the placenta,
decreasing the delivery of nutrients and/or oxygen to the developing fetus and
leading to problems before and after delivery.

Rupture of the fetal membranes before 24 weeks of gestation with loss of
amniotic fluid markedly decreases the baby's chances of survival, even if the
baby is delivered much later.[14]

The quality of the facility—whether the hospital offers neonatal critical care
services, whether it is a Level I pediatric trauma care facility, the
availability of corticosteroids and other medications at the facility, the
experience and number of physicians and nurses in neonatology and obstetrics
and of the providers has a limited but still significant impact on fetal
viability. Facilities that have obstetrical services and emergency rooms and
operating facilities, even if smaller, can be used in areas where higher
services are not available to stabilize the mother and fetus or neonate until
they can be transferred to an appropriate facility.[43][44][45][46]

## See also[edit]

        
                  * Beginning of human personhood
          * Futile medical care
          * Office for Human Research Protections#Additional protection for pregnant women, human fetuses, and neonates
        

## References[edit]

        
                  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Moore, Keith and Persaud, T. _The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology_, p. 103 (Saunders 2003).
          2. **^** (2012). Fetal Viability. [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.reference.md/files/D005/mD005328.html. [Last Accessed 15 November 2012].
          3. **^** Breborowicz GH (January 2001). "Limits of fetal viability and its enhancement". _Early Pregnancy_. **5** (1): 49–50. PMID 11753511.
          4. **^** The Free Dictionary. "nonviable fetus". _Medical Dictionary_. |access-date=May 21, 2019}}
          5. **^** "Non-Viable Fetus Law and Legal Definition". _USLegal_. Retrieved  May 21, 2019.
          6. **^** "Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018" (PDF). Irish parliament.
          7. **^** Patel RM, Rysavy MA, Bell EF, Tyson JE (June 2017). "Survival of Infants Born at Periviable Gestational Ages". _Clinics in Perinatology_. **44** (2): 287–303. doi:10.1016/j.clp.2017.01.009. PMC 5424630. PMID 28477661.
          8. **^** Costeloe KL, Hennessy EM, Haider S, Stacey F, Marlow N, Draper ES (December 2012). "Short term outcomes after extreme preterm birth in England: comparison of two birth cohorts in 1995 and 2006 (the EPICure studies)". _BMH_. **345** : e7976. doi:10.1136/bmj.e7976. PMC 3514472. PMID 23212881.
          9. **^** Fellman V, Hellström-Westas L, Norman M, Westgren M, Källén K, Lagercrantz H, Marsál K, Serenius F, Wennergren M (June 2009). "One-year survival of extremely preterm infants after active perinatal care in Sweden". _JAMA_. **301** (21): 2225–33. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.771. PMID 19491184.
          10. **^** Ancel PY, Goffinet F, Kuhn P, Langer B, Matis J, Hernandorena X, et al. (March 2015). "Survival and morbidity of preterm children born at 22 through 34 weeks' gestation in France in 2011: results of the EPIPAGE-2 cohort study". _JAMA Pediatrics_. **169** (3): 230–8. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.3351. PMID 25621457.
          11. **^** Boland RA, Davis PG, Dawson JA, Doyle LW (March 2017). "Outcomes of infants born at 22-27 weeks' gestation in Victoria according to outborn/inborn birth status". _Archives of Disease in Childhood. Fetal and Neonatal Edition_. **102** (2): F153–F161. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2015-310313. PMID 27531224.
          12. **^** Chen F, Bajwa NM, Rimensberger PC, Posfay-Barbe KM, Pfister RE (September 2016). "Thirteen-year mortality and morbidity in preterm infants in Switzerland". _Archives of Disease in Childhood. Fetal and Neonatal Edition_. **101** (5): F377–83. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2015-308579. PMID 27059074.
          13. **^** March of Dimes --> Neonatal Death Retrieved on November 10, 2014. In turn citing: 
            * Tyson JE, Parikh NA, Langer J, Green C, Higgins RD (April 2008). "Intensive care for extreme prematurity--moving beyond gestational age". _The New England Journal of Medicine_. **358** (16): 1672–81. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa073059. PMC 2597069. PMID 18420500.
            * Luke B, Brown MB (December 2006). "The changing risk of infant mortality by gestation, plurality, and race: 1989-1991 versus 1999-2001". _Pediatrics_. **118** (6): 2488–97. doi:10.1542/peds.2006-1824. PMC 3623686. PMID 17142535.
            * The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (September 2002). "ACOG Practice Bulletin: Clinical Management Guidelines for Obstetrcian-Gynecologists: Number 38, September 2002. Perinatal care at the threshold of viability". _Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **100** (3): 617–24. doi:10.1016/S0029-7844(02)02260-3. PMID 12220792.
          14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ (). What are the chances that my baby will survive?. [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.spensershope.org/chances_for_survival.htm. [Last Accessed 14 November 2012].
          15. **^** Stensvold HJ, Klingenberg C, Stoen R, Moster D, Braekke K, Guthe HJ, Astrup H, Rettedal S, Gronn M, Ronnestad AE (March 2017). "Neonatal Morbidity and 1-Year Survival of Extremely Preterm Infants". _Pediatrics_. **139** (3): e20161821. doi:10.1542/peds.2016-1821. PMID 28228499.
          16. **^** Glass HC, Costarino AT, Stayer SA, Brett CM, Cladis F, Davis PJ (June 2015). "Outcomes for extremely premature infants". _Anesthesia and Analgesia_. **120** (6): 1337–51. doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000000705. PMC 4438860. PMID 25988638.
          17. **^** Allen MC, Donohue PK, Dusman AE (November 1993). "The limit of viability--neonatal outcome of infants born at 22 to 25 weeks' gestation". _The New England Journal of Medicine_. **329** (22): 1597–601. doi:10.1056/NEJM199311253292201. PMID 8179651.
          18. **^** Finney, Patrick A. (1922). __Moral Problems in Hospital Practice: a Practical Handbook _. St. Louis: Herder Bk. Co. p. 24. OCLC 14054441._ __
          19. **^** "Attorney Catherine Christophillis Discusses The Reasoning Behind The Drug Testing Of Pregnant Women". _Legal News Chat Transcript_. October 25, 2000.
          20. **^** Li Z, Zeki R, Hilder L, Sullivan, EA (2012). "Australia's Mothers and Babies 2010". _Perinatal statistics series no. 27. Cat. no. PER 57_. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare National Perinatal Statistics Unit, Australian Government. Retrieved  4 July 2013.
          21. **^** Mohangoo AD, Blondel B, Gissler M, Velebil P, Macfarlane A, Zeitlin J (2013). Wright L (ed.). "International comparisons of fetal and neonatal mortality rates in high-income countries: should exclusion thresholds be based on birth weight or gestational age?". _PLOS ONE_. **8** (5): e64869. Bibcode:2013PLoSO...864869M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064869. PMC 3658983. PMID 23700489.
          22. **^** Royal College of Obstetricians; Gynaecologists UK (April 2001). "Further Issues Relating to Late Abortion, Fetal Viability and Registration of Births and Deaths". Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists UK. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2013.
          23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113, 160, 93 S.Ct. 705, 730 (1973).
          24. **^** "House Report 107-186 - BORN-ALIVE INFANTS PROTECTION ACT OF 2001". _frwebgate.access.gpo.gov_. Retrieved  3 April 2018.
          25. **^** Sayeed SA (October 2005). "Baby doe redux? The Department of Health and Human Services and the Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2002: a cautionary note on normative neonatal practice". _Pediatrics_. **116** (4): e576–85. doi:10.1542/peds.2005-1590. PMID 16199687.
          26. **^** Powell T (2012). "Decisions and Dilemmas Related to Resuscitation of Infants Born on the Verge of Viability". _NAINR_. **12** (1): 27–32. doi:10.1053/j.nainr.2011.12.004. Retrieved  8 October 2015.
          27. **^** Kattwinkel J, Perlman JM, Aziz K, Colby C, Fairchild K, Gallagher J, Hazinski MF, Halamek LP, Kumar P, Little G, McGowan JE, Nightengale B, Ramirez MM, Ringer S, Simon WM, Weiner GM, Wyckoff M, Zaichkin J (November 2010). "Neonatal resuscitation: 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care". _Pediatrics_. **126** (5): e1400–13. doi:10.1542/peds.2010-2972E. PMID 20956432.
          28. **^** Guttmacher.org Abortion Incidence and Services in the United States in 2000
          29. **^** Franklin Foer (1997). Fetal Viability. [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/the_gist/1997/05/fetal_viability.html. [Last Accessed 14 November 2012].
          30. **^** Santhakumaran S, Statnikov Y, Gray D, Battersby C, Ashby D, Modi N (May 2018). "Survival of very preterm infants admitted to neonatal care in England 2008-2014: time trends and regional variation". _Archives of Disease in Childhood. Fetal and Neonatal Edition_. **103** (3): F208–F215. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-312748. PMC 5916099. PMID 28883097.
          31. **^** Walsh F (11 April 2008). "Prem baby survival rates revealed". BBC News. Retrieved 2008-05-11.
          32. **^** Kaempf JW, Tomlinson M, Arduza C, Anderson S, Campbell B, Ferguson LA, Zabari M, Stewart VT (January 2006). "Medical staff guidelines for periviability pregnancy counseling and medical treatment of extremely premature infants". _Pediatrics_. **117** (1): 22–9. doi:10.1542/peds.2004-2547. PMID 16396856. - in particular see TABLE 1 Survival and Neurologic Disability Rates Among Extremely Premature Infants
          33. **^** Morgan MA, Goldenberg RL, Schulkin J (February 2008). "Obstetrician-gynecologists' practices regarding preterm birth at the limit of viability". _The Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine_. **21** (2): 115–21. doi:10.1080/14767050701866971. PMID 18240080.
          34. **^** Vavasseur C, Foran A, Murphy JF (September 2007). "Consensus statements on the borderlands of neonatal viability: from uncertainty to grey areas". _Irish Medical Journal_. **100** (8): 561–4. PMID 17955714. " All would provide intensive care at 26 weeks and most would not at 23 weeks. The grey area is 24 and 25 weeks gestation. This group of infants constitute 2 per 1000 births."
          35. **^** Kaempf _et al._ (2006) Table of neo-natologists resuscitation advice showing gestation ages at which they have neutral positions whether they would or would not recommend resuscitation.
          36. **^** _Roe v. Wade_ , 410 U.S. 113 (1973) ("viability is usually placed at about seven months (28 weeks) but may occur earlier, even at 24 weeks.") Retrieved 2007-03-04.
          37. **^** "Powell's Books - Guinness World Records 2004 (Guinness Book of Records) by". Retrieved  2007-11-28.
          38. **^** "Miracle child". Archived from the original on 2007-12-09. Retrieved  2007-11-28.
          39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Most-premature baby allowed home". BBC News. 2007-02-21. Retrieved  2007-05-05.
          40. **^** Baptist Hospital of Miami, Fact Sheet Archived 2009-03-26 at the Wayback Machine (2006).
          41. **^** Kirkey, Sharon (29 March 2013). "Fate of the fetus: As politicians debate, science reveals more and more about what happens during pregnancy". Postmedia News. Retrieved 5 June 2013.
          42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Preterm birth". _World Health Organization_. Retrieved  3 April 2018.
          43. **^** "NIH Study Reveals Factors That Influence Premature Infant Survival, Disability". _nih.gov_. 13 September 2015. Retrieved  3 April 2018.
          44. **^** Glass HC, Costarino AT, Stayer SA, Brett CM, Cladis F, Davis PJ (June 2015). "Outcomes for extremely premature infants". _Anesthesia and Analgesia_. **120** (6): 1337–51. doi:10.1213/ANE.0000000000000705. PMC 4438860. PMID 25988638.
          45. **^** Behrman RE, Butler AS, Outcomes, et al. (Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Understanding Premature Birth and Assuring Healthy) (3 April 2018). "Mortality and Acute Complications in Preterm Infants". National Academies Press (US). Retrieved 3 April 2018.
          46. **^** Belluck, Pam (6 May 2015). "Premature Babies May Survive at 22 Weeks if Treated, Study Finds". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  3 April 2018.
        

## Further reading[edit]

        
                  * "Fetal Viability and Death" (PDF). United States. National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research. May 2006.
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

        
                  * History of abortion
          * Methods of abortion
          * Abortion debate
          * Abortion law
        

Movements|

        
                  * Abortion-rights movements
          * Anti-abortion movements
        

Issues|

        
                  * Abortion and mental health
          * Beginning of human personhood
          * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
          * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
          * Anti-abortion violence
          * Abortion under communism
          * Birth control
          * Crisis pregnancy center
          * Ethical aspects of abortion
          * Eugenics
          * Fetal rights
          * Forced abortion
          * Genetics and abortion
          * Late-term abortion
          * Legalized abortion and crime effect
          * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
          * Limit of viability
          * Men's rights
          * Minors and abortion
          * One-child policy
          * Paternal rights and abortion
          * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
          * Prenatal development
          * Reproductive rights
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Sex-selective abortion
          * Sidewalk counseling
          * Societal attitudes towards abortion
          * Toxic abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
          * Women's rights
        

By country|

| Africa|

        
                  * Algeria
          * Angola
          * Benin
          * Botswana
          * Burkina Faso
          * Burundi
          * Cameroon
          * Cape Verde
          * Central African Republic
          * Chad
          * Egypt
          * Ghana
          * Namibia
          * Nigeria
          * South Africa
          * Uganda
          * Zimbabwe
        

---|---  
Asia|

        
                  * Afghanistan
          * Armenia
          * Azerbaijan
          * Bahrain
          * Bangladesh
          * Bhutan
          * Brunei
          * Cambodia
          * China
          * Cyprus
          * Georgia
          * East Timor
          * India
          * Iran
          * Israel
          * Japan
          * Kazakhstan
          * Northern Cyprus
          * South Korea
          * Philippines
          * Qatar
          * Saudi Arabia
          * Turkey
        

Europe|

        
                  * Albania
          * Andorra
          * Austria
          * Belarus
          * Belgium
          * Bosnia and Herzegovina
          * Bulgaria
          * Croatia
          * Czech Republic
          * Denmark
          * Estonia
          * Finland
          * France
          * Germany
          * Greece
          * Hungary
          * Iceland
          * Ireland
          * Italy
          * Kazakhstan
          * Latvia
          * Liechtenstein
          * Lithuania
          * Luxembourg
          * Malta
          * Moldova
          * Monaco
          * Montenegro
          * Netherlands
          * North Macedonia
          * Norway
          * Poland
          * Portugal
          * Romania
          * Russia
          * San Marino
          * Serbia
          * Slovakia
          * Slovenia
          * Spain
          * Sweden
          * Switzerland
          * Ukraine
          * United Kingdom
        

North America|

        
                  * Belize
          * Canada
          * Costa Rica
          * Cuba
          * Dominican Republic
          * El Salvador
          * Guatemala
          * Mexico
          * Nicaragua
          * Panama
          * Trinidad and Tobago
          * United States
        

Oceania|

        
                  * Australia
          * Micronesia
          * Fiji
          * Kiribati
          * Marshall Islands
          * New Zealand
          * Papua New Guinea
          * Samoa
          * Solomon Islands
          * Tonga
          * Tuvalu
          * Vanuatu
        

South America|

        
                  * Argentina
          * Bolivia
          * Brazil
          * Chile
          * Colombia
          * Ecuador
          * Guyana
          * Paraguay
          * Peru
          * Suriname
          * Uruguay
          * Venezuela
        

Law|

        
                  * Case law
          * Constitutional law
          * History of abortion law
          * Laws by country
          * Buffer zones
          * Conscientious objection
          * Fetal protection
          * Heartbeat bills
          * Informed consent
          * Late-term restrictions
          * Parental involvement
          * Spousal consent
        

Methods|

        
                  * Vacuum aspiration
          * Dilation and evacuation
          * Dilation and curettage
          * Intact D&X
          * Hysterotomy
          * Instillation
          * Menstrual extraction
          * Abortifacient drugs
            * Methotrexate
            * Mifepristone
            * Misoprostol
            * Oxytocin
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
        

Religion|

        
                  * Buddhism
          * Christianity
            * Catholicism
          * Hinduism
          * Islam
          * Judaism
          * Scientology
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Medicine

* * *

Specialties  
and  
subspecialties|

|

Surgery

* * *
        
                  * Cardiac surgery
          * Cardiothoracic surgery
          * Colorectal surgery
          * Eye surgery
          * General surgery
          * Neurosurgery
          * Oral and maxillofacial surgery
          * Orthopedic surgery
          * Hand surgery
          * Otolaryngology (ENT)
          * Pediatric surgery
          * Plastic surgery
          * Reproductive surgery
          * Surgical oncology
          * Thoracic surgery
          * Transplant surgery
          * Trauma surgery
          * Urology (Andrology)
          * Vascular surgery
        

Internal medicine

* * *
        
                  * Allergy / Immunology
          * Angiology
          * Cardiology
          * Endocrinology
          * Gastroenterology (Hepatology)
          * Geriatrics
          * Hematology
          * Hospital medicine
          * Infectious disease
          * Nephrology
          * Oncology
          * Pulmonology
          * Rheumatology
        

Obstetrics and gynaecology

* * *
        
                  * Gynaecology
          * Gynecologic oncology
          * Maternal–fetal medicine
          * Obstetrics
          * Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
          * Urogynecology
        

Diagnostic

* * *
        
                  * Radiology (Interventional radiology
          * Nuclear medicine)
          * Pathology (Anatomical pathology
          * Clinical pathology
          * Clinical chemistry
          * Clinical immunology
          * Cytopathology
          * Medical microbiology
          * Transfusion medicine)
        

Other specialties

* * *
        
                  * Addiction medicine
          * Adolescent medicine
          * Anesthesiology
          * Dermatology
          * Disaster medicine
          * Diving medicine
          * Emergency medicine (Mass gathering medicine)
          * Family medicine
          * General practice
          * Hospital medicine
          * Intensive-care medicine
          * Medical genetics
          * Narcology
          * Neurology (Clinical neurophysiology)
          * Occupational medicine
          * Ophthalmology
          * Oral medicine
          * Pain management
          * Palliative care
          * Pediatrics (Neonatology)
          * Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R)
          * Preventive medicine
          * Psychiatry
            * Addiction psychiatry
          * Radiation oncology
          * Reproductive medicine
          * Sexual medicine
          * Sleep medicine
          * Sports medicine
          * Transplantation medicine
          * Tropical medicine (Travel medicine)
          * Venereology
        

Medical education|

        
                  * Medical school
          * Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
          * Bachelor of Medical Sciences
          * Master of Medicine
          * Master of Surgery
          * Doctor of Medicine
          * Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
          * MD–PhD
        

Related topics|

        
                  * Alternative medicine
          * Allied health (Dentistry
          * Podiatry
          * Physiotherapy)
          * Molecular oncology
          * Nanomedicine
          * Personalized medicine
          * Public health
          * Traditional medicine
          * Veterinary medicine
          * Physician (Chief physician)
          * History of medicine
        
          * ![Wikipedia book](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/89/Symbol_book_class2.svg/16px-Symbol_book_class2.svg.png) Book
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
          * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Commons
          * ![WikiProject](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/People_icon.svg/16px-People_icon.svg.png) Wikiproject
          * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Medicine Portal
          * ![Outline](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Global_thinking.svg/10px-Global_thinking.svg.png) Outline
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fetal_viability&oldid=900295869"

Categories:

        
                  * Neonatology
          * Childhood
          * United States abortion case law
          * Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
          * History of women's rights in the United States
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Webarchive template wayback links
          * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006
          * All articles containing potentially dated statements
          * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2019
          * All articles with unsourced statements
          * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * العربية
          * Català
          * Français
          * Português
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 4 June 2019, at 18:06 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

