

![The Motley

Fool](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAUYAAAA3AQMAAABKEHFjAAAAA1BMVEX///+nxBvIAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAABhJREFUeNrtwQEBAAAAgiD/r25IQAEAPBoJBgABTFdNBwAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

  * Latest Stock Picks 
  * Stocks 

Premium Services

Return

S&P;

Stock Advisor Flagship service

361%

86%

Rule Breakers High-growth stocks

163%

72%

_Returns as of 6/11/2019_

View all Motley Fool Services

Stock Market News

    
    
    * Latest Investing News
    * Gainers & Losers in the Market Today
    * 3 Top Dividend Stocks to Buy Now
    * Dividend Paying Stocks for Beginners
    * Top Growth Stocks for 2019
    * How to Identify Growth Stocks
    * Marijuana Stocks
    * Earnings Call Transcripts
    * 10 Best Stocks Right Now
    

Popular Stocks

    
    
    * Apple Stock (AAPL)
    * Facebook Stock (FB)
    * Tesla Stock (TSLA)
    * Netflix Stock (NFLX)
    * Google Stock (GOOG)
    * Amazon Stock (AMZN)
    * GE Stock (GE)
    * Disney Stock (DIS)
    * Lyft Stock (LYFT)
    * Zoom Stock (ZM)
    

  * How to Invest 

Learn How to Invest

    
    
    * How to Invest in Stocks
    * Start Investing with $100 a Month
    * Investing Knowledge Center
    * Learn Options Trading
    * Guide to Index, Mutual & ETF Funds
    * How to Build a Dividend Portfolio
    * Investing for Retirement
    

Track Your Performance

    
    
    * Portfolio Tracker
    * Rate & Research Stocks - CAPS
    

Investing Accounts

    
    
    * Compare Brokerage Accounts
    * Compare IRA Accounts
    

  * Retirement 

Retirement Planning

    
    
    * 401Ks | IRAs | Asset Allocation
    * Step by step guide to retirement
    * 2018 Guide to Retirement Planning
    * Will Social Security be there for me?
    * Retirement Guide: 20s | 30s | 40s | 50s
    * Save for College or Retirement?
    * $16,122 Social Security Bonus
    

Already Retired

    
    
    * Time to Retire, Now What?
    * Living in Retirement in Your 60s
    * Should I Reverse Mortgage My Home?
    * Should I Get a Long Term Care Policy?
    * Your 2018 Guide to Social Security
    * Latest Retirement Articles
    

  * Personal Finance 

![The Ascent

Logo](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAyAAAAC2AQMAAAAbaXvoAAAAA1BMVEX///+nxBvIAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAClJREFUeNrtwTEBAAAAwqD1T20IX6AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIDPAEfOAAEh0JNjAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

The Ascent is The Motley Fool's new personal finance brand devoted to helping
you live a richer life. Let's conquer your financial goals together...faster.
See you at the top!

    
    
    * Best Credit Cards
    * Best Bank Accounts
    * Best Stock Brokers
    * Best Personal Loans
    * Best Student Loans
    

  * Community 

Our Mission:  
Make the world smarter, happier, and richer.

Founded in 1993 by brothers Tom and David Gardner, The Motley Fool helps
millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts,
books, newspaper column, radio show, and premium investing services.

  * Latest Stock Picks
  * Stocks 

Stocks

Premium Services

Return

S&P;

Stock Advisor Flagship service

361%

86%

Rule Breakers High-growth stocks

163%

72%

_Returns as of 6/11/2019_

View all Motley Fool Services

Stock Market News

    
    
      * Latest Investing News
      * Gainers & Losers in the Market Today
      * 3 Top Dividend Stocks to Buy Now
      * Dividend Paying Stocks for Beginners
      * Top Growth Stocks for 2019
      * How to Identify Growth Stocks
      * Marijuana Stocks
      * Earnings Call Transcripts
      * 10 Best Stocks Right Now
    

Popular Stocks

    
    
      * Apple Stock (AAPL)
      * Facebook Stock (FB)
      * Tesla Stock (TSLA)
      * Netflix Stock (NFLX)
      * Google Stock (GOOG)
      * Amazon Stock (AMZN)
      * GE Stock (GE)
      * Disney Stock (DIS)
      * Lyft Stock (LYFT)
      * Zoom Stock (ZM)
    

  * How to Invest 

How to Invest

Learn How to Invest

    
    
      * How to Invest in Stocks
      * Start Investing with $100 a Month
      * Investing Knowledge Center
      * Learn Options Trading
      * Guide to Index, Mutual & ETF Funds
      * How to Build a Dividend Portfolio
      * Investing for Retirement
    

Track Your Performance

    
    
      * Portfolio Tracker
      * Rate & Research Stocks - CAPS
    

Investing Accounts

    
    
      * Compare Brokerage Accounts
      * Compare IRA Accounts
    

  * Retirement 

Retirement

Retirement Planning

    
    
    * 401Ks
    * IRAs
    * Asset Allocation
    * Step by step guide to retirement
    * Your 2017 Guide to Retirement Plans
    * Will Social Security be there for me?
    * Retirement Guide: 20s
    * Retirement Guide: 30s
    * Retirement Guide: 40s
    * Retirement Guide: 50s
    * Save for College or Retirement?
    * $16,122 Social Security Bonus
    

Already Retired

    
    
    * Time to Retire, Now What?
    * Living in Retirement in Your 60s
    * Should I reverse Mortgage My Home?
    * Should I Get a Long Term Care Policy?
    * Your 2018 Guide to Social Security
    

  * Personal Finance 

Personal Finance

![The Ascent

Logo](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAyAAAAC2AQMAAAAbaXvoAAAAA1BMVEX///+nxBvIAAAAAXRSTlMAQObYZgAAAClJREFUeNrtwTEBAAAAwqD1T20IX6AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIDPAEfOAAEh0JNjAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

The Ascent is The Motley Fool's new personal finance brand devoted to helping
you live a richer life. Let's conquer your financial goals together...faster.
See you at the top!

    
    
      * Best Credit Cards
      * Best Bank Accounts
      * Best Stock Brokers
      * Best Personal Loans
      * Best Student Loans
    

  * Community 

Community

  * Login

Search Search:

# The 10 Most Common Reasons People Visit Their Doctor

## A recent study by The Mayo Clinic asks more than 142,000 people why they

went to see their doctor. The No. 1 answer was a big surprise!

![Sean Williams](https://g.foolcdn.com/avatar/1211926414/large.ashx)

Sean Williams

(TMFUltraLong)

Aug 11, 2013 at 2:20PM

With the full implementation of the individual portion of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act less than five months away, physicians and
doctor's offices around the country should be bracing for what could be an
influx of new patients. With the mandate for insurance comes the potential
that more people (both those covered under Medicaid expansion and self-insured
individuals) may choose to visit their doctor more often to address ongoing
and preventative concerns.

![Male doctor talking to a patient in his

office.](https://g.foolcdn.com/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fg.foolcdn.com%2Feditorial%2Fimages%2F64791%2Fgettyimages-852090066_8cTQuWD.jpg&w=700&op=resize)

Image source: Getty Images.

From an investing standpoint and as a society, we understand what diseases are
most prevalent, where the trends are rising, and what medications are being
developed to treat these diseases. Obesity, for instance, is a disease that
affects 35.7% of the U.S. population, and with it comes a considerably higher
risk of developing high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, and
cancer. Similarly, some 25 million people in the U.S. are diabetic, with
another nearly 80 million in a pre-diabetes stage. You'd think with staggering
figures like these that the majority of doctors office visits would be related
in some way to chronic weight or diabetic issues.

But that's just not the case, according to a large study conducted by the Mayo
Clinic, which looked at 142,377 patients between 2005 and 2009 to determine
why exactly they went to see their doctor. Your initial impression might be to
assume that high-profile and prevalent diseases tend to be the main reason
people go see their doctor, but it actually tends to be more subtle symptoms
that drive us to seek help.

Here are the 10 most common reasons the Mayo Clinic listed in its study for
why people go see their doctor :

**1.** Skin disorders, including cysts, acne, and dermatitis.  
**2.** Joint disorders, including osteoarthritis.  
**3.** Back problems.  
**4.** Cholesterol problems.  
**5.** Upper respiratory conditions (excluding asthma).  
**6.** Anxiety, bipolar disorder, and depression.  
**7.** Chronic neurologic disorders.  
**8.** High blood pressures.  
**9.** Headaches and migraines.  
**10.** Diabetes.

**Skin disorders  
** According to the Mayo Clinics' study, nearly 43% of respondents went to see
their doctor in at least some context because of a dermatologic disorder. What
this means for you as an investor is that there could be a huge growth
potential in skin-disorder companies should more people choose to visit their
physicians next year.

There are quite a few ways of profiting off skin disorders, since it's such a
broad encompassing disorder that can range from aesthetic issues like acne to
serious complications like melanoma. Beyond your commonly found over-the-
counter medications, one interesting example of a potential beneficiary is
**Trius Therapeutics** (UNKNOWN:TSRX.DL), the developer of experimental acute
bacterial skin and skin structure infection drug, tedizolid. In trials, the
drug, which is designed to treat methicillin-resistant _staphylococcus aureus_
, better known as MRSA, reduced lesion sizes by at least 20% in 85.2% of
patients in a 48-hour to 72-hour time period, which was slightly higher than
**Pfizer** 's (NYSE:PFE) Zyvox, which is the current standard of treatment.
However, tedizolid achieved its results in just a six-day dosing period
compared with Zyvox's 10-day standard treatment. With **Cubist
Pharmaceuticals** agreeing to purchase Trius less than two weeks ago, it could
be snagging itself quite the bargain.

On a larger scale, **GlaxoSmithKline** (NYSE:GSK) is also a big skin-disorder
player, but primarily from the point of cancer treatment. Earlier this year,
Glaxo received Food and Drug Administration approval for both Taflinar and
Mekinist for the treatment of advanced melanoma. Both drugs are single agents
(meaning either one or the other will be prescribed), with each targeting a
BRAF mutation commonly found among melanoma patients. Not to mention that
Glaxo also received FDA approval for its diagnostic test to determine whether
patients possess this mutation. With few melanoma advances in recent years,
Glaxo has a solid chance to build a name for itself in this market.

**Joint disorders  
** Bone and joint health are common disorders that should have popped into my
head earlier as a possible reason for a doctor's visit, but they are also
often overlooked by investors despite accounting for 33.6% of all doctor's
visits based on this study. Rather than looking to pre-existing treatments I
would like to turn your attention to an up-and-coming experimental drug that
has a strong chance to be a blockbuster from **Merck** (NYSE:MRK) known as
odanacatib.

If there were any doubts about the effectiveness of odanacatib, a drug
designed to reduce fracturing in bones, they flew the coop in late-stage
trials when an outside monitoring committee stopped the trial early because of
its overwhelming success. Although Merck is taking its time with its potential
blockbuster and waiting until 2014 to file for a new drug application, it has
the potential to garner $3 billion or more in peak sales if approved.

**Back problems  
** Talk about another category that can have a bevy of problems ranging from
something as minor as a muscle pull to some serious like pain caused by
cancer. Back problems were named in nearly one-quarter (23.9%) of all doctors'
visits and have the potential to be a big moneymaker for big pharmaceuticals
and investors.

One clear way to play this is by sticking with an iconic over-the-counter
medication known to relieve pain, Tylenol, which is still manufactured by
**Johnson & Johnson**. Clearly J&J's revenue stream is incredibly diverse,
with consumer products, medical devices, _and_ pharmaceuticals combining to
equal a really large pie, but you would be surprised how often physicians
suggest to patients a regimen that involves over-the-counter anti-inflammation
products like Tylenol to alleviate non-serious back pain.

**Cholesterol problems  
** High cholesterol at the No. 4 spot (named in 22.4% of all doctor's visits
by respondents) might be the first truly expected ailment that appeared on
this list. As I mentioned earlier, with more than a third of this nation's
adults being obese, this group of people runs a considerably higher risk of
developing obesity-related complications, which can range from high blood
pressure and high cholesterol, to more immediately serious diseases like
cancer. Cholesterol-lowering drugs have the potential to make a meaningful and
long-lasting impact on improving the quality of life for a good chunk of
Americans, which is why pharmaceutical companies are investing so heavily in
new medications now.

A new medication I've hailed as a game-changer on numerous occasions since its
approval in May is Liptruzet. This combination drug, which is made up of a
statin -- Pfizer's now generic Lipitor -- and Merck's cholesterol absorption
inhibitor Zetia, delivered a far bigger effect on reducing LDL-cholesterol
(the bad kind) than either Lipitor or Zetia could on their own in trials.
Liptruzet's LDL-reduction totaled 53% to 61% as compared with Lipitor and
Zetia, which demonstrated LDL-reductions of 37% to 54% and 20%, respectively.
As long-term safety concerns for these revolutionary new LDL-reducing drugs
lessen, the number of prescriptions written for them by physicians is likely
to improve.

**Upper respiratory conditions  
** The fifth most common reason for visiting the doctor, upper respiratory
conditions, was my blind guess as the most common reason people went to the
doctor before reading the Mayo Clinic's study. This broad topic, which
encompassed 22.1% of respondents, can range from something as simple as a
bacterial or viral infection that had settled in a patient's chest to
something much more severe like cancer.

With the good likelihood that a vast majority of upper respiratory-related
doctor visits have to do with some form of bacterial or viral infection, my
suggestion here would be to look into flu vaccine manufacturers. **Sanofi**
(NASDAQ:SNY), for example, developed roughly 60 million doses of its Fluzone
for this past year's flu season and, by January, had sold out of many
variations of the vaccine. It's a bit difficult to tell how in-demand the flu
vaccine will be from one season to the next, but I believe Sanofi's sales this
past year speak for themselves.

**What's your reason?**  
Sometimes getting in ahead of the next big sales trends in the pharmaceutical
industry involves looking at studies like this one and understanding why
people go to their doctor in the first place. With a better understanding of
why other people go see their doctor, perhaps being honest with yourself and
asking yourself the same question might clue you into the next great health-
care investment opportunity!

* * *

## Author

![Sean Williams](https://g.foolcdn.com/avatar/1211926414/large.ashx)

Sean Williams

(TMFUltraLong)

A Fool since 2010, and a graduate from UC San Diego with a B.A. in Economics,
Sean specializes in the healthcare sector and investment planning. You'll
often find him writing about Obamacare, marijuana, drug and device
development, Social Security, taxes, retirement issues and general
macroeconomic topics of interest. Follow @TMFUltraLong

* * *

## Article Info

  * __Aug 11, 2013 at 2:20PM
  * __Health Care

* * *

## Stocks

##### GSK

![GlaxoSmithKline Stock Quote]()

### GlaxoSmithKline

#### NYSE: GSK

#### $39.91

#### down __

#### $0.21

#### (0.00%)

##### SNY

![Sanofi Stock Quote]()

### Sanofi

#### NASDAQ: SNY

#### $42.98

#### down __

#### $0.63

#### (0.00%)

##### TSRX.DL

![Trius Therapeutics Stock Quote]()

### Trius Therapeutics

#### UNKNOWN: TSRX.DL

##### PFE

![Pfizer Stock Quote]()

### Pfizer

#### NYSE:PFE

#### $42.62

#### down __

#### $0.46

#### (0.00%)

##### MRK

![Merck & Co. Stock Quote]()

### Merck & Co.

#### NYSE: MRK

#### $82.78

#### up __

#### $0.30

#### (0.00%)

* * *

## Related Articles

  * Better Buy: GlaxoSmithKline vs. Merck
  * Better Buy: Johnson & Johnson vs. GlaxoSmithKline
  * 3 Top Stocks With High Dividend Yields
  * Is GlaxoSmithKline a Buy?
  * GlaxoSmithKline plc (GSK) Q1 2019 Earnings Call Transcript

* * *

* * *

  * Prev
  *     * 1
    * 2
    * 3
    * 4
    * 5
    * 6
  * Next

* * *

## Compare Brokers

Current

The 10 Most Common Reasons People Visit Their Doctor @themotleyfool #stocks
$GSK $SNY $TSRX.DL $PFE $MRK Next Article

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

