

GoSearch __

__Replay: WQAD News 8 __News 8 TV Schedule Autos

__Search __Contact Us

WQAD.com __ Menu

  * News
  * GMQC
  * Bridges & Traffic
  * Life in the QC
  * On-Air
  * Contests & Deals
  * Brewed
  * Sports
  * Podcasts

  * **Weather** **75 °**

__

**75 °**

Low **61 °**

High **83 °**

* * *

Wed

__

50 ° __69 °

Thu

__

52 ° __72 °

Fri

__

62 ° __77 °

See complete forecast

* * *

__Severe weather alert

# Here's how much fast food Americans are eating

Posted 7:49 am, October 3, 2018, by WQAD Digital Team, Updated at 12:22PM,
October 3, 2018

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * LinkedIn
  * Email
  * 

![](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/localtv-2/img/wqad/logo-gray.png)

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Fast food has become a major part of the American diet, and a new report from
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reveals just how many adults
eat it.

Between 2013 and 2016, about 37% of US adults consumed fast food on any given
day, according to the data brief published Wednesday by the National Center
for Health Statistics.

"On any given day in the United States, an estimated 36.6% or approximately
84.8 million adults consume fast food," said Cheryl Fryar, first author of the
report and a health statistician at the CDC.

"We focused on fast food for this report because fast food has played an
important role in the American diet in recent decades," she said. "Fast food
has been associated with poor diet and increased risk of obesity."

Fast foods tend to be high in calories, fat, salt and sugar, which -- when
consumed in excess -- can be associated with obesity, high blood pressure,
Type 2 diabetes and heart disease, among other health risks.

On average, adults in the US consumed 11.3% of their total daily calories from
fast food between 2007 and 2010, according to a National Center for Health
Statistics data brief published in 2013.

### Who eats the most and least fast food

The new report included data on about 10,000 people 20 and older from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2013-2016.

The data revealed that fast food consumption varied by age, income level, race
and sex. For instance, 44.9% of adults ages 20 to 39 said that they consumed
fast food on a given day, compared with 37.7% of adults 40 to 59, and 24.1% of
adults 60 and older.

The percentage of adults who said they consumed fast food rose with family
income level, according to the report. Overall, 31.7% of lower-income, 36.4%
of middle-income and 42% of higher-income adults said they had eaten fast
food.

"What surprised me was the finding that income was positively associated with
more fast food," said Dr. Lawrence Cheskin, an associate professor and
director of clinical research at the Global Obesity Prevention Center at Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, who was not involved in the new
report.

"That connection or correlation is opposite of what I perhaps would have
expected," he said. "But we need these kinds of studies and these kinds of
facts and statistics to get a better understanding of what drives the use of
foods that, as a nutrition expert I would say, are not your first choice for a
variety of reasons."

Cheskin, who is also director of the Johns Hopkins Weight Management Center,
emphasized that foods high in sugar and fat can raise the risk of certain
chronic health problems. "People have the lowest health risk when they eat
fruits and vegetables and whole grains," he said.

The report also found that a higher percentage of non-Hispanic black adults --
42.4% -- said they consumed fast food than non-Hispanic white adults at 37.6%,
non-Hispanic Asian adults at 30.6% and Hispanic adults at 35.5%.

Among those who had eaten fast food, 43.7% did so during lunch, 42% during
dinner, 22.7% during breakfast and 22.6% as snacks, according to the report.

More men (48.3%) than women (39.1%) said they ate fast food during lunch.
However, more women (25.7%) than men (19.5%) said they had it as a snack.
Among all adults, a higher percentage of men (37.9%) than women (35.4%) said
they ate fast food on a given day.

The report has some limitations, including that the subjects' dietary
information was obtained through in-person interviews during which the adults
recalled what they had eaten in the past 24 hours. Such recall interviews
could lead to underreporting and other issues.

### 'What we should be scared of is double cheeseburgers'

All in all, the report's findings are what most experts would expect and
mirror fast food consumption patterns found among children, said Jennifer
Harris, an associate professor in allied health sciences at the University of
Connecticut and director of marketing initiatives at the Rudd Center for Food
Policy and Obesity, who was not involved in the new CDC report.

"Other studies that have looked at 24-hour dietary recall like this have found
a similar thing: that about a third of kids on any given day eat fast food,"
Harris said.

Last month, a Rudd Center report said that 91% of 871 parents who took an
online survey said they had purchased lunch or dinner for their child in the
previous week at one of the four largest fast-food restaurant chains:
McDonald's, Burger King, Wendy's or Subway. The survey was conducted in 2016.

"On average, they'd gone 2½ -- actually 2.4 -- times per week. So those
numbers are pretty comparable to about a third on any given day," Harris said.

That 91% was an increase from 79% of 771 parents in a 2010 survey and 83% of
835 parents in a 2013 survey, according to the Rudd Center report.

"We do know that fast food advertising has gone up during that time by pretty
large amounts. We do know that parents take their children, they say, because
it's convenient, it's a good value, and their kids like the food. So all of
those are driving purchases of fast food," Harris said.

"The other thing that we suspect is also that the restaurants have been
introducing healthier items with their kids' meals," she said, adding that
even though there are some healthier options on menus, several items are still
high in calories, fat and salt.

"We know for children, on days that they consume fast food, they eat about 120
more calories that day. They also consume more sugar and sodium and fat on the
days they eat fast food," she said.

Although fast food is typically higher in unhealthy saturated fat, sodium and
calories, it tends to be low in several key nutrients that adult bodies need
to flourish and that children's bodies need to grow, said Liz Weinandy, a
registered dietitian at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, who
was not involved in the new CDC report.

"It is funny, when we see news clips of a shark swimming near a beach, it
scares us into not going near that beach. However, what we should be scared of
is double cheeseburgers, French fries and large amounts of sugary beverages,"
Weinandy said.

"Adults can go to the grocery store more and prep food to take on the go so we
don't have to get in a situation where we need to rely on fast food so much,"
she said. "It takes time and some organization. I see many people who are
successful at this, though, when they take a couple of hours on the weekend,
and again midweek, to prep food and then plan ahead just a little to take some
things with them."

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Trademark and Copyright 2019 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company.
All rights reserved.

* * *

**Filed in:** Lifestyle

**Topics:** America, burger king, fast food, health, McDonald's, Wendy's

__Suggest a correction

×

### Suggest A Correction

##

Your name

Your email

Report a typo or grammatical error

Cancel

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * LinkedIn
  * Email
  * 

![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2016/12/wqad.png?w=60&h=60&crop=1)

### Download the WQAD News 8 app

Be the first to know with breaking news alerts, and find out what's happening
in your area with News Near Me.

__

##### Popular

  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2014/11/130814195816-01-marijuana-tablet-large.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **Louisiana coroner claims first ever recorded death from marijuana overdose**
  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/promo384469985.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **Neighbors clean up after house explosion claims the lives of two in rural Knox County**
  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/190605103042-dominican-republic-americans-dead-split-live-video-1.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **Early autopsy results released after 3 Americans die at Dominican Republic resort**
  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/wiu-president-jack-thomas.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **WIU Alumni Council calls for university president to resign by June 30**

##### Latest News

  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/i-74-bridge-arches.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **I-74 project making progress on bridge arches, see it here!**
  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/promo384569790.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **Why the City of Rock Island is looking to'tighten up' what aldermen can spend city money on**
  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/severed-wolf-head-found-in-siberia.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **40,000-year-old severed wolf's head discovered in Siberia**
  * ![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/turlock.jpeg?quality=85&strip=all&w=109&h=60&crop=1) **California man dies after drinking minibar scotch at Dominican Republic resort, family says**

  * News Your Health

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/promo382731334.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Thousands of cancer diagnoses tied to a poor diet, study finds

  * News Your Health

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/organic-

breakfast.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Skipping breakfast tied to higher risk of heart-related death, study

finds

  * News Your Health

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/promo382639926.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Drinking too much fruit juice (or any sugary drink) linked to premature

death risk

  * News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/s110088380.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### FDA confirms PFAS chemicals are in the US food supply

  * News Your Health

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/promo381517455.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Heart failure deaths on the rise in younger US adults, researchers say

  *     * News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/cancer-

financial-burden.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### The cost of cancer: 25% of survivors face financial hardship, report

finds

  * News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2016/06/thinkstockphotos-483675321.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Am I drinking too much coffee? 20 ways to tell

  * On-Air Your Health

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/promo384104320.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### YOUR HEALTH: Could a simple supplement be a Fountain of Youth?

  * News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/ne-018mo_cnna-

st1-1000000005105d3f-320x180_700k-1-thumb.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=320&h=180&crop=1)

#### Brewery worker plans to fast and consume nothing but beer and water for

Lent

  * News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/gluten.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Gluten-free diet not healthy for everyone

  *     * News Your Health

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/cbd.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### CBD effective in treating heroin addiction, study finds

  * News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2019/05/aspirin.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=370&h=204&crop=1)

#### Low-dose aspirin linked to bleeding in the skull, new report says

  * Lifestyle News

![](https://s0.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/plugins/lazy-

load/images/1x1.trans.gif)![](https://localtvwqad.files.wordpress.com/2014/03/raw-

chicken.jpg?quality=85&strip=all&w=350&h=204&crop=1)

#### Do you wash your chicken? CDC says you shouldn't

  * Mobile Apps
  * Android App
  * iPhone & iPad App
  * Storm Track 8 Weather Android App
  * Storm Track 8 Weather iPhone App

  * __Facebook

  * __Twitter
  * __Instagram
  * __Email Alerts
  * __About & Contact
  * Covers

Online Public File • Terms of Service • Privacy Policy  
• 3003 Park 16th Street Moline, IL 61265  
• Copyright (C) 2019, WQAD  
• A Tribune Broadcasting Station • Powered by WordPress.com VIP

×

### Email Alerts

**Notice** : you are using an outdated browser. Microsoft does not recommend
using IE as your default browser. Some features on this website, like video
and images, might not work properly. For the best experience, please upgrade
your browser.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=18314522&cv=2.0&cj=1)

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/mu-plugins/post-

flair/sharing/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

