

Skip to main content

        
                  * U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
        

![Office on Women's Health -

womenshealth.gov](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/OWH_Logo-

URL_RGB_2C.svg)

En Español

Call the OWH HELPLINE: 1-800-994-9662 9 a.m. -- 6 p.m. ET, Monday -- Friday

![Office on Women's Health -

womenshealth.gov](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/OWH_Logo-

URL_RGB_2C.svg)

Menu

CHANGE

Top Menu

        
                  * Health and Wellness
            * Getting Active
            * Healthy Eating
            * Healthy Living by Age
            * Healthy Weight
            * Mental Health
            * Relationships and Safety
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Caregiver stress
              * Folic acid
              * Heart-healthy eating
              * Iron-deficiency anemia
              * Stress and your health
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Diseases and Conditions
            * Cancer
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Lupus
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Autoimmune diseases
              * Carpal tunnel syndrome
              * Depression
              * Irritable bowel syndrome
              * Migraine
              * Thyroid disease
              * Urinary tract infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Reproductive Health
            * Breastfeeding
            * Menopause
            * Menstrual Cycle
            * Ovulation Calculator
            * Pregnancy
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Bacterial vaginosis
              * Birth control methods
              * Human papillomavirus (HPV)
              * Infertility
              * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
              * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
              * Uterine fibroids
              * Vaginal yeast infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Patient Materials
            * Autoimmune Diseases
            * Breastfeeding
            * Cancer
            * Fitness and Nutrition
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Mental Health
            * Pain
            * Pregnancy
            * Reproductive Health
            * Sexual Health
            * Sexually Transmitted Infections
            * Other A-Z Topics
        

## Browse by resource

        
                      * Fact sheets
              * Infographics
              * Guides
              * Videos
              * Webinars
        

**View all pages in this section**

        
                  * About Us
            * Who we are
            * What we do
            * Programs and activities
            * Work with us
            * Contact Us
            * Blog
        

## Popular topics

        
                      * Vision and mission
              * Leadership
              * Programs and activities
              * In your community
              * Funding opportunities
              * Internships and jobs
        

**View all pages in this section**

        
                  * Back to section menu
        

## Pregnancy

        
                  * Before you get pregnant
            * If you are sexually active
            * Preconception health
            * Trying to conceive
            * Knowing if you are pregnant
            * Unplanned pregnancy
          * You're pregnant: Now what?
            * Stages of pregnancy
            * Prenatal care and tests
            * Twins, triplets, and other multiples
            * Staying healthy and safe
            * Body changes and discomforts
            * Pregnancy complications
            * Pregnancy loss
            * Know your pregnancy rights
          * Getting ready for baby
            * Birthing, breastfeeding, and parenting classes
            * Breastfeeding
            * Circumcision
            * Health care for baby
            * Making your home safe for baby
            * Last-minute to-dos
          * Childbirth and beyond
            * Labor and birth
            * Your baby's first hours of life
            * Recovering from birth
            * Newborn care and safety
            * Getting pregnant again
            * Babysitters and child care
          * Features and fact sheets
          * Ovulation calculator
          * View A-Z health topics
        

Search __

En Español

Call the OWH HELPLINE: **1-800-994-9662**  
9 a.m. -- 6 p.m. ET, Monday -- Friday

        
                  * ![Home](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/css/home_icon.png)
          * Health and Wellness
        
            * ****
            * Getting Active
            * Healthy Eating
            * Healthy Living by Age
            * Healthy Weight
            * Mental Health
            * Relationships and Safety
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Caregiver stress
            * Folic acid
            * Heart-healthy eating
            * Iron-deficiency anemia
            * Stress and your health
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Diseases and Conditions
        
            * ****
            * Cancer
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Lupus
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Autoimmune diseases
            * Carpal tunnel syndrome
            * Depression
            * Irritable bowel syndrome
            * Migraine
            * Thyroid disease
            * Urinary tract infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Reproductive Health
        
            * ****
            * Breastfeeding
            * Menopause
            * Menstrual Cycle
            * Ovulation Calculator
            * Pregnancy
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Bacterial vaginosis
            * Birth control methods
            * Human papillomavirus (HPV)
            * Infertility
            * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
            * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
            * Uterine fibroids
            * Vaginal yeast infections
        

**All A-Z health topics**

        
                  * Patient Materials
        
            * ** Browse by health topic  **
        
            *         * Autoimmune Diseases
            * Breastfeeding
            * Cancer
            * Fitness and Nutrition
            * Heart Disease and Stroke
            * HIV and AIDS
            * Mental Health
        
            * Pain
            * Pregnancy
            * Reproductive Health
            * Sexual Health
            * Sexually Transmitted Infections
            * Other A-Z Topics
        
            * **Browse by resource**
            * Fact sheets
            * Infographics
            * Guides
            * Videos
            * Webinars
        

**View all pages in this section**

        
                  * About Us
        
            * ****
            * Who we are
            * What we do
            * Programs and activities
            * Work with us
            * Contact Us
            * Blog
        
            * **Popular topics**
            * Vision and mission
            * Leadership
            * Programs and activities
            * In your community
            * Funding opportunities
            * Internships and jobs
        

**View all pages in this section**

Share Facebook Twitter

        
                  1. Home
          2. Pregnancy
          3. You're pregnant: Now what?
          4. Body changes and discomforts
        

## Pregnancy

        
                  * Before you get pregnant
          * You're pregnant: Now what?
            * Stages of pregnancy
            * Prenatal care and tests
            * Twins, triplets, and other multiples
            * Staying healthy and safe
            * Body changes and discomforts
            * Pregnancy complications
            * Pregnancy loss
            * Know your pregnancy rights
          * Getting ready for baby
          * Childbirth and beyond
          * Features and fact sheets
          * Ovulation calculator
          * View A-Z health topics
        

OPA Office of Population Affairs

Find a Family Planning Clinic

Such as "Washington, DC" or "20002"

SEARCH

About this tool | Host this tool

![@ symbol on a purple envelope](/resources/images/subscribe-icon.png)

### Subscribe

To receive Pregnancy email updates

Submit

![](https://www.womenshealth.gov/files/styles/masthead/public/images/wh_ts518535220.jpg?itok=X3Zur25M&c=010277a5c5fc10765fd800966995a0c7)

# Body changes and discomforts

![](https://www.womenshealth.gov/files/styles/masthead/public/images/wh_ts518535220.jpg?itok=X3Zur25M&c=010277a5c5fc10765fd800966995a0c7)

**Everyone expects pregnancy to bring an expanding waistline.** But many women
are surprised by the other body changes that pop up. Get the low-down on
stretch marks, weight gain, heartburn and other "joys" of pregnancy. Find out
what you can do to feel better.

Expand all

|

Collapse all

## Body aches

As your uterus expands, you may feel aches and pains in the back, abdomen,
groin area, and thighs. Many women also have backaches and aching near the
pelvic bone due the pressure of the baby's head, increased weight, and
loosening joints. Some pregnant women complain of pain that runs from the
lower back, down the back of one leg, to the knee or foot. This is called
sciatica.(SYE-AT-ick-uh) It is thought to occur when the uterus puts pressure
on the sciatic nerve.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Lie down.
          * Rest.
          * Apply heat.
        

Call the doctor if pain does not get better.

## Breast changes

A woman's breasts increase in size and fullness during pregnancy. As the due
date approaches, hormone changes will cause your breasts to get even bigger to
prepare for breastfeeding. Your breasts may feel full, heavy, or tender.

In the third trimester, some pregnant women begin to leak colostrum (coh-LOSS-
truhm) from their breasts. Colostrum is the first milk that your breasts
produce for the baby. It is a thick, yellowish fluid containing antibodies
that protect newborns from infection.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Wear a maternity bra with good support.
          * Put pads in bra to absorb leakage.
        

Tell your doctor if you feel a lump or have nipple changes or discharge (that
is not colostrum) or skin changes.

## Constipation

Many pregnant women complain of constipation. Signs of constipation include
having hard, dry stools; fewer than three bowel movements per week; and
painful bowel movements.

Higher levels of hormones due to pregnancy slow down digestion and relax
muscles in the bowels leaving many women constipated. Plus, the pressure of
the expanding uterus on the bowels can contribute to constipation.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Drink eight to 10 glasses of water daily.
          * Don't drink caffeine.
          * Eat fiber-rich foods, such as fresh or dried fruit, raw vegetables, and whole-grain cereals and breads.
          * Try mild physical activity.
        

Tell your doctor if constipation does not go away.

## Dizziness

Many pregnant women complain of dizziness and lightheadedness throughout their
pregnancies. Fainting is rare but does happen even in some healthy pregnant
women. There are many reasons for these symptoms. The growth of more blood
vessels in early pregnancy, the pressure of the expanding uterus on blood
vessels, and the body's increased need for food all can make a pregnant woman
feel lightheaded and dizzy.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Stand up slowly.
          * Avoid standing for too long.
          * Don't skip meals.
          * Lie on your left side.
          * Wear loose clothing.
        

Call your doctor if you feel faint and have vaginal bleeding or abdominal
pain.

## Fatigue, sleep problems

During your pregnancy, you might feel tired even after you've had a lot of
sleep. Many women find they're exhausted in the first trimester. Don't worry,
this is normal! This is your body's way of telling you that you need more
rest. In the second trimester, tiredness is usually replaced with a feeling of
well being and energy. But in the third trimester, exhaustion often sets in
again. As you get larger, sleeping may become more difficult. The baby's
movements, bathroom runs, and an increase in the body's metabolism might
interrupt or disturb your sleep. Leg cramping can also interfere with a good
night's sleep.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Lie on your left side.
          * Use pillows for support, such as behind your back, tucked between your knees, and under your tummy.
          * Practice good sleep habits, such as going to bed and getting up at the same time each day and using your bed only for sleep and sex.
          * Go to bed a little earlier.
          * Nap if you are not able to get enough sleep at night.
          * Drink needed fluids earlier in the day, so you can drink less in the hours before bed.
        

## Heartburn and indigestion

Hormones and the pressure of the growing uterus cause indigestion and
heartburn. Pregnancy hormones slow down the muscles of the digestive tract. So
food tends to move more slowly and digestion is sluggish. This causes many
pregnant women to feel bloated.

Hormones also relax the valve that separates the esophagus from the stomach.
This allows food and acids to come back up from the stomach to the esophagus.
The food and acid causes the burning feeling of heartburn. As your baby gets
bigger, the uterus pushes on the stomach making heartburn more common in later
pregnancy.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Eat several small meals instead of three large meals -- eat slowly.
          * Drink fluids between meals -- not with meals.
          * Don't eat greasy and fried foods.
          * Avoid citrus fruits or juices and spicy foods.
          * Do not eat or drink within a few hours of bedtime.
          * Do not lie down right after meals.
        

Call your doctor if symptoms don't improve after trying these suggestions. Ask
your doctor about using an antacid.

## Hemorrhoids

Hemorrhoids (HEM-roidz) are swollen and bulging veins in the rectum. They can
cause itching, pain, and bleeding. Up to 50 percent of pregnant women get
hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids are common during pregnancy for many reasons. During
pregnancy blood volume increases greatly, which can cause veins to enlarge.
The expanding uterus also puts pressure on the veins in the rectum. Plus,
constipation can worsen hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids usually improve after
delivery.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Drink lots of fluids.
          * Eat fiber-rich foods, like whole grains, raw or cooked leafy green vegetables, and fruits.
          * Try not to strain with bowel movements.
          * Talk to your doctor about using products such as witch hazel to soothe hemorrhoids.
        

## Itching

About 20 percent of pregnant women feel itchy during pregnancy. Usually women
feel itchy in the abdomen. But red, itchy palms and soles of the feet are also
common complaints. Pregnancy hormones and stretching skin are probably to
blame for most of your discomfort. Usually the itchy feeling goes away after
delivery.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Use gentle soaps and moisturizing creams.
          * Avoid hot showers and baths.
          * Avoid itchy fabrics.
        

Call your doctor if symptoms don't improve after a week of self-care.

## Leg cramps

At different times during your pregnancy, you might have sudden muscle spasms
in your legs or feet. They usually occur at night. This is due to a change in
the way your body processes calcium.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Gently stretch muscles.
          * Get mild exercise.
          * For sudden cramps, flex your foot forward.
          * Eat calcium-rich foods.
          * Ask your doctor about calcium supplements.
        

## Morning sickness

In the first trimester hormone changes can cause nausea and vomiting. This is
called "morning sickness," although it can occur at any time of day. Morning
sickness usually tapers off by the second trimester.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Eat several small meals instead of three large meals to keep your stomach from being empty.
          * Don't lie down after meals.
          * Eat dry toast, saltines, or dry cereals before getting out of bed in the morning.
          * Eat bland foods that are low in fat and easy to digest, such as cereal, rice, and bananas.
          * Sip on water, weak tea, or clear soft drinks. Or eat ice chips.
          * Avoid smells that upset your stomach.
        

Call your doctor if you have flu-like symptoms, which may signal a more
serious condition.

Call your doctor if you have severe, constant nausea and/or vomiting several
times every day.

## Nasal problems

Nosebleeds and nasal stuffiness are common during pregnancy. They are caused
by the increased amount of blood in your body and hormones acting on the
tissues of your nose.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Blow your nose gently.
          * Drink fluids and use a cool mist humidifier.
          * To stop a nosebleed, squeeze your nose between your thumb and forefinger for a few minutes.
        

Call your doctor if nosebleeds are frequent and do not stop after a few
minutes.

## Numb or tingling hands

Feelings of swelling, tingling, and numbness in fingers and hands, called
carpal tunnel syndrome, can occur during pregnancy. These symptoms are due to
swelling of tissues in the narrow passages in your wrists, and they should
disappear after delivery.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Take frequent breaks to rest hands.
          * Ask your doctor about fitting you for a splint to keep wrists straight.
        

## Stretch marks, skin changes

Stretch marks are red, pink, or brown streaks on the skin. Most often they
appear on the thighs, buttocks, abdomen, and breasts. These scars are caused
by the stretching of the skin, and usually appear in the second half of
pregnancy.

Some women notice other skin changes during pregnancy. For many women, the
nipples become darker and browner during pregnancy. Many pregnant women also
develop a dark line (called the linea nigra) on the skin that runs from the
belly button down to the pubic hairline. Patches of darker skin usually over
the cheeks, forehead, nose, or upper lip also are common. Patches often match
on both sides of the face. These spots are called melasma or chloasma and are
more common in darker-skinned women.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Be patient -- stretch marks and other changes usually fade after delivery.
        

## Swelling

Many women develop mild swelling in the face, hands, or ankles at some point
in their pregnancies. As the due date approaches, swelling often becomes more
noticeable.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Drink eight to 10 glasses of fluids daily.
          * Don't drink caffeine or eat salty foods.
          * Rest and elevate your feet.
          * Ask your doctor about support hose.
        

Call your doctor if your hands or feet swell suddenly or you rapidly gain
weight -- it may be preeclampsia.

## Urinary frequency and leaking

Temporary bladder control problems are common in pregnancy. Your unborn baby
pushes down on the bladder, urethra, and pelvic floor muscles. This pressure
can lead to more frequent need to urinate, as well as leaking of urine when
sneezing, coughing, or laughing.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Take frequent bathroom breaks.
          * Drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration.
          * Do Kegel exercises to tone pelvic muscles.
        

Call your doctor if you experience burning along with frequency of urination
-- it may be an infection.

## Varicose veins

During pregnancy, blood volume increases greatly. This can cause veins to
enlarge. Plus, pressure on the large veins behind the uterus causes the blood
to slow in its return to the heart. For these reasons, varicose veins in the
legs and anus (hemorrhoids) are more common in pregnancy.

Varicose veins look like swollen veins raised above the surface of the skin.
They can be twisted or bulging and are dark purple or blue in color. They are
found most often on the backs of the calves or on the inside of the leg.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Avoid tight knee-highs.
          * Sit with your legs and feet raised.
        

## More information on body changes and discomforts

### Explore other publications and websites

        
                  * First Trimester Pregnancy: What to Expect (Copyright (C) Mayo Foundation) - This fact sheet discusses the physical changes and symptoms experienced in the first three months of pregnancy.
          * Second Trimester Pregnancy: What to Expect (Copyright (C) Mayo Foundation) - This fact sheet discusses how the changes that began in the first weeks of pregnancy increase and accelerate during the second trimester. Of these, your growing uterus is probably the most obvious. But many other, unseen events are also taking place.
        

### Connect with other organizations

        
                  * American Academy of Family Physicians
          * American College of Nurse-Midwives
          * American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
          * Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center
          * Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation
          * March of Dimes
        
          * **Previous Page** Staying healthy and safe
          * **Next Page** Pregnancy complications
          * OPA Office of Population Affairs
        

Find a Family Planning Clinic

Such as "Washington, DC" or "20002"

SEARCH

About this tool | Host this tool

![@ symbol on a purple envelope](/resources/images/subscribe-icon.png)

### Subscribe

To receive Pregnancy email updates

Submit

All material contained on these pages are free of copyright restrictions and
may be copied, reproduced, or duplicated without permission of the Office on
Women’s Health in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Citation
of the source is appreciated.

Page last updated: January 30, 2019.

# Body changes and discomforts

**Everyone expects pregnancy to bring an expanding waistline.** But many women
are surprised by the other body changes that pop up. Get the low-down on
stretch marks, weight gain, heartburn and other "joys" of pregnancy. Find out
what you can do to feel better.

## Body aches

As your uterus expands, you may feel aches and pains in the back, abdomen,
groin area, and thighs. Many women also have backaches and aching near the
pelvic bone due the pressure of the baby's head, increased weight, and
loosening joints. Some pregnant women complain of pain that runs from the
lower back, down the back of one leg, to the knee or foot. This is called
sciatica.(SYE-AT-ick-uh) It is thought to occur when the uterus puts pressure
on the sciatic nerve.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Lie down.
          * Rest.
          * Apply heat.
        

Call the doctor if pain does not get better.

## Breast changes

A woman's breasts increase in size and fullness during pregnancy. As the due
date approaches, hormone changes will cause your breasts to get even bigger to
prepare for breastfeeding. Your breasts may feel full, heavy, or tender.

In the third trimester, some pregnant women begin to leak colostrum (coh-LOSS-
truhm) from their breasts. Colostrum is the first milk that your breasts
produce for the baby. It is a thick, yellowish fluid containing antibodies
that protect newborns from infection.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Wear a maternity bra with good support.
          * Put pads in bra to absorb leakage.
        

Tell your doctor if you feel a lump or have nipple changes or discharge (that
is not colostrum) or skin changes.

## Constipation

Many pregnant women complain of constipation. Signs of constipation include
having hard, dry stools; fewer than three bowel movements per week; and
painful bowel movements.

Higher levels of hormones due to pregnancy slow down digestion and relax
muscles in the bowels leaving many women constipated. Plus, the pressure of
the expanding uterus on the bowels can contribute to constipation.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Drink eight to 10 glasses of water daily.
          * Don't drink caffeine.
          * Eat fiber-rich foods, such as fresh or dried fruit, raw vegetables, and whole-grain cereals and breads.
          * Try mild physical activity.
        

Tell your doctor if constipation does not go away.

## Dizziness

Many pregnant women complain of dizziness and lightheadedness throughout their
pregnancies. Fainting is rare but does happen even in some healthy pregnant
women. There are many reasons for these symptoms. The growth of more blood
vessels in early pregnancy, the pressure of the expanding uterus on blood
vessels, and the body's increased need for food all can make a pregnant woman
feel lightheaded and dizzy.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Stand up slowly.
          * Avoid standing for too long.
          * Don't skip meals.
          * Lie on your left side.
          * Wear loose clothing.
        

Call your doctor if you feel faint and have vaginal bleeding or abdominal
pain.

## Fatigue, sleep problems

During your pregnancy, you might feel tired even after you've had a lot of
sleep. Many women find they're exhausted in the first trimester. Don't worry,
this is normal! This is your body's way of telling you that you need more
rest. In the second trimester, tiredness is usually replaced with a feeling of
well being and energy. But in the third trimester, exhaustion often sets in
again. As you get larger, sleeping may become more difficult. The baby's
movements, bathroom runs, and an increase in the body's metabolism might
interrupt or disturb your sleep. Leg cramping can also interfere with a good
night's sleep.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Lie on your left side.
          * Use pillows for support, such as behind your back, tucked between your knees, and under your tummy.
          * Practice good sleep habits, such as going to bed and getting up at the same time each day and using your bed only for sleep and sex.
          * Go to bed a little earlier.
          * Nap if you are not able to get enough sleep at night.
          * Drink needed fluids earlier in the day, so you can drink less in the hours before bed.
        

## Heartburn and indigestion

Hormones and the pressure of the growing uterus cause indigestion and
heartburn. Pregnancy hormones slow down the muscles of the digestive tract. So
food tends to move more slowly and digestion is sluggish. This causes many
pregnant women to feel bloated.

Hormones also relax the valve that separates the esophagus from the stomach.
This allows food and acids to come back up from the stomach to the esophagus.
The food and acid causes the burning feeling of heartburn. As your baby gets
bigger, the uterus pushes on the stomach making heartburn more common in later
pregnancy.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Eat several small meals instead of three large meals -- eat slowly.
          * Drink fluids between meals -- not with meals.
          * Don't eat greasy and fried foods.
          * Avoid citrus fruits or juices and spicy foods.
          * Do not eat or drink within a few hours of bedtime.
          * Do not lie down right after meals.
        

Call your doctor if symptoms don't improve after trying these suggestions. Ask
your doctor about using an antacid.

## Hemorrhoids

Hemorrhoids (HEM-roidz) are swollen and bulging veins in the rectum. They can
cause itching, pain, and bleeding. Up to 50 percent of pregnant women get
hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids are common during pregnancy for many reasons. During
pregnancy blood volume increases greatly, which can cause veins to enlarge.
The expanding uterus also puts pressure on the veins in the rectum. Plus,
constipation can worsen hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids usually improve after
delivery.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Drink lots of fluids.
          * Eat fiber-rich foods, like whole grains, raw or cooked leafy green vegetables, and fruits.
          * Try not to strain with bowel movements.
          * Talk to your doctor about using products such as witch hazel to soothe hemorrhoids.
        

## Itching

About 20 percent of pregnant women feel itchy during pregnancy. Usually women
feel itchy in the abdomen. But red, itchy palms and soles of the feet are also
common complaints. Pregnancy hormones and stretching skin are probably to
blame for most of your discomfort. Usually the itchy feeling goes away after
delivery.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Use gentle soaps and moisturizing creams.
          * Avoid hot showers and baths.
          * Avoid itchy fabrics.
        

Call your doctor if symptoms don't improve after a week of self-care.

## Leg cramps

At different times during your pregnancy, you might have sudden muscle spasms
in your legs or feet. They usually occur at night. This is due to a change in
the way your body processes calcium.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Gently stretch muscles.
          * Get mild exercise.
          * For sudden cramps, flex your foot forward.
          * Eat calcium-rich foods.
          * Ask your doctor about calcium supplements.
        

## Morning sickness

In the first trimester hormone changes can cause nausea and vomiting. This is
called "morning sickness," although it can occur at any time of day. Morning
sickness usually tapers off by the second trimester.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Eat several small meals instead of three large meals to keep your stomach from being empty.
          * Don't lie down after meals.
          * Eat dry toast, saltines, or dry cereals before getting out of bed in the morning.
          * Eat bland foods that are low in fat and easy to digest, such as cereal, rice, and bananas.
          * Sip on water, weak tea, or clear soft drinks. Or eat ice chips.
          * Avoid smells that upset your stomach.
        

Call your doctor if you have flu-like symptoms, which may signal a more
serious condition.

Call your doctor if you have severe, constant nausea and/or vomiting several
times every day.

## Nasal problems

Nosebleeds and nasal stuffiness are common during pregnancy. They are caused
by the increased amount of blood in your body and hormones acting on the
tissues of your nose.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Blow your nose gently.
          * Drink fluids and use a cool mist humidifier.
          * To stop a nosebleed, squeeze your nose between your thumb and forefinger for a few minutes.
        

Call your doctor if nosebleeds are frequent and do not stop after a few
minutes.

## Numb or tingling hands

Feelings of swelling, tingling, and numbness in fingers and hands, called
carpal tunnel syndrome, can occur during pregnancy. These symptoms are due to
swelling of tissues in the narrow passages in your wrists, and they should
disappear after delivery.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Take frequent breaks to rest hands.
          * Ask your doctor about fitting you for a splint to keep wrists straight.
        

## Stretch marks, skin changes

Stretch marks are red, pink, or brown streaks on the skin. Most often they
appear on the thighs, buttocks, abdomen, and breasts. These scars are caused
by the stretching of the skin, and usually appear in the second half of
pregnancy.

Some women notice other skin changes during pregnancy. For many women, the
nipples become darker and browner during pregnancy. Many pregnant women also
develop a dark line (called the linea nigra) on the skin that runs from the
belly button down to the pubic hairline. Patches of darker skin usually over
the cheeks, forehead, nose, or upper lip also are common. Patches often match
on both sides of the face. These spots are called melasma or chloasma and are
more common in darker-skinned women.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Be patient -- stretch marks and other changes usually fade after delivery.
        

## Swelling

Many women develop mild swelling in the face, hands, or ankles at some point
in their pregnancies. As the due date approaches, swelling often becomes more
noticeable.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Drink eight to 10 glasses of fluids daily.
          * Don't drink caffeine or eat salty foods.
          * Rest and elevate your feet.
          * Ask your doctor about support hose.
        

Call your doctor if your hands or feet swell suddenly or you rapidly gain
weight -- it may be preeclampsia.

## Urinary frequency and leaking

Temporary bladder control problems are common in pregnancy. Your unborn baby
pushes down on the bladder, urethra, and pelvic floor muscles. This pressure
can lead to more frequent need to urinate, as well as leaking of urine when
sneezing, coughing, or laughing.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Take frequent bathroom breaks.
          * Drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration.
          * Do Kegel exercises to tone pelvic muscles.
        

Call your doctor if you experience burning along with frequency of urination
-- it may be an infection.

## Varicose veins

During pregnancy, blood volume increases greatly. This can cause veins to
enlarge. Plus, pressure on the large veins behind the uterus causes the blood
to slow in its return to the heart. For these reasons, varicose veins in the
legs and anus (hemorrhoids) are more common in pregnancy.

Varicose veins look like swollen veins raised above the surface of the skin.
They can be twisted or bulging and are dark purple or blue in color. They are
found most often on the backs of the calves or on the inside of the leg.

**What might help:**

        
                  * Avoid tight knee-highs.
          * Sit with your legs and feet raised.
        

## More information on body changes and discomforts

### Explore other publications and websites

        
                  * First Trimester Pregnancy: What to Expect (Copyright (C) Mayo Foundation) - This fact sheet discusses the physical changes and symptoms experienced in the first three months of pregnancy.
          * Second Trimester Pregnancy: What to Expect (Copyright (C) Mayo Foundation) - This fact sheet discusses how the changes that began in the first weeks of pregnancy increase and accelerate during the second trimester. Of these, your growing uterus is probably the most obvious. But many other, unseen events are also taking place.
        

### Connect with other organizations

        
                  * American Academy of Family Physicians
          * American College of Nurse-Midwives
          * American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
          * Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center
          * Hyperemesis Education and Research Foundation
          * March of Dimes
        

_This content is provided by theOffice on Women's Health._

## About Us

        
                  * Who we are
          * What we do
          * Work with us
          * Our vision and mission
        

## Programs and Activities

        
                  * Health Information Gateway
          * It's Only Natural
          * Make the Call, Don't Miss a Beat
          * National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day
          * National Women's Health Week
          * Supporting Nursing Moms at Work
        

## Popular Topics

        
                  * Autoimmune diseases
          * Breastfeeding
          * Carpal tunnel syndrome
          * Depression
          * HIV and AIDS
          * Menstruation
          * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
          * Pregnancy
          * Thyroid disease
          * All A-Z health topics
        

## Find Help

        
                  * Get breastfeeding help
          * Get health care
          * Get health insurance
          * Get help with family planning
          * Get help with mental health
          * Find girls' health information
        

## Stay Connected

        
                  * Blog
          * Contact us
          * Media inquiries
          * Social media
        

## About Us

        
                  * Who we are
          * What we do
          * Work with us
          * Our vision and mission
        

## Programs and Activities

        
                  * Health Information Gateway
          * It's Only Natural
          * Make the Call, Don't Miss a Beat
          * National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day
          * National Women's Health Week
          * Supporting Nursing Moms at Work
        

## Popular Topics

        
                  * Autoimmune diseases
          * Breastfeeding
          * Carpal tunnel syndrome
          * Depression
          * HIV and AIDS
          * Menstruation
          * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
          * Pregnancy
          * Thyroid disease
          * All A-Z health topics
        

## Find Help

        
                  * Get breastfeeding help
          * Get health care
          * Get health insurance
          * Get help with family planning
          * Get help with mental health
          * Find girls' health information
        

## Stay Connected

        
                  * Blog
          * Contact us
          * Media inquiries
          * Social media
        

![Envelope Icon](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/Contact_Icon.png)

![](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/Contact_Icon.png) Subscribe to
receive OWH updates Submit

![Pinterest

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_pinterest_icon.png) ![Youtube

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_youtube_icon.png) ![Twitter

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_twitter_icon.png) ![Facebook

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_facebook_icon.png)

        
                  * HHS Non-Discrimination Notice
          * Language Assistance Available
          * Accessibility
          * Privacy Policy
          * Disclaimers
          * Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
          * USA.gov
          * Use Our Content
        

Language Assistance Available

        
                  * Español
          * 繁體中文
          * Tiếng Việt
          * 한국어
          * Tagalog
          * Русский
          * العربية
          * Kreyòl Ayisyen
          * Français
          * Polski
          * Português
          * Italiano
          * Deutsch
          * 日本語
          * فارسی
          * English
        

A federal government website managed by the Office on Women's Health in the
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health at the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.

200 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20201  
1-800-994-9662 • Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET (closed on federal
holidays).

![U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office on Women's

Health.](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/footer_lockup.png)

![Girlshealth.gov. From the Office on Women's

Health.](/files/images/footer_girlshealth.png)

![Up Arrow](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/css/images/Left-NoCircle-

White.png)Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

