

_Toggle Menu_

![Peterson-Kaiser Health System

Tracker](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo--mobile.png) ![Peterson-Kaiser Health

System Tracker](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo.png)

_Toggle Search_

Search:

__Search

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter

* * *

  * Health Spending
  * Quality of Care
  * Access & Affordability
  * Health & Wellbeing

  * Dashboard

  * Interactives
  * Video
  * About Us

* * *

  * Health Spending
  * Quality of Care
  * Access & Affordability
  * Health & Wellbeing

  * Dashboard

  * Interactives
  * Video
  * About Us

# How do healthcare prices and use in the U.S. compare to other countries?

By Rabah Kamal and Cynthia Cox _Kaiser Family Foundation_

Chart Collections

Health Spending

Posted: May 8, 2018

###### Share

  * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
  * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
  * 

1 / 24

View as Slideshow

* * *

Total health spending is a function of both price paid to providers or for
drugs and the volume of services used. These charts explore prices and use of
health services in the U.S. relative to comparable countries (those with both
a total GDP above the median for OECD countries and a per capita GDP greater
than the OECD median). While available data are limited to select services and
drugs, we find that higher prices – more so than utilization – explain the
United States’ high health spending relative to other high-income countries.

The U.S. has higher prices for most health care services and prescription
drugs, according to available internationally comparable data. Meanwhile,
utilization of several services, including physician consultations and
hospital stays, is lower than in many comparable countries. Use of some
services, such as C-sections and knee replacements, is higher in the U.S. than
in similar countries.

Despite having fewer office visits and shorter average hospital stays, the
U.S. overall spends twice as much per person on healthcare than do comparable
countries.

These charts accompany an analysis showing how prices for health services in
the U.S. have grown over time.

### On average, other wealthy countries spend half as much per person on

healthcare than the U.S.

* * *

In 2016 the U.S. spent 18% of its GDP on healthcare, whereas the next highest
country (Switzerland) devoted 12% of its GDP to healthcare. The average amount
spent on healthcare per person in comparable countries ($5,198) is half that
of the U.S. ($10,348).

### The U.S. has fewer physician consultations per capita than most comparable

countries

* * *

Aside from Sweden, the U.S. has the fewest physician consultations per capita
among similarly wealthy countries. In 2015, comparable countries saw an
average of 7.6 total consultations per person at physician offices, hospital
outpatient departments, and emergency rooms, while the U.S. averaged 3.9
consultations per person.

The U.S. has fewer physicians per capita relative to similar countries (2.6
per 1,000 in 2013 compared to the comparable country average of 3.4).

### The U.S. has consistently had fewer physician consultations per capita

than comparable countries

* * *

In 2000, the U.S. had about 46% fewer physician consultations per capita than
similarly wealthy countries, and the gap has remained generally consistent
over time. In 2015, comparable countries saw an average of 7.6 consultations
per person at physician offices, hospital outpatient departments, and
emergency rooms, while the U.S. averaged 3.9 consultations per person.

### Patients in the U.S. have much shorter average hospital stays than

patients in comparable countries

* * *

Shorter hospital stays can potentially be more cost-effective than longer ones
- assuming no change in the effectiveness and quality of care - but they may
also result in higher costs and service intensity per day. U.S. patients
experience shorter hospital stays on average (6 days) than patients in
comparable countries (10 days).

### The U.S. has consistently had much shorter average hospital stays than

patients in comparable countries

* * *

The average length of stay has steadily decreased over time due to changes in
medical guidelines and practices, improved technology, and shifts in hospital
reimbursement and financial constraints. The U.S. and most comparable
countries have seen hospitals visits shorten at a similar pace since 1994.

### The average nightly hospital price is slightly higher in the U.S. than in

Switzerland, and much higher than in Australia

* * *

Hospital spending represents 32% of total health spending in the U.S. Average
prices for select health services in the U.S. (based on employer-based
insurance claims and patient cost-sharing) and a few comparable countries are
available from the International Federation of Health Plans. Although hospital
stays are shorter on average in the U.S., the average price of a night in the
hospital is far higher in the U.S. than in Australia, and slightly higher than
in Switzerland.

### The U.S. averages fewer angioplasty and more bypass surgeries than most

comparable countries

* * *

The U.S. performs fewer angioplasty and slightly more coronary bypass
surgeries on average relative to comparable OECD countries. Both procedures
are used to treat heart disease, but bypass surgery is generally recommended
for patients with more severe heart disease.

### The average price of an angioplasty or bypass in the U.S. is higher than

in comparable countries

* * *

The U.S. performs fewer angioplasties and more coronary bypass surgeries than
comparable countries, but its average prices for both procedures are
substantially higher than in comparable countries where data are available.
According to the International Federation of Health Plans, the average price
of an angioplasty in the U.S. is 183% higher than in Australia, which sees the
next-highest price among those comparable countries with available data. The
average price per coronary bypass surgery in the U.S is 129% more than
Switzerland’s next-highest average.

### The U.S. performs more caesarean sections than most comparably wealthy

countries

* * *

The U.S. performs more caesarean sections than most comparable countries,
although the rate of cesarean deliveries in the U.S. has declined slightly
after increasing nearly 60% between 1996 and 2009 to peak of 32.9% of live
births. Although caesarean section deliveries may be necessary in certain
cases, they are often performed unnecessarily, are more expensive and often
pose more risks for mother and child than a natural delivery.

### The average price of a caesarean section in the U.S. is higher than in

comparable countries with available data

* * *

In 2014, the price of a normal delivery in the U.S. averaged $10,808, about
33% less than the average price of a caesarean section ($16,106). Compared to
similar countries for which data are available, prices for both types of
deliveries are much higher on average in the U.S.

### The U.S. leads most comparable countries in MRI availability and use

* * *

The U.S. has more MRI units available per million population than most
comparable countries have on average, and it performs more MRI examinations
per 1,000 people than the comparable country average. This correlation is not
necessarily found in other similarly wealthy countries. For example, France
has a below-average number of MRI units available per million population but
an above-average volume of MRI exams performed. Medical practice patterns or
cultural trends driving demand may be contributing to the utilization of
medical technology.

### The average price of an MRI in the U.S. is significantly higher than in

comparable countries

* * *

In 2014, the U.S. performed more MRI exams than most similarly wealthy
countries at an average price of $1,119 per MRI. This was 42% more than the
average price in the United Kingdom, 122% more than the average price in
Switzerland, and 420% more than the average price in Australia. According to
the International Federation of Health Plans, the national 95th percentile
average price of an MRI in the U.S. is $3,031.

### The average price of an appendectomy in the U.S. is at least double the

average price in comparable countries

* * *

While fewer appendectomies are performed on average in the United Kingdom
compared to the U.S., the price per surgery in the U.S. is $15,930 - nearly
double the price in the United Kingdom. Meanwhile, in Australia and
Switzerland, where far more appendectomies are performed on average than in
comparable countries, the price of each surgery is even less, at only $3,814
in Australia and $6,040 in Switzerland.

### The U.S. performs more knee replacements than comparably wealthy countries

* * *

Both the U.S. and similarly wealthy countries for which data are available
have seen an increase in the number of total knee replacements performed since
2000, though the U.S. has consistently performed more of these surgeries. In
2014, the U.S. saw an average of 227 total knee replacements performed per
100,000 population, compared to the average of 180 per 100,000 in similarly
wealthy countries.

### The average price of a knee replacement in the U.S. is higher than in

comparable countries with available data

* * *

The average price of a knee replacement in the U.S. was $28,184 in 2014, 40%
more than the average price in Switzerland, 53% more than in the United
Kingdom, and 77% more than in Australia.

### The average price of a hip replacement in the U.S. is higher than in

comparable countries with available data

* * *

The average price of a hip replacement in the U.S. is much more than the
average price in those comparable countries for which data is available.

### The average price of a colonoscopy is higher in the United Kingdom than in

the U.S.

* * *

The average price of a colonoscopy in the United Kingdom is 135% more than the
average price in the U.S.

### The average price of Humira in the United States is about 96% higher than

in the United Kingdom

* * *

Humira, prescribed to treat rheumatoid arthritis, is priced 96% higher in
United States than in the United Kingdom and 225% higher than in Switzerland,
according to data from the International Federation of Health Plans. For the
U.S., these data reflect the average payments made, including insurance and
patient cost-sharing, but does not reflect rebates.

### The average price of Xarelto in the U.S. is more than double the price in

the United Kingdom

* * *

Xarelto, a drug prescribed to prevent or treat blood clots, is priced more
than twice as high in the United States, on average, than in the United
Kingdom or Switzerland.

### The average price of Harvoni in the U.S. is 42% higher than in the United

Kingdom

* * *

Harvoni, a high-cost specialty drug prescribed to treat Hepatitis C, is priced
42% higher in the United States, on average, than in the United Kingdom and
90% higher than in Switzerland.

### The average price of Truvada in the United States is 44% higher than in

Switzerland

* * *

Truvada, prescribed to treat HIV/AIDS, is priced 44% higher in the United
States, on average, than in Switzerland, and 89% higher than in the United
Kingdom.

### The average price of Tecfidera in the United States is 174% higher than in

Switzerland

* * *

On average in the United States, Tecfidera (prescribed to treat relapsing
multiple sclerosis) is priced 174% higher than in Switzerland, and 668% higher
than in the United Kingdom.

### The average price of Avastin in the United States is 124% higher than in

Switzerland

* * *

Avastin, prescribed to treat some cancers, is priced 124% higher in
Switzerland, on average, and 125% higher than in the United Kingdom. Unlike
some other drugs included in the International Federation of Health Plans, the
price range for Avastin is relatively large; the 25th percentile was $2,289
and the 95th percentile was $8,831 in 2014.

Health Spending Prescription Drugs Prices & Use Total Health Spending
Utilization

#### Looking for More Data?

Find out more details about U.S. Healthcare from our updated dashboard.

Visit the Dashboard

###### A Partnership Of

![Peterson Center on Healthcare](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo--pch.png) ![The Henry J. Kaiser Family

Foundation](https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/wp-

content/themes/kff/assets/images/logo--hjkff.svg)

  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

