

Homepage

Homepage

Sign inGet started

![Nomad Health](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/letterbox/72/72/50/50/1*LCP5p4dvC0fDbU3IJU4uNQ.jpeg?source=logoAvatar-

lo_ZbUOoz3d6iGA---8dba39907012)

  * About
  * Doctor Advice
  * Nurse Advice
  * Interviews
  * Nomad News
  * Find Clinical Jobs

* * *

# Complete List of Average Doctor Salaries By Specialty

![Go to the profile of Nomad Health](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/100/100/1*LCP5p4dvC0fDbU3IJU4uNQ.jpeg)

Nomad HealthBlockedUnblockFollowFollowing

Apr 11, 2018

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*IcGGwXuHAenzVgdZebH02Q.png)

_Editor’s Note: This post has been updated and republished on the Nomad Blog._
_Check out the post here — updated with data for 2019!_

If you’ve ever — or let’s face it, often — wondered how your salary stacks up
to what other doctors are earning, you’re not alone. Compensation-related
questions are among the most common our Nomad Navigators receive.

Particularly when it comes to the medical field where salaries vary greatly by
specialty, we feel strongly that that kind of information should be clear and
transparent. In fact, we’re proud to say we’re the first physician job search
site to show your pay upfront.

This in mind, we thought it might be helpful to share a breakdown of the
average income for both permanent and locum tenens jobs by speciality. A few
things to know out of the gate:

**The mean salary of a doctor in the United States is $294,000/year according
to a** **Medscape Report** **.**

However, doctor salaries vary based on location and specialty. For instance,
neurosurgeons make the most per year on average at $663K, while a Pediatric
Infectious Disease doctor makes $192K. But one thing is for sure — locum
tenens medical professionals can expect to make **30–50% more than a permanent
position.**

In this article, we break down the average doctor salaries by specialty and
compare that to an estimated locum tenens salary to show how much more you
could be making through locum tenens work.

### Doctor Salaries and Locum Tenens Salaries

Locum tenens medical professionals can expect to make between 30–50% more than
a permanent position.

In the table below, we compare the national average annual salary by specialty
and the estimated locum tenens salary a doctor could make.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*2b-biWms2LcpnNP7dpI7DQ.png)

  1. Data from Doximity Report 
  2. Based on 30% average increase

* * *

Working locum tenens allows doctors to work when and where they want while
also getting paid a premium. Since locum tenens work is so flexible, many
full-time doctors actually do locum tenens work on the side as supplemental
income to their primary job.

If this chart inspired you to look for a locum tenens job, you can start your
search here!

If you have any questions, feel free to reach out to our Nomad Navigators
team.

Good luck!

The Nomad Team  
nomadhealth.com

* * *

New to Nomad? Register here!

Already on Nomad? Access your Dashboard here!

Interested in Locum Tenens? Learn more here!

  * Salary
  * Doctors
  * List
  * Comparison
  * Average

6 claps

  * BlockedUnblockFollowFollowing

![Go to the profile of Nomad Health](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/120/120/1*LCP5p4dvC0fDbU3IJU4uNQ.jpeg)

### Nomad Health

The first online marketplace for healthcare jobs. Learn more at
nomadhealth.com.

  * Follow

![Nomad Health](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/120/120/1*LCP5p4dvC0fDbU3IJU4uNQ.jpeg)

### Nomad Health

The first online marketplace for healthcare jobs.

Nomad Health

The first online marketplace for healthcare jobs.

Follow

  * 6

  *     *       * 

![Nomad Health](https://cdn-

images-1.medium.com/fit/c/80/80/1*LCP5p4dvC0fDbU3IJU4uNQ.jpeg)

Never miss a story from **Nomad Health** , when you sign up for Medium. Learn
more

Get updatesGet updates

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

