

![ScienceDaily](/images/sd-logo.png)

* * *

Your source for the latest research news

Follow **___** _Subscribe ____

**Just In:**

  * Romance: People Do Indeed Have a 'Type'
  * Mass Anomaly Under Moon's Largest Crater
  * Biggest Meteorite Collision in the UK
  * Climate Change: Making Siberia More Habitable?
  * How Undifferentiated Cells Commit to Their Fate
  * Danger Avoidance: Genetically Encoded
  * Molecular Aging 'Midlife Crisis' Identified
  * Translation of Genes More Complex Than Expected
  * How Old Are Your Organs? Mix of Young, Old
  * New Insight Into Origin of Canadian Rockies

advertisement

Follow all of ScienceDaily's **latest research news** and **top science
headlines**!

Science News

from research organizations

* * *

# Nearly half of US medical care comes from emergency rooms

## Figures are even higher for minorities and women

Date:

    
    
    October 17, 2017
    

Source:

    
    
    University of Maryland School of Medicine
    

Summary:

    
    
    Nearly half of all US medical care is delivered by emergency departments, according to a new study. In recent years, the percentage of care delivered by emergency departments has grown. The paper highlights the major role played by emergency rooms in US health care.
    

Share:

FULL STORY

* * *

Nearly half of all US medical care is delivered by emergency departments,
according to a new study by researchers at the University of Maryland School
of Medicine (UMSOM). And in recent years, the percentage of care delivered by
emergency departments has grown. The paper highlights the major role played by
emergency care in health care in the U.S.

advertisement

* * *

"I was stunned by the results. This really helps us better understand health
care in this country. This research underscores the fact that emergency
departments are critical to our nation's healthcare delivery system." said
David Marcozzi, an associate professor in the UMSOM Department of Emergency
Medicine, and co-director of the UMSOM Program in Health Disparities and
Population Health. "Patients seek care in emergency departments for many
reasons. The data might suggest that emergency care provides the type of care
that individuals actually want or need, 24 hours a day."

Although he now focuses on population health, Dr. Marcozzi is an emergency
room doctor himself, and works one or two days a week in the University of
Maryland Medical Center emergency department, treating patients.

This is the first study to quantify the contribution of emergency department
care to overall U.S. health care. The paper appears in the latest issue of
_International Journal for Health Services_.

For this study, Dr. Marcozzi and his colleagues examined publicly available
data from several national healthcare databases, which covered all 50 states
and the District of Columbia. They studied the period between 1996 and 2010.

For 2010, the most recent your study, the study found that there were nearly
130 million emergency department visits, compared with almost 101 million
outpatient visits and nearly 39 million inpatient visits. Inpatient visits
typically involve a hospital stay, but are planned ahead, as opposed to
emergency department visits, which are generally at least somewhat unexpected.

Over the 14-year period of the study, more than 3.5 billion health care
contacts -- emergency department visits, outpatient visits, and hospital
admissions took place. Over that time, emergency care visits increased by
nearly 44 percent. Outpatient visits accounted for nearly 38 percent of
contacts. Inpatient care accounted for almost 15 percent of visits.

Certain groups were significantly more likely to use the emergency department
as their method of healthcare. African-American patients were significantly
more likely to have emergency department visits than patients in other racial
groups; patients in the "other" insurance category, which includes those
without any type of insurance, were significantly more likely to have
emergency department visits than any other group. And patients living in the
South were significantly more likely to have emergency department visits than
patients living in other areas of the country.

African-American patients used emergency departments at a higher rate than
other groups. In 2010, this group used the emergency department almost 54
percent of the time. The rate was even higher for urban African-American
patients, who used emergency care 59 percent of the time that year. Emergency
department use rates in south and west were 54 percent and 56 percent,
respectively. In the northeast, use was much lower, 39 percent of all visits.

Certain groups accounted for increasing percentages of overall emergency room
use: African-Americans, Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, residents of the
south and west, and women. Dr. Marcozzi says that these findings point to
increasing use by vulnerable populations, which is no surprise since
socioeconomic and racial inequality creates barriers to the use health care.

The use of emergency care resources for non-emergency cases has been
controversial, since initial emergency care patients often end up being seen
for non-emergency medical issues. Some experts argue that emergency
departments are covering for deficiencies in inpatient and outpatient
resources, and for a lack of effective prevention strategies. This could
contribute to the high rate of emergency department use. They argue that
emergency room use should be reduced.

Dr. Marcozzi says this is unlikely to happen anytime soon, given the structure
of the country's health care system. He also notes that it may not be the best
option. Instead, he says we should work to connect the care delivered in
emergency departments with care delivered by the rest of the healthcare
system.

advertisement

* * *

* * *

**Story Source:**

Materials provided by **University of Maryland School of Medicine**. _Note:
Content may be edited for style and length._

* * *

**Journal Reference** :

  1. David Marcozzi, Brendan Carr, Alisha Liferidge, Nicole Baehr, Brian Browne. **Trends in the Contribution of Emergency Departments to the Provision of Health Care in the USA**. _International Journal of Health Services_ , 2017; 002073141773449 DOI: 10.1177/0020731417734498

* * *

**Cite This Page** :

  * MLA
  * APA
  * Chicago

University of Maryland School of Medicine. "Nearly half of US medical care
comes from emergency rooms: Figures are even higher for minorities and women."
ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 October 2017. .

University of Maryland School of Medicine. (2017, October 17). Nearly half of
US medical care comes from emergency rooms: Figures are even higher for
minorities and women. _ScienceDaily_. Retrieved June 11, 2019 from
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/10/171017091849.htm

University of Maryland School of Medicine. "Nearly half of US medical care
comes from emergency rooms: Figures are even higher for minorities and women."
ScienceDaily. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/10/171017091849.htm (accessed
June 11, 2019).

advertisement

* * *

  * RELATED TOPICS
    * Health & Medicine
    * __Today's Healthcare
    * __Health Policy
    * __Patient Education and Counseling
    * __Workplace Health
    * Science & Society
    * __Public Health
    * __Disaster Plan
    * __Racial Disparity
    * __Security and Defense

advertisement

* * *

  * RELATED TERMS
    * __Athletic training
    * __Emergency management
    * __Bioethics
    * __Palliative care
    * __CPR
    * __Sports medicine
    * __Medicine
    * __Hyperthermia

RELATED STORIES

* * *

##### Medicaid Patients Need Support to Use Primary Care Rather Than Emergency

Rooms

May 14, 2015 혰 More than half of all Medicaid enrollees prefer the 'one-stop
shop' of a hospital emergency department to receive care for conditions that
could be treated effectively at a primary care ... read more __

##### Emergency Departments Improve Readiness to Care for Children

Apr. 13, 2015 혰 Pediatric emergency care coordinators in the nation's
emergency departments are strongly linked with improved readiness to care for
children, according to a new study. Nearly 50 percent of the ... read more __

##### Affordable Care Act Increases Reliance on Emergency Rooms, Experts Say

Dec. 15, 2014 혰 The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act may have
provided health care insurance to an estimated 20 million Americans who lacked
coverage, but it has not eased the demand on the nation's ... read more __

##### Seeing Same GP at Every Visit Will Reduce Emergency Department

Attendance

July 24, 2014 혰 Attendances at emergency departments can be reduced by
enabling patients to see the same GP every time they visit their doctor's
surgery. This is just one of several recommendations made in a ... read more
__

FROM AROUND THE WEB

* * *

Below are relevant articles that may interest you. ScienceDaily shares links
with scholarly publications in the TrendMD network and earns revenue from
third-party advertisers, where indicated.

**Print Email** Share

* * *

advertisement

* * *

Most Popular

this week

* * *

HEALTH & MEDICINE

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190603102549_1_75x50.jpg)Brush Your Teeth --

Postpone Alzheimer's

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605142613_1_75x50.jpg)Is There a Limit to Human

Endurance? Science Says Yes

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190520190110_1_75x50.jpg)Anxiety Might Be Alleviated

by Regulating Gut Bacteria

MIND & BRAIN

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190606150315_1_75x50.jpg)How Old Are Your Organs? To

Scientists' Surprise, Organs Are a Mix of Young and Old Cells

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101143_1_75x50.jpg)Research Confirms Gut-Brain

Connection in Autism

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190610160248_1_75x50.jpg)In Romantic Relationships,

People Do Indeed Have a 'Type'

LIVING & WELL

##### Boy or Girl? It's in the Father's Genes

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530141443_1_75x50.jpg)Circadian Clocks: Body

Parts Respond to Day and Night Independently from Brain, Studies Show

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529221040_1_75x50.jpg)New Evidence Links Ultra-

Processed Foods With a Range of Health Risks

advertisement

* * *

Strange & Offbeat

* * *

HEALTH & MEDICINE

##### Life in Antarctica's Ice Mirrors Human Disease

##### Improved Human Brain Organoids to Boost Neurological Disease Research

##### Americans Consumer 70,000 Particles of Microplastics Per Year

MIND & BRAIN

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605121652_1_75x50.jpg)Was Mona Lisa's Smile a

Lie?

##### Hearing Through Your Fingers: Device That Converts Speech

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101120_1_75x50.jpg)Godzilla Is Back and He's

Bigger Than Ever: The Evolutionary Biology of the Monster

LIVING & WELL

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529094003_1_75x50.jpg)Healthy, Stress-Busting Fat

Found Hidden in Dirt

##### Soft, Social Robot Brings Coziness to Homes, and Classrooms

##### Examining Ethical Issues Surrounding Wearable Brain Devices Marketed to

Consumers

advertisement

* * *

Toggle navigation Menu __ SD

  * SD

    * Home Page
    *       * Top Science News
    *       * Latest News
  * Home 

    * Home Page
    *       * Top Science News
    *       * Latest News
  * Health 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the health sciences,   
or browse the topics below:

Health & Medicine

    
    
      * Allergy
      * Alternative Medicine
      * Birth Control
      * Cancer
      * Diabetes
      * Diseases
      * Heart Disease
      * HIV and AIDS
      * Obesity
      * Stem Cells
      * ... _more topics_
    

Mind & Brain

    
    
      * ADD and ADHD
      * Addiction
      * Alzheimer's
      * Autism
      * Depression
      * Headaches
      * Intelligence
      * Psychology
      * Relationships
      * Schizophrenia
      * ... _more topics_
    

Living Well

    
    
      * Parenting
      * Pregnancy
      * Sexual Health
      * Skin Care
      * Men's Health
      * Women's Health
      * Nutrition
      * Diet and Weight Loss
      * Fitness
      * Healthy Aging
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Tech 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the physical sciences  & technology,   
or browse the topics below:

Matter & Energy

    
    
      * Aviation
      * Chemistry
      * Electronics
      * Fossil Fuels
      * Nanotechnology
      * Physics
      * Quantum Physics
      * Solar Energy
      * Technology
      * Wind Energy
      * ... _more topics_
    

Space & Time

    
    
      * Astronomy
      * Black Holes
      * Dark Matter
      * Extrasolar Planets
      * Mars
      * Moon
      * Solar System
      * Space Telescopes
      * Stars
      * Sun
      * ... _more topics_
    

Computers & Math

    
    
      * Artificial Intelligence
      * Communications
      * Computer Science
      * Hacking
      * Mathematics
      * Quantum Computers
      * Robotics
      * Software
      * Video Games
      * Virtual Reality
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Enviro 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the environmental sciences,   
or browse the topics below:

Plants & Animals

    
    
      * Agriculture and Food
      * Animals
      * Biology
      * Biotechnology
      * Endangered Animals
      * Extinction
      * Genetically Modified
      * Microbes and More
      * New Species
      * Zoology
      * ... _more topics_
    

Earth & Climate

    
    
      * Climate
      * Earthquakes
      * Environment
      * Geography
      * Geology
      * Global Warming
      * Hurricanes
      * Ozone Holes
      * Pollution
      * Weather
      * ... _more topics_
    

Fossils & Ruins

    
    
      * Ancient Civilizations
      * Anthropology
      * Archaeology
      * Dinosaurs
      * Early Humans
      * Early Mammals
      * Evolution
      * Lost Treasures
      * Origin of Life
      * Paleontology
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Society 
    * View all the latest **top news** in the social sciences  & education,   
or browse the topics below:

Science & Society

    
    
      * Arts & Culture
      * Consumerism
      * Economics
      * Political Science
      * Privacy Issues
      * Public Health
      * Racial Disparity
      * Religion
      * Sports
      * World Development
      * ... _more topics_
    

Business & Industry

    
    
      * Biotechnology & Bioengineering
      * Computers & Internet
      * Energy & Resources
      * Engineering
      * Medical Technology
      * Pharmaceuticals
      * Transportation
      * ... _more topics_
    

Education & Learning

    
    
      * Animal Learning & Intelligence
      * Creativity
      * Educational Psychology
      * Educational Technology
      * Infant & Preschool Learning
      * Learning Disorders
      * STEM Education
      * ... _more topics_
    

  * Quirky 
    * Top News
    *       * Human Quirks
    * Odd Creatures
    * Bizarre Things
    * Weird World

__

Free Subscriptions

* * *

Get the latest science news with ScienceDaily's free email newsletters,
updated daily and weekly. Or view hourly updated newsfeeds in your RSS reader:

  * __Email Newsletters
  * __RSS Feeds

Follow Us

* * *

Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter
  * __Google+
  * __LinkedIn

Have Feedback?

* * *

Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and
negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions?

  * __Leave Feedback
  * __Contact Us

About This Site | Staff | Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy |
Editorial Policy | Terms of Use

Copyright 2019 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights
controlled by their respective owners.

Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide
medical or other professional advice.

Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its
staff, its contributors, or its partners.

Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral
programs, where indicated.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: 款-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: 款-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: 款-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGF棺]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: 款-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: 款-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: 款-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGF棺]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

