

# Psychology Today

  * Find a Therapist 

# Find a Therapist

Therapists v

    
    
    * Therapists
    * Treatment Centers
    * Psychiatrists
    * Support Groups
    

x

Therapists: Log In | Sign Up

  * Get Help 

#### Mental Health

    
    
    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

#### Do I Need Help?

    
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

  * Magazine 

#### Current

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe

#### Recent

    
    
    *     *     *     * Issue Archive
    

  * Today 

#### News

    
    
    * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
    

#### Essential Reads

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)
    

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

#### Trending Topics

    
    
    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All
    

us

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

# Search

Search

Back

Psychology Today

  * Home
  * Find a Therapist
  * Get Help
  * Magazine
  * Today

Back

### Find a Therapist

#### Get Help

  *     * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
  * #### Members

    * Login
    * Sign Up
    * 

Back

### Get Help

#### Mental Health

  *     * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

    
    
    * #### Do I Need Help?
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

Back

### Magazine

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe Issue Archive

Back

### Today

#### News

  *     * Going Beyond the Waiver
    * What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?
    * The Bilingual Advantage: Three Years Later
    * The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind
  * #### Essential Reads

    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/shutterstock_585722714_1.jpg?itok=vSx7T2se)

What Kind of Network Predicts Success for Women MBA Grads?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/confederate_statue_2-144x144-0_53-768_768.jpg?itok=FinNMDG_)
    

Is Implicit Bias a Product of the Person or the Situation?

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_images/2019-06/9077654798_257c7920a9_o.jpg?itok=JypCxsVm)
    

The Genius of William James

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pulse_club-144x144-205_0-684_683_0.jpg?itok=rKb4HEzz)
    

Three Years Since the Pulse Nightclub Shooting

  * #### Trending Topics

    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All

Go

![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/icons/icon-check-circle-gray.svg)
Verified by Psychology Today

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile/public/field_user_blogger_photo/eyal-

winter-scaled.jpg?itok=B517wOiv)

### Eyal Winter Ph.D.

Feeling Smart

# Why Our Emotions Are More Rational Than We Think

## The interface between rationality and emotions

Posted Feb 09, 2015

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

![self](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/article-

inline-half/public/field_blog_entry_images/Picture2.jpg?itok=IO1HjKjt)

Source: self

Many of us tend to think of decision making as a process in which two separate
and opposite mechanisms are engaged in a critical struggle. The emotional and
impulsive mechanism within us temp us to choose the “wrong” thing, while the
rational and intellectual mechanism that we also carry inside us slowly and
ploddingly promises to lead us eventually to make the right choice. This
description, which was also shared by many scientists until a few decades ago,
is both simplistic and wrong.

Our emotional and intellectual mechanisms work together and sustain each
other. Sometimes they cannot be separated at all. In many cases, a decision
based on emotion or intuition may be much more efficient—and indeed
better—than a decision arrived at after thorough and rigorous analysis of all
the possible outcomes and implications. A study conducted at the University of
California at Santa Barbara indicates that in situations in which we are
moderately angry our ability to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant
claims in disputed issues is sharpened. Another study that I coauthored
reveals that our inclination to become angered grows in situations in which we
can benefit from anger. In other words, there is logic in emotion and often
emotion in logic.

How do emotions influence our decision making? Do they hinder us or help us?
What is their role in social situations? How are collective emotions formed?
What are the evolutionary mechanisms that made us both thinking and emotional
creatures? My new book _Feeling Smart: Why Our Emotions Are More Rational Than
We Think_ attempts to answer these questions. It uses insights from the latest
research studies published in recent years “on the seam” between emotions and
rationality. Our abiity to integrate rationality and emotions applies not only
for economic decisions but also to a much larger domain of environments,
including politics, religion, family, sexuality, and art—some of which I
intend to discuss in this blog.

The new insights that have been obtained about the role of emotions are an
outcome of a quiet revolution that has occurred over the past two decades in
three important research disciplines: brain sciences, behavioral economics,
and game theory. These three together have in recent years expanded our
understanding of all aspects related to human behavior. If in the past
emotions were studied mainly in psychology, sociology, and philosophy while
rationality was the preserve of economics and game theory, today both the
study of rationality and the study of emotions are active research subjects
for scholars in all those fields.

Game theory and behavioral economics, the academic fields in which I
specialize, are rapidly expanding subjects within economics. Over the past two
decades, 12 Nobel Prizes in economics were awarded to researchers in those two
fields. Their influence is felt well beyond the gates of academia.

Although my blog is not based on one and only one school of thought, I do have
a personal and consistent message that I'd like to stress. This message can be
summarized using the apparently paradoxical combination of words: “rational
emotions.” Research in behavioral economics and the popular literature that it
has spawned, including books composed by my friends Dan Ariely and Daniel
Kahneman, tends to concentrate on mental deviations that lead us away from
rational decision making and in some cases can harm us. In my opinion, this is
an overly pessimistic position. In contrast, I am trying to point out how
emotions serve us and further our interests, including our most material and
immediate interests.

It is impossible to conduct a discussion on this subject without making use of
two important research fields: game theory and the theory of evolution.

Game theory, which is essentially the study of interactive decisions, is
necessary because humans are social creatures who interact with their
environments. The game theoretic approach enables us to understand the roles
that emotions and other behavioral characteristics have within a context of
social interaction. Without it, we would be exposed to only “one side of the
coin,” and we would have only a partial understanding of our own behaviors.

The theory of evolution is also vital for understanding human behavior. An
evolutionary claim is intended to explain how a behavioral characteristic
helps (or has in the past helped) human species to survive. Like physical
developments in humans and other living creatures, human behavioral
developments are the results of a “package deal”: a behavioral characteristic
or inclination that appears to be an obstacle in one decision context is in
many cases an important advantage in other decision contexts.

My use of the term “emotions” throughout the discussions in this blog is
broader than the meaning attached to that word in common speech. I include
emotions, such as anger and worry, which are regarded by everyone as emotions,
but also concepts that are typically thought of as social norms, such as
fairness, equality, and magnanimity. This is not an attempt to define what is
an emotion (something that I will deliberately avoid doing here) but instead
comes from a desire to discuss an extensive range of phenomena that impact
what might otherwise be perfectly rational thinking.

Feel Smart,  
Eyal

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

6 Comments

### rational emotion

Submitted by William Duggan Ph.D. on February 12, 2015 - 5:05pm

Great.

  * Reply to William Duggan Ph.D.
  * Quote William Duggan Ph.D.

### rational

Submitted by Tony Jesse on February 25, 2017 - 8:14am

I notice that you came to your conclusion in your research by using the method
of reason not your emotions.

  * Reply to Tony Jesse
  * Quote Tony Jesse

### Dear Dr. Winter, I have had

Submitted by Morgan W on September 30, 2015 - 2:59pm

Dear Dr. Winter, I have had firsthand experience with rational emotion and how
it can help in my decision making. Acting on my emotions by themselves has
affected me in many ways and I use to think it was a bad way to think and I
should only focus on rational and intellectually thinking. My thoughts soon
changed as I inherited a sum of money from my great grandpa as he passed away.
I started spending and was not thinking until the rational emotion of worry
kicked in. Due to this rational emotion I thought more of the future rather
than the here and now. It set me up for becoming a better adult and help me
realize that emotion and rational thinking can go hand in hand in making the
best possible decision making. After reading your blog, it only furthered my
thoughts on how I should act on rational emotions more often than not when it
is needed. There are still certain times where I feel emotions should not be a
part of my thinking so I can say for sure that I feel this is not the best way
to do my thinking all the time, But I will still take my rational thinking
more into consideration after reading this blog.

  * Reply to Morgan W
  * Quote Morgan W

### I wish to point out that

Submitted by Andrew Guo on March 3, 2017 - 3:43am

I wish to point out that spending money beyond your income is a lack of
rational thinking for logic would prove that it unsustainable.

In fact I'd argue that it is emotions that made you spend beyond your income
and rationality that made you snap back into recognizing the irrationality of
spending beyond your means.

  * Reply to Andrew Guo
  * Quote Andrew Guo

### Thank you for pointing out

Submitted by Anon on April 14, 2017 - 5:40am

Thank you for pointing out what should have been obvious from the get go. Too
many people jump on ideas like "Oh you thought chocolate/caffeine/margarine
was bad? Studies show it can be good for you!"

They're so happy to be told that what they feel isn't bad. It's just terrible
to take advantage of people that way, but that's how people sell stuff (like
books). To quote something I read earlier today:

"If you want the other person _not_ to think about the decision, then get them
into an emotional state. A sales person will get their customers excited,
hopeful or into a state of lust."

Making your readers happy is exactly that. Fooling them into believing their
actions are positive instead of negative. That happiness lowers their guard
and makes them listen to you, trust you, or buy something from you.

What an incredibly ironic article for a site called PsychologyToday, isn't it?

  * Reply to Anon
  * Quote Anon

### Cognition, Affect, and Learning

Submitted by Barry Kort on June 4, 2018 - 10:18am

"Cognition, Affect, and Learning: The Role of Emotions in Learning"

This NSF-funded research from the MIT Media Lab explores the role of emotions
in learning.

This research won the "Best Theory Paper Award" when it was first published
back in 2001.

TinyURL(dot)Com/Cognition-Affect-Learning

  * Reply to Barry Kort
  * Quote Barry Kort

## Post Comment

Your name

E-mail

The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.

Subject

Comment *

Notify me when new comments are posted

All comments __

Replies to my comment __

Leave this field blank

advertisement

### More Posts

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-02/regret-144x144-0_0-897_897.jpg?itok=6PpBgY0F)

## The Fear of Regret and Its Consequences

Why the fear of regret can be worse than regret itself, and how we can avoid
it.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-01/33230371231_f9834e52aa_b-144x144-256_0-559_558_0.jpg?itok=sybN7f7I)

## How to Manufacture Love: Guidelines for Dating

How Aron's Love Procedure can be Used to Succeed in your Date

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2018-12/33230371231_f9834e52aa_b-144x144-266_0-559_558.jpg?itok=mE4gk5uM)

## How to Manufacture Love II

More Practical Guidelines for Dating

Continue Reading

advertisement

## Most Popular

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/robot-144x144-0_12-638_638_0.jpg?itok=l0ctuoaj)

Sex Robots and the End of Civilization

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/image1501-144x144-186_0-515_514.jpg?itok=YY3gsGoj)

New Neuroscience Discovery May Disrupt Biology

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-05/sebastian_kaulitzk_medically_accurate_illustration_of_vagus_nerve_gut-brain_axis-144x144-0_0-750_750_0.jpg?itok=Fqgj60gq)

Longer Exhalations Are an Easy Way to Hack Your Vagus Nerve

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/narcissism_pathway_use_danielsampaioneto-144x144-37_64-335_335.jpg?itok=YsR7HbxU)

What Leads a Person Down the Narcissism Pathway?

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/architecture-buildings-city-220444-144x144-537_0-1334_1337.jpg?itok=cQR3llvb)

The Men’s Mental Health Double-Bind

advertisement

## More Like This

  * The Myth of the Rational Consumer
  * Why Fulfilling Travel Is Harder than We Think
  * 10 Common Myths About Emotions (and Why They're Wrong)
  * Why Was Kennedy’s Love-Making Always Very Brief? 
  * "Just Be Kind" Is More Complicated than It Sounds

## Find a Therapist

Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from Psychology
Today.

### Cities:

  * Atlanta, GA
  * Austin, TX
  * Baltimore, MD
  * Boston, MA
  * Brooklyn, NY
  * Charlotte, NC
  * Chicago, IL
  * Columbus, OH
  * Dallas, TX
  * Denver, CO
  * Detroit, MI
  * Houston, TX
  * Indianapolis, IN
  * Jacksonville, FL
  * Las Vegas, NV
  * Los Angeles, CA
  * Louisville, KY
  * Memphis, TN
  * Miami, FL
  * Milwaukee, WI
  * Minneapolis, MN
  * Nashville, TN
  * New York, NY
  * Oakland, CA
  * Omaha, NE
  * Philadelphia, PA
  * Phoenix, AZ
  * Pittsburgh, PA
  * Portland, OR
  * Raleigh, NC
  * Sacramento, CA
  * Saint Louis, MO
  * San Antonio, TX
  * San Diego, CA
  * San Francisco, CA
  * San Jose, CA
  * Seattle, WA
  * Tucson, AZ
  * Washington, DC

Are you a Therapist?

Get Listed Today

Psychology Today

![Facebook](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-facebook.svg)

![Twitter](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-twitter.svg)

![Instagram](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-instagram.svg)

## Recent Issues

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Subscribe Today!

  * About
  * Privacy
  * Terms

United States ![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/actions/country-switcher-

body.svg) v

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Psychology Today (C) 2019 Sussex Publishers, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

