

Javascript must be enabled for the correct page display

Skip to Content

![image description](https://www.bankruptcy-canada.ca/wp-

content/uploads/2014/12/logo-blue-2x.png)

Since 2004

![https://www.bankruptcy-canada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/icon-

user.svg](https://www.bankruptcy-canada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/icon-

user.svg) CONTACT A LICENSED TRUSTEE

Confidential, No Obligation

(888) 823-8239

![phone](/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/phoneicon.png)(888) 823-8239
EnglishFrançais

Search form

  * How Bankruptcy Works
  * How Consumer Proposals Work

    * How it Works
    * What is Consumer Proposal?
    * Consumer Proposal vs. Bankruptcy
    * Debts that are Not Eliminated
    * Role of a Trustee
    * Eligibility to File a Consumer Proposal
    * Effects on Credit Rating
    * How to File A Consumer Proposal
    * Initial Assessment
    * Payment Terms
    * Filing the Documents
    * Voting of the Creditors
    * Amending a Consumer Proposal
    * After Consumer Proposal is Completed
    * ![Debt repayment calculator](/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/calculator.jpg)

Debt Repayment Calculator  
Compare your options.

![Contact a Consumer Proposals Administrator](/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/contact-trustee.jpg)

Contact a Consumer Proposal Administrator near You  
Arrange for a free consultation.

  * FAQ's
  * Find a Trustee
  * Why Bankruptcy Canada
    * Our Team
    * Ratings & Reviews
  * Free Consultations

Home /What Causes Bankruptcy?

### Learn About Bankruptcy

### Introduction

  * What is Personal Bankruptcy
  * What Happens in a Bankruptcy
  * Who should Consider Bankruptcy
  * What are the Types of Bankruptcy?
  * Bankruptcy vs Consumer Proposal

### How It Works

  * How to File Bankruptcy
  * Role of a Trustee
  * Length of Bankruptcy
  * Bankruptcy Costs
  * Duties during Bankruptcy
  * Life after Bankruptcy

### Effects of Bankruptcy

  * What Happens to Your Debts
  * Assets You can Keep in a Bankruptcy
  * Effects on Spouse
  * Effects on Credit Rating

### Find a Trustee

Enter Postal Code

  * or -  
Select Trustee By Province

  * Alberta

  * British Columbia
  * Manitoba
  * Newfoundland
  * New Brunswick
  * Nova Scotia
  * Ontario
  * Prince Edward Island
  * Quebec
  * Saskatchewan

See map of all Trustee Locations

### explore related topics

### See All Topics

  * After Bankruptcy
  * Alternatives to Bankruptcy
  * Bankruptcy
  * Consumer Proposals
  * Cost Of Bankruptcy
  * Credit Counselling
  * Credit Repair
  * Debt
  * Debt Consolidation
  * Debt Settlement
  * Divorce & Separation
  * Money Problems
  * OSB
  * Student Loans
  * Testimonials
  * Topics
  * Trustees Talk
  * What I Keep or Lose in Bankruptcy
  * Wendy's Column

# What Causes Bankruptcy?

The editors of bankruptcy-canada.ca have surveyed some of the Licensed
Insolvency Trustees that contribute to this site, have reviewed all of the
questions that appear on our Bankruptcy Canada Blog and, as a result, they
have determined that there are _three leading causes of bankruptcy in Canada_.

Before we explain the reasons, please note that each year over 100,000
Canadians file for personal bankruptcy, or file a consumer proposal; so, if
you are reading this site and you have financial problems, you are not alone.

## The three leading causes of personal bankruptcy in Canada

The first one on the list of leading causes of bankruptcy in Canada is **job
loss** , **or reduced income in general**. Losing your job or having your
overtime reduced, for example, can make it increasingly difficult for you to
make your debt payments.

Faced with a job loss, one of your keys to survival is reducing your expenses
as quickly as possible to free up cash and continue servicing your debts. This
is of course easier said than done, since you cannot quickly reduce your rent
or car payments, but remember that reducing other expenses, whenever possible,
is often the key to avoiding bankruptcy.

Another one of leading contributors to personal bankruptcy in Canada is
marriage separation or divorce. **Approximately one third of all people filing
personal bankruptcy in Canada are either separated or divorced at the time of
filing.**

It’s easy to see why separation and divorce can lead to financial problems. As
a couple you only have to pay rent once, and you only have one phone bill,
hydro bill, and you share most other expenses. Once you are separated, you are
each paying your own bills, so your expenses increase, but your income stays
the same.

If you have debts when you separate, your increased expenses may make it
difficult to continue to service the debts.

The last on our list of leading causes of bankruptcy in Canada, are medical
problems; they often can and do lead to a lot of financial problems.
Fortunately, in Canada most of our medical expenses, such as hospital care,
are covered by the government, unlike in the United States where medical bills
for uninsured Americans are a leading cause of bankruptcy in America.

However, if you get sick or injured, and you are off work for a number of
months, even with medical insurance your income is reduced, and that makes it
more difficult to service your debts.

For a more detailed list of possible **_causes of bankruptcy in Canada_ ,**
please visit our Bankruptcy Canada Blog; and remember that regardless of what
has caused your financial problems, help is available. If you are considering
bankruptcy, we urge you to contact a licensed trustee for a **free
consultation**. He/she will review your situation, and recommend solutions to
your financial problems.

### Trustees in Canada

  * Alberta
  * British Columbia
  * Manitoba
  * New Brunswick
  * Newfoundland
  * Nova Scotia
  * Ontario
  * Prince Edward Island
  * Quebec
  * Saskatchewan

### Community

  * Bankruptcy Canada
  * Debt Support Group

### Send Us Feedback

  * Review Our Site
  *   * About Us

  * Privacy Statement
  * Legal Terms of Use
  * Site Map
  * Locations

### Bankruptcy Canada Inc.

Administrative Office*

100 King Street West

Toronto, ON, M5X 1C9, Canada *There are no Licensed Insolvency Trustees
available at this location. Media inquiries may be directed to: Jarret Austin,
President, Bankruptcy Canada Inc., (647) 693-8800, jaustin@bankruptcy-
canada.ca

  *     *       * 

Bankruptcy Canada Inc. © 2019 All Rights Reserved

  * About Us
  * Privacy Statement
  * Legal Terms of Use
  * Site Map
  * Locations

Back to top

__ Navigation

  * How Bankruptcy Works
  * How Consumer Proposals Work ****
    * How it Works ****
    * What is Consumer Proposal?
    * Consumer Proposal vs. Bankruptcy
    * Debts that are Not Eliminated
    * Role of a Trustee
    * Eligibility to File a Consumer Proposal
    * Effects on Credit Rating
    * __Back
    * How to File A Consumer Proposal ****
    * Initial Assessment
    * Payment Terms
    * Filing the Documents
    * Voting of the Creditors
    * Amending a Consumer Proposal
    * After Consumer Proposal is Completed
    * __Back
    * __Back
  * FAQ's
  * Find a Trustee
  * Why Bankruptcy Canada ****
    * Our Team
    * Ratings & Reviews
    * __Back
  * Free Consultations

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

