

Financial Samurai

Slicing Through Money's Mysteries

  * About
    * Welcome To The Financial Samurai Forum (FSF)!
  * Free Wealth Management
  * Top Financial Products
  * Negotiate A Severance
  * Real Estate Crowdfunding

# Subsidy Amounts By Income For The Affordable Care Act (Obamacare)

Posted by Financial Samurai 210 Comments

![Patriotic dog and US flag](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-

content/uploads/2013/10/flag-dog-225x300.jpg)_Updated for 2019 and beyond._

The Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) is a potentially great way to help lower
income individuals afford health care. I'm a supporter of ACA despite the
trappings of ever bigger government running our lives because disease and
accidents do not discriminate between rich or poor. In a nation as rich as
ours, nobody should die or get stuck in a permanent loop of poverty just
because they can't afford medical treatment.

The two most common reasons why people don't retire earlier are: 1) Lack of
money and 2) Uncertainty regarding health care access and costs. As an early
retiree in 2012 with a full 30 years to go before being eligible for Medicare
benefits, I was worried about health care until I did some research on cheap
health care alternatives.

Now that I've spent a good amount of time studying what healthcare.gov has to
offer, I'm not worried but thrilled for the potentially millions of other
people who don't have health care or who have no desire to work into their
60s.

I've also discovered that even millionaires will be eligible for health care
subsidies. More equality is a welcome relief from the constant class warfare
rhetoric and discriminatory policies we hear from Capital Hill.

## Obamacare (ACA) Subsidy Amounts By Income

When it comes to paying income taxes and receiving health care subsidies, it's
generally better to be middle to lower middle class. The philosophy on
Financial Samurai is to be wealthy but blend in with the crowd. Staying in the
shadows is even more important as an early retiree because we are no longer
contributing as much to society, yet we don't look as old as we should which
may anger some people.

We already paid our dues in the form of taxes, hence why we retired. One tip
for early retirees is to never tell anybody you've retired. Instead, tell them
you are unemployed, a consultant, or an entrepreneur to deflect envy and
potentially garner sympathy.

The below are four charts I painstakingly put together by inputting income
levels in the Kaiser Family Foundation Subsidy Calculator. A Silver Plan is
used in the example where the insurer will pay for 70% of the medical expense.

Premium expense is capped at 9.5% of income, and out of pocket expense
excluding premium expense ranges from $6,350 for a single individual up to
$12,700 for a family of four. You are welcome to play around with the
calculator to fit your situation.

## SUBSIDY BY INCOME FOR FAMILY OF FOUR

![ACA Subsidy By Income Family Of Four

Chart](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/subsidy-

family-four.png)

## SUBSIDY BY INCOME FOR FAMILY OF THREE

![Family Of Three Subsidy By Income

Chart](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/subsidy-

family-three.png)

## SUBSIDY BY INCOME FOR MARRIED COUPLE NO CHILDREN

![Subsidy By Income Chart Obamacare Married Couple No

Kids](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/subsidy-

married-couple.png)

## SUBSIDY BY INCOME FOR SINGLE INDIVIDUAL

![Subsidy by income for single individual

obamacare](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-

content/uploads/2013/10/subsidy-single-obamacare.png)

## Analysis Of Income Limits For Subsidies

*** Poverty levels:** Income under $25,100 to be exact for a family of four
(two adults, two children), $20,780 for a family of three, and $12,140 for an
individual are considered poverty levels in the United States. The calculator
spits out $0 subsidies, which is a glitch, implying such applicants pay $0 to
next to nothing for annual health care premiums.

![ACA Income Limits For Subsidies](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-

content/uploads/2013/10/ACA-income-limit-for-subsidies.png)

ACA Income Limits For Subsidies 2019

*** Phaseout levels:** For 2019, after earning an income of $100,400 or higher
for a family of four, $83,120 for a family of three, $65,840 for a married
couple with no kids, and $48,560 for single individuals, you will no longer
receive government health care subsidies. The basic math is 4X the Federal
Poverty Level (FPL) as determined by the government. Despite the phaseout, the
good thing is that it looks like the max % of income one has to pay annually
in premiums gets fixed at 9.5% of gross salary no matter what you make.

![ACA Cost By Income](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-

content/uploads/2013/10/ACA-Cost-by-income.png)

*** Other levels of coverage:** The premium and subsidy amounts above are
based on a Silver plan. You have the option to apply the subsidy toward the
purchase of other levels of coverage, such as a Gold plan (which would be more
comprehensive) or a Bronze plan (which would be less comprehensive).

**_Out of pocket costs:_ * The out of pocket costs excluding premium costs are
capped, depending on your situation. For example, a family of four making
$50,000 cannot exceed $10,400 for the silver plan for example. The out of
pocket increases to a maximum of $12,700 for a family of four making $94,000.
The out of pocket costs for an individual making $30,000 cannot exceed $6,350.
It 's good to see these out of pocket costs limited, however, they still
**seem quite high**.

A family making $50,000 a year should bring home roughly $35,000-$40,000 after
taxes. To spend 30% of their after tax income on health care is a large
percentage. Hence it is always important for people to continue saving no
mater what their income level. The point is at least we know our backstop cost
and can plan accordingly.

Related: The Health Affordability Ratio

## How To Take Advantage Of Health Care Subsidies

It's obviously better to make so much money where you have no problem
affording unsubsidized health care. However, let me share some ways in which
everybody can better benefit from government subsidies and not just the middle
income to lower income population.

***Maximize contribution to pre-tax retirement accounts.** Contribute the
maximum $19,000 to your 401k to reduce your taxable income by $19,000. If you
have a working spouse, do the same thing to get a combined $38,000 reduction
to your MAGI. You can contribute $6,000 each to your IRA as well pre-tax if
you make under $122,000 as a single and under $193,000 as a married couple.
But your goal is to get way down the charts so you start receiving subsidies.

Related: How Much Should You Have Saved In Your 401k By Age

*** Start an S-Corp or LLC.** Starting a business is a way to reduce your
taxable income by deducting all business related expenses. Everyone should
check with an accountant first about deductions before going ahead because
each business is different. There is a lot of overlap in terms of business
expenses and general lifestyle expenses.

For example, if you are a Scuba Diving Instructor, how are you going to put
together your course and write about your experiences online about scuba
diving in the Maldives without going to the Maldives? There's no law saying
you can't enjoy yourself on business.

You can start your own website to legitimize your business with Bluehost. You
get a free domain name for a year. There's not a day that goes by where I'm
not thankful for starting FinancialSamurai.com in 2009. I no longer ever have
to work for someone else. I pay ~$750 a month for excellent healthcare, and
it's tax deductible.

*** Become a rental property owner.** All expenses related to operating your
rental property are tax deductible. Add on the non cash expense of
depreciation and you 'll easily be able to reduce your rental income and pay
less taxes. If you have a rental property in Bora Bora, you can deduct your
transportation costs to get there. Not bad at all. (Read How To Pay Little To
No Taxes For The Rest Of Your Life)

*** Own income producing assets and be debt free.** Let 's say you own $1
million dollars worth of property outright that generates operating income of
$45,000 a year (4.5% net rental yield). You have no other income, but you have
no debt so life isn't too hard supporting your family of four. Your family
qualifies for $5,640 a year in health care subsidies and you only have to pay
$2,650 a year.

Another example is amassing a $3 million dollar stock portfolio yielding
$90,000 a year in dividends with a $25,000 a year deduction in primary
mortgage interest. Your MAGI is $65,000 meaning that you and your family of
four still qualify for $2,600 a year in health care subsidy as multi-
millionaires.

Related: Ranking The Best Passive Income Streams

*** Check with private exchanges online.** Like every good deal shopper, you
shouldn 't just rely on one source. I checked online for very similar plans
for a family of four and for an individual and here's what I came up with:
$950 a month for a family of four with a $5,000 max deductible and $210 a
month for a 35 year old individual in good health with a max deductible of
$2,000.

There are many options tailored to each individual case. For those of you who
have much higher incomes than $94,000 for a family of four and more than
$30,000 per individual and can't adjust your MAGI down any further, going the
private exchange looks like the better option.

**Bottom line:** It is much better to have a high net worth and low adjusted
gross income instead of a high adjusted gross income and low net worth to take
advantage of government subsidies. I 'm sure the government realizes this as
well, which is their way of encouraging individuals to save and invest for
their future. By accumulating a healthy amount of assets, the government will
also reward you with subsidies. (Read The Average Net Worth For The Above
Average Person and What Should My Net Worth Be By Income?)

## Affordable Health Care For All

As you can see from the charts above, income plays the key role in how much
subsidy an individual or a family gets. Together, we are helping subsidize
lower income groups to gain health care access that they deserve. Helping
others is what being a good citizen is all about.

Those with pre-existing conditions and who are considered of lower health can
no longer be denied health care or discriminated against. Yes, Obamacare
creates somewhat of a moral hazard when it comes to exercising and eating
healthy. However, just as the rich help subsidize the poor through a
progressive tax system, the healthy will subsidize the less healthy through
the Affordable Care Act.

The largest point of contention will likely be how the government determines
what income levels are poverty levels and what income levels are considered
too much to receive subsidies. It's difficult to live on less than $20,000 a
year as an individual in San Francisco for example, yet the poverty level is
$12,140 and below.

The greatest benefit from the Affordable Care Act is that if you or your
family are experiencing hard times, you will be highly subsidized until income
improves. Having at least disaster insurances is tantamount. For those who are
considering quitting their jobs to do something new, or others who've decided
to get out of the rate race early, you've now got one less thing to worry
about.

## Recommendations

**Looking for affordable term life insurance?** Check out PolicyGenius, an
independent insurance broker that is revolutionizing the way we shop for life
insurance – for free! Answer a few simple questions on PolicyGenius’s website
and instantly receive free, personalized and comprehensive life insurance
quotes.

PolicyGenius provides free, unbiased advice on more than 25 A-rated top life
insurance companies they have thoroughly researched and vetted. Because life
insurance prices are regulated, you don't have to worry about not getting the
best deals. PolicyGenius helps you compare the best quotes all in one place.
When insurance companies compete, you win.

**Manage Your Finances In One Place:** The best way to become financially
independent and protect yourself is to get a handle on your finances by
signing up with Personal Capital. They are a free online platform which
aggregates all your financial accounts in one place so you can see where you
can optimize.

Before Personal Capital, I had to log into eight different systems to track
25+ difference accounts (brokerage, multiple banks, 401K, etc) to manage my
finances. Now, I can just log into Personal Capital to see how my stock
accounts are doing and how my net worth is progressing. I can also see how
much I’m spending every month.

Their most important tool is their Retirement Planner. The tool uses your real
linked data to run a Monte Carlo simulation to see whether your future
financial situation is on track. There is NO REWIND BUTTON when it comes to
your finances. Therefore, I highly recommend you take full advantage of the
best free financial management tool on the web today.

![Retirement Planner Personal Capital](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-

content/uploads/2015/12/Retirement-Planner-Personal-Capital-Financial-

Samurai-728x405.png)

Is your retirement on track? Sign up to find out!

Updated for 2019 and beyond.

__Tweet 2

__Share 69

__Pin 5

__Flip

__Share

__Reddit

__Pocket

76 Shares

Filed Under: Health & Fitness, Insurance

**Author Bio:** Sam started Financial Samurai in 2009 to help people achieve
financial freedom sooner, rather than later. He spent 13 years working in
investment banking, earned his MBA from UC Berkeley, and retired at age 34 in
San Francisco.

Sam's favorite free financial tool he's been using since 2012 to manage his
net worth is **Personal Capital**. Every month, Sam runs his investments
through their free Retirement Planner and Investment Checkup tool to make sure
he stays financially free, forever. It 's free and easy to use.

For investing opportunities in 2019, Sam is most interested in investing in
the heartland of America through **real estate crowdfunding**. Property
valuations are much cheaper and net rental yields are much higher. There is a
demographic trend towards moving away from higher cost areas of the country to
lower cost areas thanks to technology.

#### Subscribe To Private Newsletter

Enter your email address...

### Comments

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/313cc7601d0094430d76ae224ce043e5?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Brian Miller says

May 23, 2019 at 5:48 pm

Does "unearned" income count towards qualifying for Obamacare? A couple friend
who makes their living from rental income (without being set up as employees
of their own company) said they don't qualify for subsidies because their
income is not earned income.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/202510f26b63a3f446c0979e8cfd8fa9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)McConMan says

May 4, 2019 at 5:29 pm

I am 64 and plan on retiring next year when I am on Medicare. But my wife has
three more years to go. I work at the local hospital so I went to the people
who do the ACA coverage. My SSI check will be about $2100 per month but they
told me that doesn't count towards income since it is tax free. They said that
in SC I have to have over $16,000 of taxable income for my wife to be
eligible. Has anyone heard about minimum income limits to the ACA or is this
just a SC thing?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/29fec84a66bca9c6042c57e410daa1d7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Scott says

April 4, 2019 at 6:18 pm

I just met with my tax preparer. For 2018 I owe the IRS $14,000 dollars. The
sum total of the premium from my silver tier plan. I earned $7500 more on the
year than the 400% FPL unexpectedly. Imagine my surprise. How would you feel
with a surprise $14,000 bill? I think it is all smoke and mirrors. Give me the
free market anytime. No to government subsidies.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

April 4, 2019 at 9:52 pm

Yikes, that is terrible.

Obamacare is not working.. the deductions are so high it makes it useless to
so many.

See: How To Get Healthcare Subsidies Even As A Multi-Millionaire

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e1896c753efa2746ccbeb45b1c8aaa66?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Joan says
    

April 17, 2019 at 4:23 pm

Scott - this almost happened to us last year. You have to watch your income
constantly and NOT go over the limit or you fall off the cliff. Last year we
were lucky enough to fund an IRA to reduce our AGI to meet the ceiling. It's
not the ACA's fault - you have to manage your income. I cannot wait to get on
Medicare. We are 62 and early retired… the ACA has been a god-send but we all
need Medicare for All NOW.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cad6e9de658e1999e530ea5c70762912?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Uwe Heine says

January 15, 2019 at 8:44 am

Where do I find the maximum percent of income that I have to pay for coverage?
I went to the Kaiser Family website that you linked, and it looks like in
North Carolina the subsidy is all or nothing when you go above the $400% of
poverty level. The cost of Bronze level coverage goes from $0 to $16,978 per
year ($0 if income is 65k and $16978 if income is 66k). It looks like I will
have a one time added income that puts me above the 400% level this year.
Kaiser does say I could be eligible for "catastrophic coverage" since my
premiums would be about 20% of my income!

Thanks for any clarification.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0999d04950d9c64bc7ae761f9ff8c000?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Greg Jarrett says
    

January 15, 2019 at 9:03 pm

That is the "subsidy cliff" you may have heard about.  
Earn $1 over 400% FPL and it can cost you $20,000 more for your health
insurance, depending on your age and location.  
This could be fixed, but the GOP won't lift a finger to help a program started
by Democrats. Sad!

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9038c29bc3c2a1da0907996ffabdd944?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Valerie Roberg says

January 15, 2019 at 5:27 am

Thank you for doing the research for your charts. However, I'm confused about
the premium amounts you listed. I'm a family of 2 and the premium for the
second lowest silver plan is $1900 per month!. That's $22800 per year. Your
chart lists $5000-9000 yearly premiums. Why the huge difference?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0999d04950d9c64bc7ae761f9ff8c000?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Greg Jarrett says

January 1, 2019 at 10:20 pm

This sentence in your post seems to be incorrect:  
"Despite the phaseout, the good thing is that it looks like the max % of
income one has to pay annually in premiums gets fixed at 9.5% of gross salary
no matter what you make."

That gave me hope, but as nearly as I can tell once you slip over that 400%
FPL line, your premiums can skyrocket. Ours would go up to 29% of our income
if we'd stayed in the ACA Marketplace. Completely unaffordable, so we had to
go elsewhere for coverage.

I think the ACA was a good step, but needs some serious improvements. The
sooner we can get to Single Payer, the better, in my opinion.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f3a50785314a3edc77280538a578bb7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Patricia Sarfert says

December 8, 2018 at 1:38 pm

I don't suppose you happen to have an updated chart for 2019? The
healthcare.gov website is cumbersome and I am trying to run different income
scenarios as we may be selling a rental home this year. I am trying to see how
much subsidy we will lose to see if it is worth selling, and so far all I can
do is guess because they don't make it easy to compare without starting brand
new applications.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

December 8, 2018 at 9:11 pm

I've left the initial charts alone to give readers a sense of how much they
have to pay, but I updated the post with two new charts in the middle for
2019. You can just do the math yourself to get a rough estimate on cost based
on your income for a Silver Plan.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f3a50785314a3edc77280538a578bb7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Patricia Sarfert says
    

December 9, 2018 at 7:37 am

Thank you- that is very helpful. I've had the hardest time figuring anything
out from the healthcare.gov website. My situation is an odd one, because I am
trying to sell one rental property to pay off a loan used to purchase another
rental property (all of our income, around $40k per year, comes from these
properties since my husband was laid off two years ago and is currently in
school for another career field), and I would have thought that the loan
payoff expense would lower the MAGI from the capital gains, but from what I
can see, it does not because it would only affect the capital gains from the
other property that I am not selling. I talked to my CPA, and as far as I can
tell, that is how it would work, but it's still very confusing so I am trying
to be certain before I decide how to proceed. Overall, we will have no money
left from the sale after we pay off the loan, but it seems like it will still
count as income in the MAGI that ACA uses, so we would lose any subsidy, even
though the reality is that we will have no additional income this year after
paying the loan (a loss of $9000+ in subsidies). I am all for Universal
Healthcare- nobody should have to make life choices like this- I consider
myself a reasonably intelligent person, but I think I need a Master's degree
in accounting and a CPA license just to be able to figure out something that
should be made to be easily understandable by the lay person so that ordinary
people can make informed decisions. And the fact that even if I carry just the
basic Bronze plan (that I currently have) all of my medical costs (assuming no
major medical problems) are still out of pocket because of the high
deductibles. So, I can choose to pay almost $17k out of pocket this year (from
our $40k 'actual' income) just for the insurance, plus pay all out of pocket
for any minor medical appointments, or I can take a risk of not having
insurance. Don't get me wrong- I am a supporter of the Affordable Care Act,
but it needs to go farther and make healthcare truly affordable for all, and I
am just fine paying higher taxes to pay for Universal Healthcare. If everyone
pays the same taxes, such as the way New Zealand does, then it is a fair
system that everyone pays the same share and gets the same care. Our current
for profit system doesn't work and isn't sustainable- people's lives shouldn't
be in the hands of capitalist corporations who care more about making money
than in helping people who need care, and we shouldn't have to make the choice
between having insurance and risking not having it so that we can pay our
bills.  
Sorry for the rant- I truly appreciate your assistance.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dfe444a651ffc50f726905fba54ba7c9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Photobarb says

November 25, 2018 at 11:14 am

The tables above provide great information, but are they based on gross or net
reported income?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ab76eaccc24ccc09dce00ba93d263f38?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Todd Smith says

November 9, 2018 at 12:18 pm

Who else pays almost 17,000 annually with a high deductible? Middle class
can't get a break. The rich get subsidies and the poor get it as well while we
end up paying for it all having a difficult time paying our own bills.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5d6e352e7708d35a2b1a8cb262102012?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Rick says

November 3, 2018 at 1:09 pm

I was all in favor of the ACA until it actually got implemented in PA. I was
happily paying about $225 a month for individual coverage, then not too much
more with ACA the first year.  
Then I found out that I'd get zero assistance and my actual bill was double,
payable in full at tax time.  
I've been unemployed with zero income since 2012, and I get about $35k in
dividends from stocks. I also get another $10-20k in capital gains, but I
never know exactly until December. I want to change my portfolio to produce
less income, but I can't, because selling causes a bigger capital gain that
also disqualifies me for subsidy. So I am trapped, trying to toe the limit
line by selling only losers.

Worse yet, all insurers except IBX have dropped out of the market in PA,
meaning IBX can charge anything it wants, and it does. My policy has jumped
from $250/mo to $450 to $909 in the past 3 years.

I'll be quite happy when ACA goes away, even though I am supposed to be it's
target market.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/15db2715a6c096b6c8060a2c00a9ca0f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Jed Smith says
    

November 20, 2018 at 3:49 am

I'm in exactly the same situation. Almost $1000/mth for Bronze level coverage.
I don't dare go back to work, even part-time. Selling losers and trying to
minimize dividends within taxable accounts is about all one can do. HSA
contributions are one way to lower MAGI but I haven't done that as the amount
is unpredictable, it limits the choices of "affordable" plans, and it doesn't
cover the biggest component: premiums.

For something that was supposed to lower health care cost, a 300% increase in
premiums in the past 4 years shows it to be a complete failure. But, nothing
will change to help, especially for those in similar situations.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1c0bbc41d5920e4e56dfaa883720a8f1?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)John Harris says
    

April 20, 2019 at 7:06 am

I'll bet you were happy paying $ 2,700 a year for healthcare when you have a
portfolio worth over $1.8M. Who wouldn't be? But it's really not fair is it?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d637e013ff635aa16ea75fa7b5d5d7ed?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Bart Eddy says

January 6, 2018 at 7:02 pm

So according to Samurai, it is OK for people to retire in their 30's as he
apparently has done and have the rest of us cover the full cost of his
insurance until he hits age 65. Absolutely crazy. If someone can retire at an
early age, they should be required to pay the full cost of their health
insurance. i don't need to subsidize his retirement. Health care subsidies
should be means-tested on net worth and annual income, not just annual income.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

January 6, 2018 at 7:30 pm

I pay $700 a month for health insurance, and so is my wife. I’m not sure what
you’re talking about, but I know I am helping my fellow brothers and sisters
on the lower end of the income spectrum afford healthcare.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dfd58236b8ef162b8efd6b2515e85624?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)AB says

December 21, 2017 at 11:20 pm

Hi there, my name is AB currently reside in texas, santonio, am barely 2 month
pregnant without an insurance, being trying to get an affordable insurance
with no luck, my taxable monthly income is 10,000$, please can anyone help me
find any affordable healthcare plan?  
Thank you

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4055370d6c3540b1ab85a016bc91b02b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)James Wentworth says
    

April 20, 2019 at 7:09 am

Move to New York.

Seriously, Texas is not a good state for low income people.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dde223f2fbf5e29158df7fd26313649b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Barb Nelson says

October 26, 2017 at 5:07 pm

I definitely do not have an answer BUT something is so wrong with our health
insurance system historically based on employer sponsored plans. Thank God for
the ACA even though it is not even close to perfect. Why is the conversation
not focused on the fact that the insurance companies have been robbing us
blind for decades. Here is the typical scenario: You work your butt off for
years and enjoy a real good benefit plan at your job at pretty reasonable
prices. You have 6 weeks of sick days stored up. Fantastic. Then you get sick
and need surgery and some rehab and maybe can't go back to work for 8 or 10
weeks. Guess what happens after your sick days expire? You are now responsible
for the FULL COST OF YOUR HEALTH INSURANCE so your company sends you a bill
for $1400 and you are no longer getting paid. Maybe you have short term
disability insurance that pays you 60% of your wage but that is not going to
cover your full cost of health coverage. So you have paid your employer
sponsored health care premiums for years and years but now that you are sick
you can no longer afford to keep your insurance. WHAT A RACKET! These
insurance companies have been doing this for decades and decades. Raking in
the money but rarely ever having to pay the big bucks for health care because
they will never pay a dime for anyone who becomes really really sick. Why is
this even acceptable? Why is this not part of the conversation? We need
national health care and not insurance based on employment. Isn't that an
oxymoron? How is this even legal? Most people do not apparently realize that
individuals who become extremely ill (cancer, chronic disease) are covered
under Medicaid because they lose their life savings, their home, anything of
value in order to pay for their care until they are destitute and qualify for
Medicaid. They may have been gainfully employed and insured for decades but
their insurance company is laughing all the way to the bank and in shock that
we have let them

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/08bf9e1ba808d3315f2c0d793968107b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Jason says

August 11, 2017 at 3:43 pm

Found on a friend's Facebook page.

AN ENGINEER EXPLAINS "OBAMACARE" IN FOUR SENTENCES..

Is there a single soul who is surprised that an Engineer came up with this
10,535 pages reduced to 4 sentences?

A Great summary by a Notre Dame University engineer..

Here are the 10,535 pages of Obama Care condensed to 4 simple sentences. As
humorous as it sounds…..every last word is absolutely  
TRUE!

  1. In order to insure the uninsured, we first have to un-insure the insured.

  2. Next, we require the newly un-insured to be re-insured.

  3. To re-insure the newly un-insured, they are required to pay extra charges to be re-insured.

  4. The extra charges are required so that the original insured, who became un-insured, and then became re-insured, can pay enough extra so that the original un-insured can be insured, so it will be'free-of-charge' to them.

Let's be frank, the US health insurance system has been pretty bad for
decades, but Obamacare took a bad thing and made it even worse. Obama tapped
the middle class to subsidize the poor, leaving the poor with health
insurance, but the middle class with unaffordable health insurance. If the
response to it had been widespread non-compliance seven years ago then you
might have been able to force him to repeal it. It can't be fixed. It has to
go. Instead, because people blathered on about how much someone would be able
to save by cleverly managing their money (even though it should have been
obvious the government would never allow you to get away with actually saving
money), you capitulated, tugging your forelocks to your political masters.

In New Zealand we had a similar situation a few years ago when our then
parliament signed us up for Kyoto assuring us that because of our clean green
economy (and we are fairly good) we would make about $2 billion a year in
carbon credits. When the matter was finally resolved it turned out that we
would be paying $2 billion in carbon credits. Remember, politicians lie. It's
what they do. It's all they're good at. Don't be a useful idiot shilling for
them.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/096264c704aa8a12750e0ff78a7ce508?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Stephanie says

March 2, 2017 at 6:29 pm

The ACA forced responsible Americans who have been purchasing healthcare
insurance for decades to lose their healthcare. We still get to pay premiums
and they are higher premiums but we no longer have healthcare because we
cannot afford to go to the doctor after paying the premiums. I have needed to
go to the doctor a few times this year but did not go because I can't pay
anything in co-pay and all of any test. So I don't even want to know what is
wrong with me.

Our taxes help support Medicaid which we had when we were children and very
poor. Back then we got dental, vision, hearing… all things that are necessary
for EVERYONE. ACA doesn't even cover these basics.

More American have "Insurance" big deal. We don't have healthcare anymore. AND
more people are NOW dying for the first time from preventable disease. Because
they have worked all their life. Do not have insurance they can use. So they
are just staying home so they do not deprive their spouses of their
retirement. Anyone who thinks the ACA is just wonderful doesn't care about
anyone else.

I know a few addicts who refuse to work or who can no longer work because of
their addictions. But they now can go to the doctor constantly (and do) while
I cannot. We earn 30,000 a year gross. And are forced to take my husbands work
offered insurance. … prior to Obamacare we had a "catastrophe" policy only and
it paid better than our current EXPENSIVE insurance.

the "Health Insurance" for everyone is a lie. We were better off before, much
better off. And poor people could always go to the ER and get Medicaid. Which
paid much better than the current mess. And if you are poor the ER and
Hospital would most like forgive your bills. I know they always did my dad. I
completed a few pages showing his income, assets, and bills.  
And each hospital will forgive the bill.

Obamacare was a huge mistake. And very poorly done.  
Anyone who thinks otherwise has never been poor and never been lower middle
class working for decades.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ba05151f961c9643ac03520c29361bd0?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dwayne Wayne says

January 21, 2017 at 7:47 am

This is BS.  
I claimed the EXACT AMOUNT of earnings and still have to pay back 45% of my
subsidy, and that's on the lowest costing bronze plan. The first year of
Obamacare I picked a gold plan and ended up paying back 55% of what they gave
me… and I always entered the EXACT AMOUNT in earnings for the year.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

January 21, 2017 at 9:09 am

Check out the latest: Healthcare Costs Are Outrageous! How Much Should One
Comfortably Spend On Healthcare?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/57b06b446831a24ff485e337caa3be11?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)gerald german says

December 22, 2016 at 6:00 pm

Most people commenting made too much for subsidies. What about folks who make
too little?My wife and I are in poor health and can't work full-time anymore.
We need health insurance, but fall Under the minimum(about $12000 combined).
Insurance premiums are more than we earn. Where do we go for affordable
insurance or healthcare?

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8ab2bd8cb129ea35dcd68a7c786735b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Tom Yeager says
    

December 25, 2017 at 2:57 pm

You don't have to take every available deduction. Don't take the standard
deduction. Use Schedule A even if there are no deductions on it. That adds
$6350/person to your MAGI. Of course, you will have to pay taxes on that extra
amount, but the tax will be much lower than than the subsidy. If that's not
enough extra, skip one or both exemption for another $4050/person.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8ab2bd8cb129ea35dcd68a7c786735b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Tom Yeager says
    

December 25, 2017 at 3:14 pm

Boy, did I goof, and my comment is not worth publishing. Deductions are post
MAGI. I do employ the same method, though, on my Schedule C, but that, of
course, requires one to run a business.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c15d6be3085849521e468b7e117e8f48?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Gail says

July 31, 2016 at 7:25 pm

I liked this article and wish you would write a follow up to it, now that we
are a few years into Obamacare. Have the income requirements for subsidies
changed at all, for example. What happens if someone starts out the year
getting a subsidy and their income increases, etc.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/bc41159aa2fc2b2a67345420f1b74cc8?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Mike Knowlton says
    

October 31, 2016 at 1:13 pm

A follow up would be interesting, I recently looked at the price of an ACA
policy for my family of 4,  
Silver plan. The cost is $18,455 vs $8,290 in this 2013 article.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 31, 2016 at 2:43 pm

Prices have definitely surged higher.

In a big government scenario, it is all about the middle class and higher
subsidizing the poor.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0ce323df90f13f9cb3500f53b825cf1e?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Nanette Patterson says

June 26, 2016 at 3:45 pm

I was married 2014 and am dealing with the harsh reality of having to pay back
all my 2015 Obamacare subsidies. Close to 5,000 dollars. I really dont
understand the covered CA software. I enter all the correct info and the
results show that my premium with a PTC is 25 dollars per month based on the
facts I am buying Individual Health Insurance and cannot get health insurance
from my husbands workplace. But at the end of the year when filing my 2015
taxes filing jointly (as Obamacare requires you to do) my combined income with
my husband puts us over the 400% poverty level and Im have to pay all the
subsidies back. All I can do now is try to avoid this in the future by putting
money into IRA for 2016 tax period and following your advice in your article.
Why does Covered California software give such conflicting results?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cc478d37d688e2ce16186e27b9d03cce?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Ed says

June 18, 2016 at 3:34 am

Bumped in to this website out of frustration…and leaving in more frustration.
Samurai, I dont know who you are…but you show nothing here more than being a
stump for this horrible Obamacare program. You must be a liberal because all
you do is trump the program for "helping the poor". Well F that line of
thinking. There are MANY of us making just over the min. to get a subsidy and
are screwed with HUGE deductions and HUGE premiums for a worthless Bronze
plan. In addition to that, those that get a subsidy, then get rammed in the a-
with penalties if they get a job and their income goes up above the subsidy
cutoff. Geez… if you buy in to this socialist disaster of a program, then that
says a lot…especially for someone who calls him/herself "Financial Samurai".
Buy a clue or shutter this website. Your opinion is biased, ignorant and
worthless. You must be like Hillary and are completely out of touch with
reality. Trump is as well. Bye.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d16994823712d284a40f527fe311e647?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)kevin says

April 3, 2016 at 1:53 pm

Question , what qualifies as income under " ObamaCare" ???

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1664d0efcb7d222bef966a090206fd28?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Scott says

February 23, 2016 at 3:58 pm

I do not see the answer to the question: What is the income level at which ACA
becomes free?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/20aae16b2d2a8c7ae6ff76d1591e0ef9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)paul says

January 12, 2016 at 6:31 am

Family of soon to be 6. Paying $1000.11 per month for silver (HMO). Being a
business owner does help some in that its deductible. However, I still have a
very serious problem paying for other people and receiving nothing but
increasingly higher premiums in return. Obamacare may have been a necessary
step to get our county on parity with the rest of the world but I sincerely
hope it turns into a completely universal system instead of just another way
to hold the middle class down. Looking very seriously at Health Share Ministry
plans if things don't change. It just ridiculous when before all of this I was
paying $375 a month for a family PPO with significantly better coverage and
out of pocket. As is, I basically have no insurance until I hit my $2700
deductible.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8eb0edb40173a88de58e54e0dabef2a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lamont Cranston says
    

January 12, 2016 at 9:21 am

Six years ago when my premium hit $9,900 for a family of 4, I raised my
deductible from $2,500  
to $10,000, the premium dropped to $4,500. A very substantal drop. In less
than two years I made up the $7,500 difference in the deductible. Of course
now, the premium has increased to $8,450 for a family of 3. People winced when
I said I had a $10k deductible, now many have Obamacare with a $13,200
deductible and aren't happy.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/306430871d708bf644633af51f31792d?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Nicole says

September 16, 2015 at 3:31 pm

I was a family of 4 and was receiving $465 dollars a month (living in West
Palm Beach, Florida) with a Humana Silver 4600 HMOx Florida plan. I got
pregnant gave birth and was cut off on August 21st, 2015. Mind you I had
already met my maximum out of pocket share of cost to Humana and was supposed
to be covered 100% until 2016. My husband kept his subsidy. Was told by ACA
that I 'should' qualify for medicaid. Of course because Florida did NOT expand
medicaid was told by medicaid I do not qualify for medicaid. Son was born with
Cleft palate and lip.  
Call back healthcare.gov and get transferred and told a mirage of stories from
IRS sets the subsidy amounts and because you will claim your son next year you
no longer qualify for your subsidy but your husband does. Not sure how next
years tax return benefits me for the rest of this year. I've been transferred
and told thus far 6 different stories as per why I no longer qualify for a
subsidy. Then was told to file an appeal, another rep tells me if my husband
qualifies I should too. No one has any explanation as to why the subsidy was
given to humana for the month of August but I was cut prior to being
discharged from the hospital now on the hook for thousands of dollars worth of
hospital bills because my insurance was cut the day I gave birth.  
The ACA representatives are incompetent. The law is completely screwed up.
Appealing to medicaid in a state which refused to expand medicaid leaves one
with 0 options. I already know my appeal will fall on deaf ears. my husband
does not have any employer health care coverage offerings so I am stuck in a
family 'glitch' supposedly. Lovely system really. Let's reelect Rick Scott who
was involved in healthcare fraud twice and continue the 20 billion dollar
healthcare fraud featured on 60 minutes out of South Florida instead of
expanding medicaid and fixing the glitches. Hopefully I will hurry up and die
quickly. The typical republican plan.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b6c17424e42031736c51f4472e1e4f04?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)janet says
    

February 24, 2016 at 12:18 am

Nicol same here in Arkansas. Our governor stinks.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3cbd1a4e0d925cab1e5e5927339f5010?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Roger Lebey says

September 16, 2015 at 10:47 am

Question: My wife is applying individually for ACA medical coverage in New
York. (I am covered by Medicare) Our modified adjusted gross for 2015 will
exceed amount permitting any premium reduction; but she is leaving her job
next month. Is there a way we can apply in the future for a premium reduction
once her substantially reduced income takes effect?

Thank you

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b2d94669ef73425cd396a0b8dc80696a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Audrey says
    

November 3, 2015 at 9:35 am

Obamacare is based on coming year income. They want you to estimate your
income for 2016 to see if you qualify for healto care through the marketplace
and/or a subsidy. For hourly wage earners like myself, it makes it a little
difficult.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/27722b06e3454d35b83143ea539771e2?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Charles Waggle says

July 7, 2015 at 9:31 am

My son that lives with me had a medicare card and lost it upon turning 21 lost
it in June looking at Obama care at a reduced rate 3 in my home my income is
the only income I am retired under 20,000 confused on how to get this
insurance

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d09d418a51825a58ae3a7baf4731ac6c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Elisabeth says

June 30, 2015 at 11:31 pm

I'm a flaming liberal but what I'm paying for insurance, just for myself, is
enough to turn me into a conservative. My husband is retired, I'm self-
employed, our 19-year-old daughter is in college. My husband receives
Medicare, daughter gets TennCare, so the insurance we bought through the ACA
is just for me; we're paying $380 a month for a bronze plan with a $5500
deductible. No subsidy, although according to your chart we should be
receiving $980 a year. That's bad enough, but last week when SCOTUS confirmed
the ACA, NPR interviewed a woman in Texas who said, had the court ruled the
other way, her monthly premiums would have "doubled to more than $800 a
month." That means she's receiving more than $400 a month in subsidies and for
that kind of money, I'm guessing she's got a platinum plan. Which fits right
in with our neighbors who work under the table, don't report their income, and
have a subsidy that lets them pay $90 a month for a gold plan with a minimal
deductible. It's not right. I like to believe I have a social conscience, but
the way this system is geared isn't right.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b2d94669ef73425cd396a0b8dc80696a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Audrey says
    

November 3, 2015 at 9:30 am

I agree. I do get a subsidy but my plan amount has risen every year even
though my income has not changed. My premium less subsidy will be 2 and half
times what it was this year( if I still qualify for the same amt of subsidy).
If I go to lower plan, it would not cover my health care needs.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8eb0edb40173a88de58e54e0dabef2a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lamont Cranston says
    

January 5, 2016 at 12:11 pm

Elisabeth says,  
"I’m a flaming liberal but what I’m paying for insurance, just for myself, is
enough to turn me into a conservative."  
Obama has done that, to many people.

I flipped over 30 years ago, when I applied for a subsidized mortgage through
the state.  
Our income easily qualified, but my wife and I lived very frugal for the first
3 years of marriage,  
the money we saved was earning 10% and this put us over the maximum to qualify
for the subsidized loan. So because we tried to get ahead, we were penalized.
Instead of a 9% loan  
we looked at a 16-3/4% loan. Yes, this was around 1984, 16-3/4% was the going
mortgage rate.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f14dd64e3a5db9c29adf2bb79f5d04b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)YVONNE says

June 14, 2015 at 6:25 am

P.S. I forgot to tell you I live in Marion,OHIO 43302 when I asked my first
question above sorry,

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f14dd64e3a5db9c29adf2bb79f5d04b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)YVONNE says

June 14, 2015 at 6:16 am

Hi I am retiring early in a opers plan I had 26yr but my back kept giving me
trouble, if I stayed the full 30 plan no reduced benefits, but I am in a
tradional penison reduced benefit plan, with a plop I would get 1,048 dollars
a month without plop 1,092 amounth, I have no iras, no cd, my husband is on ss
and a penison which together we will be making 30,000 ayr he has no
investments of anything either, do I qualify for low income help with health
insurance? well thanks and have a great day'

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9282c5b2dfa602b80d6d1be5b27367e5?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Angela Roberts says

May 9, 2015 at 11:45 am

Also live in FL, married with no kids. Premiums are $998 per month which is
11976.00 per year. Since our actual income is around $62000, based on your
scenario, the maximum we should have to pay is 9.5% of our income. So, we
should be paying $5890.00 per year. Seems more like we would be paying 19% of
our actual income. Please note, this plan has a deductible of 9500, and out of
pocket of 11500. So we would have to pay $23476.00 out of pocket (this
includes the monthly premium) before insurance paid 1 dime. Sorry, this is by
no means AFFORDABLE.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

May 9, 2015 at 1:26 pm

Damn, that is a lot! Perhaps raise the deductible?

I'm looking at $1,550 a month for two with no kids. Crap!

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/13790d9d980f93f35c3661d631c2332a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Julie Lapides says
    

December 25, 2015 at 1:28 pm

There is something flawed about your analysis. As a single person, age 60, I
moved from CO back to MD 2 years ago. While rebuilding my business here in MD,
the subsidies were a lifeline. In 2015 I paid $178 in premium per month for a
Silver Plan, had no deductible, and a $2500 OOP Max. Now that my AGI will be a
"whopping" $53,000 approximately for 2015, my premium for a Silver Plan will
go up to $750 per month, with a $1600 deductible, and an OOP Max of $6550. I
have health issues, and they're not from not taking care of myself through the
years. They are through no fault of my own. So I have to be careful about the
policy I pick. There was very little difference on the overall OOP between the
Bronze and the Silver, only the Bronze plan has far worse coverage, and I will
have huge unpredictable expenses likely for most of the year. It is not
affordable for me to have an AGI of $53,000 and be paying about 25% of that
out in OOP medical expenses and premiums.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8eb0edb40173a88de58e54e0dabef2a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lamont Cranston says
    

January 5, 2016 at 12:01 pm

Hi Julie,  
I don't know if your response was to me or not.  
I just poked in all the data at The ACA website.  
You can confire my numbers or put in yours.  
Start here, >https://www.healthcare.gov/< then hover on 'GET ANSWERS', when
the box opens find in the center column, 'PREVIEW PLANS AND PRICES. Click on
that and start entering data as ask, you will see some items can be skipped to
get to the final numbers.  
I entered my zip, 32405 for my family of four, 60yrs, 55yrs, 24yrs and 21yrs.
non smokers or any of those other boxes. I used $60,000 as my MAGI. (Modified
Adjusted Gross Income)  
The result for the least expensive premium, BCBS Esential 1452 plan is $177
month. The subsidy for that plan is $1,224 per month or $14,688 per year, I
would be responsible for the premium of $2124 per year, plus deductible and
OOP expenses. I think you have one misthink, Out of Pocket includes the
deductible.  
So I could get $14,688 of subsidy.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4889a9cb26d760633261e8fcaf521f2e?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Bill McKinzie says

April 28, 2015 at 3:56 pm

It was convenient that you show no data for the less than amounts. Actually
(as in Texas) the amount is 0. Those families pay the full price. Texas did
not accept the Medicaid to fill the gap between the state plan and the ACA.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8eb0edb40173a88de58e54e0dabef2a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lamont Cranston says
    

January 5, 2016 at 11:54 am

Sorry to be so long, I registered here with an email I rarely check.  
"It was convenient that you show no data for the less than amounts."  
Well ya, I guess it was, but you can do your own research for any family,
zipcode, and income  
that you desire. Doesn't take 3 minutes.  
Start here, >https://www.healthcare.gov/< then hover on 'GET ANSWERS', when
the box opens find in the center column, 'PREVIEW PLANS AND PRICES. Click on
that and start entering data as ask, you will see some items can be skipped to
get to the final numbers.  
I entered my zip, 32405 for my family of four, 60yrs, 55yrs, 24yrs and 21yrs.
non smokers or any of those other boxes. I used $60,000 as my MAGI. (Modified
Adjusted Gross Income)  
The result for the least expensive premium, BCBS Esential 1452 plan is $177
month. The subsidy for that plan is $1,224 per month or $14,688 per year, I
would be responsible for  
the premium of $2124 per year, plus deductible and OOP expenses.  
So I could get $14,688 of subsidy.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b8eb0edb40173a88de58e54e0dabef2a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lamont Cranston says

April 22, 2015 at 2:56 pm

I see this article was written around July 2013, I'm in Fl., when I looked at
the silver plan for my family of four, in 2014, the cost was $13,800, and with
an AGI of $60,000 I was told I would get a $6,100 subsidy. $13,800 - $6,100 =
$7,700 which is just about what I am paying on my existing policy. My existing
policy wouldn't be so high except, as the Obamacare regulations started in
2012, I had an 18.4% increase, then in 2013 I had a 19.2% increase then in
2104 I had a 24% increase.  
Now in 2015, we are hearing families that were promised a certain subsidy, are
now getting a tax bill because the subsidy was not as high as they were told.
I believe once enough Obamanauts sign up, the subsidy will slowly slide away.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/877efd8a46e2f3ae4216f0bd56146bee?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Janet Kurczaba says

January 29, 2015 at 11:30 am

Good afternoon. I have a question re:ACA. I retired early and am living on a
small trust left by my mother. Basically, it allows me to put off Social
Security for another year or 2. Last year I enrolled in a health plan through
Health Care.Gov and received a subsidy.. This year the premium went up over
$100. Now Health Care.Gov is disputing my subsidy. I sent them a copy of my
bank account which was listed as acceptable documentation. Now they state they
want more documentation. They suggested pay stubs, W-2 or unemployment checks.
Obviously, I have none of these. I understand they cannot include my assets in
their decision. The cold, hard truth is beginning to dawn on me-is it possible
with no earned income I do not qualify for a subsidy even though I'm able to
afford the insurance with the help of the subsidy? I can't be the only person
in this situation. In addition, I do not qualify for Medicaid.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/eabc4c1e2f20de1c6a1d5901058cc815?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Jeremy says

January 16, 2015 at 3:10 am

Saw this come across Twitter today. There are lots of problems with the ACA,
it is far from perfect, but it is a move in the right direction

Prior to the ACA, millions of people were prevented from getting insurance
through no fault of their own. Many people are born with or develop "pre-
existing conditions" and are F#%&ed by the insurance system. Makes great sense
for a business to exclude "those people" from their pool, but less so for a
civil society. In the end we pay for it anyway, just in a horribly inefficient
manner

Sam, I like your analysis, although I would suggest one thing: for most
people, a silver plan is probably too much insurance. Sure, you get a lower
deductible, but in most cases you are just paying in advance for services that
you might not use. It would be like paying $20 extra per month on your car
insurance, that then provides a free monthly oil change that costs $20. What,
you don't need an oil change every month? Too bad

We are one of the families that received a letter saying that our policy would
be cancelled. No big deal, we just get another one. Prices were higher, going
up from $233/mo to $501/mo, more than doubling. I'm sure the previous cost of
insurance was actually too low

But we couldn't just compare by price… this plan also had prescription drug
benefits, maternity benefits, lower deductible, etc… It makes sense that more
coverage costs more, even though we were unlikely to use those benefits

The subsidy could help, depending on income. I modeled the subsidies as an
effective 13% tax on income between 138% of FPL and 400% of FPL. Details:

For each dollar of income earned above 138% of FPL, in our case the subsidy
was reduced by $0.13. At the lowest income level, the max subsidy we could
have qualified for was about $5282, which would have resulted in lower
insurance costs with better coverage.

Instead, we cancelled our insurance outright. We are outside the US, and prior
to the ACA we carried insurance that we could never use, on the small chance
that we developed a pre-existing condition. The Equal Access to Care clause
removes this limitation, and we didn't want to take the subsidy since we
didn't need it. Win win

At present, I self-insure. I had a chest X-ray, EKG, and some blood work
awhile back. Total cash price was about $50. I think that is what they charge
for a single Tylenol in the US. My wife is covered by the single payer health
system as we are presently in her native country. A 2 am emergency room visit
cost us $30.

If/when we return to the US, we will get insurance on the exchange. NOT having
insurance in the US is like playing Russian Roulette, eventually you get shot.
With no pricing transparency, hospitals next door to each other charging 10x
for the same procedures, and the layer upon layer of bureaucracy that has the
US paying 2x more per capita on health care than the next industrialized
nation with objectively lower outcomes, it makes sense.

And as one of those high net worth / low income families, I'll happily pay 2x
what we were paying before knowing that it provides equal access to those
previously discriminated against

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cbab3f40cb787d23112f57d0e4d88574?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dan says

December 25, 2014 at 8:40 pm

I'm so surprised nobody has a problem with any of this. Like where do
subsidies come from? Why is the treasury paying directly to insurance
companies? On and on. Obamacare is income redistribution at its finest. Not
only does it take from everyone, it takes also from the very poor when it's
time to collect on their coverage. $6000 deductible anyone? How many who get a
subsidy have $6000 to cover that? My aunt who works for a law firm recently
lost her coverage. The lawyers decided they can't afford it and would rather
pay the penalty. These are ultra rich LIBERAL democrats BTW. So she shopped
the exchange and has a plan with a $6000 deductible. While one of the lawyers
just bought a 3 million dollar vacation home. They also have women working
there for minimum wage. Obamacare hasn't fixed a thing. All it's done is on
paper made everyone look like they have insurance because it's mandated. It
has shifted the burden from employers to the government. It's a sweet deal for
a company. I would drop coverage and pay the penalty myself. The problem with
health insurance was cost. The ACA did nothing to address costs! in fact the
ACA forces people to pay more of their health care costs through deductibles
and coinsurance. Which philosophically isn't a bad thing. It's your body, pay
for it. The ACA is also hugely discriminatory. The poorest typically
minorities have the worst coverage and will pay the most while wealthier
typically white will pay less. Why isn't the insurance, deductibles and
coinsurance the same for all in the exchanges? Why are some people bronze,
some are gold and some plantinum? That's putting a value on human life based
solely on income ultimately race or gender and that's discrimination 101! So
you see, obamacare stinks. There is nothing affordable about the affordable
care act. It's redistributing wealth in the most insane way. You might have
insurance now and ok that's nice, but someone else is now paying for it. In a
big way. We could have just put these people on Medicare. Solved. I've seen my
insurance since obamacare go from $338 to $478. It's finally too much and I
shopped the exchange. I had a $300 deductible. I now have a $1500 deductible.
For a lot less coverage and a lot more coinsurance. If anyone stopped to
really analyze what it's done they would see we all just got screwed. No reach
around. Thanks OBAMA.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/81bd2b3d223a88694f89bf1b31a0da5b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Michael says

December 9, 2014 at 1:24 pm

I have sold my company and am starting a farm so I will be showing a very low
magi going forward. My wife also wants to stay at home and quit her job. So,
the result will be our income showing about $50,000/year max. My question is
how does the affordable healthcare act look at income? Do they look back at
the previous year, which would show we made over $300k, or does it look at
what we are going to make going forward once she quits her job? Also, part of
my company buyout is that they pay me quarterly for the next 4 years in
addition to the lump sum I already received. Will that be looked at as income?
Do we need to show a certain time period of lower income before we can qualify
for the healthcare subsidies? Finally, is there a place to find these answers
other than posting them on this forum?

Thanks for the help

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4e4a7f83b46ffaafc12c9ae9aceb4950?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Sarah says

December 8, 2014 at 4:10 pm

My family falls into what is commonly called the "family glitch". We make too
much to qualify for medicaid, and my husband's job offered insurance is just
below 9.56% of our income. To insure the entire family it would be 30% of our
income, which is unaffordable to us. If we contributed $5000 a year to a 401k
or IRA, it would bring our MAGI down enough to make the job based insurance
more than 9.56%, in turn allowing us to use subsidies to purchase insurance on
the marketplace. Would my husband's employer then have to pay fees because our
lowered MAGI renders the insurance they offer as unaffordable? It doesn't seem
quite fair to them, because they have no control over how much we contribute
to our personal retirement accounts.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/641ab03134c8c7cb2cd76aaabe8ca517?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Debbie says

December 2, 2014 at 7:26 pm

My husband got sick and then list his job and insurance. We are currently
struggling to live off of my disability which us about $13,320 a year. We are
guardians to two little girls. They have MEDICAID. I have Medicare/Humana. We
tried to get my husband insurance and guess what? We don't make ENOUGH money
for the subsidies. We would have to make that minimum of $22,000 for a family
of four in order to get the subsidy. Some "glitch". If you live in a state
that didn't expand Medicaid, you are SCREWED! This is the dumbest, most
convoluted piece of crap legislature ever written. And, yeah, they KNEW it was
crap when they were writing it.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3433877eb2831d56ea2f0a26eecfd9d8?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Sam says

November 27, 2014 at 9:38 am

My wife and I are one of the success stories of the ACA. We are self employed
and were getting royally screwed by healthcare prior to ACA. In order to
afford healthcare, we carried $10,000 deductibles each with $28,000 max out of
pocket. When I had a stent a couple years ago I of course got socked with a
$14,000 hospital bill in one day!! Still paying on that one. Now, for less
cost per month we have a PPO plan with a group deductible of $700, max group
out of pocket of $4,500 with excellent co-pays to doctors and specialists and
got to keep all of our doctors. No longer do we have to worry about getting
financially wiped out because of a medical reason, which no one should have to
deal with. If you have to spend time in the hospital, the last thing you need
is to lay there worrying about how you are going to pay for wanting a little
more life. Although ACA is far from perfect, I think most would agree
healthcare was severely flawed before and something needed to change. Pre-
existing conditions was such a ridiculous nail in the coffin too.
Unfortunately for 2015 everything went up drastically like in excess of 35%
but we are still far better off than we were prior to ACA. For now at least.

Anyway, to my question. Later this year my wife will qualify for Medicare.
That will change my plan from a group to individual. The subsidy and plan
coverage will change for me then. I read that the subsidy calculation is
basically figured off of your projected AGI. This would severely lower my
subsidy since our current AGI is for joint income. I am assuming that I would
remove the income for my wife when projecting 2016 to get an accurate account
of income for just me and my individual plan. Am I assuming correctly? That
would make total sense to me but usually what makes sense to me is different
than how it actually is. Thank you.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a8f50fee717c7a9de0ddb1a3ac45c770?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)William says

November 20, 2014 at 7:29 am

You mention that you are "Thrilled for those people who do not wish to work
into their 60s". I don't get it… If you want health insurance coverage, why
shouldn't a person be required to pay for it? Your statement infers that the
rest of us should pay for their medical care just because working is
inconvenient.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/70e31f361d7200ba7506db162f4f9e66?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Deborah says
    

November 21, 2014 at 8:08 am

William, I agree. This administration talks about people being 'job locked'
because they have to work, even if they don't want to, in order to pay their
bills - such as healthcare. That's what most of us are doing!!!! I'd love to
sit at home as well, but I have to work to pay my bills and eat - not to take
fancy vacations or have a new car - just to survive. So I am supposed to pay
for the people who don't want to work but haven't planned and saved up enough
for retirement. Really???????????

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ac815c1aa2fcb92c678f0c97de3602b9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Brian says

November 17, 2014 at 3:37 pm

First time visitor, great article Sam!

I have been looking for some example, very simple and easy to show the exact
dilemma people in my situation are in thanks to socialized medicine that
instead of covering all, picks winners and losers.

I work in Florida, and my boss decided to provide health care last year. The
company is almost entirely composed of medium to high paid PhD scientists, all
except one was in fact "born in the USA". The high paid ones complained over
and over about no health care coverage, of course, they are all from the
Soviet Union or other socialist countries, constant complaining, wasting
hundreds of hours talking about it. Finally, the boss says yes (educated in
Moscow), but he allows one woman to "decide which plan we have"…. well, she is
well paid, so she picks the most expensive plan, and her and her husband,
childless, make $170,000 per year.

Result? the only native born American in the company is the only uninsured
employee, and for some reason, that does not seem to bother any of them.

I am the only non-PhD (but I have more education and experience than any of
them), and I have to do a lot of work and thinking for them, but since I am
not a company pet or foreigner, I have to work for $15/hr, while they average
$40-100/hr. My monthly payments (my 30% portion) is $270 a month, and will
continue to rise, the out of pocket is about $3000 and the deductible is
$6,000. Seriously folks, I fear daily what could happen to me. Perhaps I
should get a minimum wage job or wait for a health tragedy.

You call this America? The H1-b visa program is a scam, cancel the whole darn
thing.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/090aa366a21064aa0f6858b662433e61?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)MackK says

November 4, 2014 at 6:36 am

Wow. So much to comment on, it's overwhelming. First off, the poverty levels
are a joke and realistically should be much higher. Second, this insurance
scheme does not account for unusual situations such as couples where one is
receiving medicare but the other isn't old enough (they count the medicare
recipient's SocSec towards income for ins purposes yet the retiree doesn't
need ins bcuz they get medicare); and if this same couple has an adult,
special needs dependent child at home, they are even further penalized with
higher insurance costs. Self-employed and don't know what your income will be?
Just guess and hope you don't wind up owing the govt money back in overpaid
subsidies. Lastly, it stinks that people who have the expendable cash in large
sums to sock away in an IRA or similar can get lower insurance costs than
another couple making the same amount but who live check to check and don't
have thousands lying around they can use to reduce their MAGI. And no one ever
mentions the true TOTAL costs (prems, deducts, co-pays, drugs & services not
covered, etc) of these plans when crowing about them. Add those up, and it
comes to far more than the 9.5% of income that insurance is supposed to stay
within in cost. Our family is looking at paying 30+% of our income with no
subsidy and no way of increasing our income because one is retired (and on soc
sec and medicare), the other is unemployed & too sick to work but can't get
medicaid, and we have a special needs adult child at home. The retired spouse
was the one who USED to provide the insurance but now on medicare, cannot.
This ACA is a financial disaster for us!

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c72ee4482c9dfb25f86b8fa8aa460162?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)John Johnson says

October 22, 2014 at 12:29 pm

I have a hard time grasping my wife's and my problem. I will be on Medicare in
July but my wife's ACA premium stays within $20 that we're both paying total
now since they add my SS etc. income. This means we will be paying ~ 15% of
our income.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fd32c23b8171619c88d68afd51adea3f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Linda says

August 26, 2014 at 10:59 am

Ok I asked before and got an answer that if I put money in an ira my magi
would go down. I see on here over and over that this is not true? I would hate
to put it in then find out I had to pay back money cause I did. Can I or can I
not lower my magi by putting contributing to a traditional ira? I have looked
at the 1040 and it appeares I can, please the right answer once an for all

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/894d0e53a83fc3c5d2a9763b2cc173ed?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dave says
    

December 9, 2014 at 1:53 pm

Yes!!! If are eligible and you contribute to a traditional IRA it will lower
your MAGI! AND If you have a plan that is HSA Qualified, You can open a Health
Savings Account to help pay for out of pocket medical expenses. The amount you
put in to your health savings account will also reduce MAGI

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3a4bc5a333c21a419ea57a8c28ebb757?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Delores Barry says

August 4, 2014 at 6:30 pm

My husband has a friend who is married and they still have one daughter age 15
living at home. He is paying on a previous bankruptcy and cannot afford the
ACA. He cannot get a subsidy for his family's health insurance through the ACA
because he makes just above the amount to qualify for the subsidy. He says
that even going to his employer's health insurance, he has to pay a co-pay
amount of $200.00 every time, either he or his wife sees a doctor in-network
and this is on top of his monthly premium payment. If the State's do not take
into account the living expenses, such as a mortgage or rent, food, clothing,
electricity, gas, car insurance, ect….. how do people that do not qualify for
a subsidy, but cannot afford the Affordable Care Act get help?  
I have come to the conclusion that the people that are just above qualifying
for a subsidy get shafted. Shame on this health care plan that gives poor
people health insurance but shafts the rest of the working poor. Obama and the
democrats that put this plan into place are just plain horrible!!!

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/70e31f361d7200ba7506db162f4f9e66?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Debbie says
    

August 5, 2014 at 6:59 am

Delores, you are EXACTLY RIGHT. The plan shafts a great number of people that
are just above the defined level of poor, but do not make enough money to make
it. And it gets worse if you are older and at this low income level as the
premiums under the ACA are egregious. Much higher premiums than individual
health insurance was prior to the ACA and the coverage is worse - at least for
older adults. The only reason implementation was delayed for many people until
2015 is the elections. There will be a revolt when this starts to affect more
people - when it is no longer ideology for them but reality. It is a bunch of
crap. The whole intent was not to help the poor, but to push more people into
poverty. There were lots of ways to help the poor without creating this type
of nightmare for everyone else.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fd32c23b8171619c88d68afd51adea3f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Linda says

July 25, 2014 at 6:19 am

I do not understand why you dont qualify for pretty much free, We make $22,000
a year and pay $170 month, you have to pick a silver plan. I called the number
and had them help me when I first tried.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/770bf6b95a00ac954020707fe47cdf28?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Kristina says

July 24, 2014 at 10:52 am

I'm confused about the ACA. In my case, a single mother of three on a limited
income of under $6k a year, I checked for insurance on the Obamacare website
and my premiums were almost $200 a month just for myself. The deductible
around $7k a year which is more than I get in a year. Now keep this in mind,
my monthly income is around $500 a month. I pay rent and utility bills plus I
have to provide gas to get back and forth and still have to take care of three
children. I am not eligible for Medicaid in my state because they didn't
expand coverage (not that I want it) but after my obligations are paid I can't
afford anything. I know most would say get a second job but due to the fact
that nothing is available, (most places where I live won't hire you without
experience) and I've applied for everything imaginable with no luck. How is
this affordable for people with barely any income? I would literally have to
not pay my light bill and my water bill just to pay the monthly premium for
this! Is there any other options out there or do I just stay in the gap where
nothing is available for me? If I could afford OC I'd be more than happy to
get it but I just can't see struggling to spend more than I make to cover a
deductible in which I'd never meet, I'd be better off paying out of pocket
anyway. If I could afford to anyway. Someone please explain!

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/70e31f361d7200ba7506db162f4f9e66?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Debbie says
    

July 24, 2014 at 2:51 pm

Kristina, I think you are among the many that are negatively affected by the
ACA. Our political representatives could have come up with plans to assist
those that need it without financially killing everyone else. This law needs
to be repealed and another method created to achieve better results. That
doesn't help you right now - you are like many of us - stuck between a rock
and a hard place. People need to make more noise about this so that the
demagogues start to understand that this law is egregious.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fd32c23b8171619c88d68afd51adea3f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Linda says

June 24, 2014 at 6:40 am

We have an apartment building we would like to sell, how will the profit
affect our health care subsidy? Also if we sell our primary residence is that
income for the marketplace? We need to do something but want to do the right
thing.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/70e31f361d7200ba7506db162f4f9e66?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Debbie says

June 17, 2014 at 2:57 pm

We were forced to change our individual insurance last Fall and could not find
anything available that was not ACA. We always believed that as individuals
who purchase their own health insurance we would have options of being in the
ACA or out of it. Nay, nay that is not the way it works.

We are 60 and 61 years of age and have our own very small business but it is a
Sub S Corporation. We cannot retire at this point. The cost of insurance
coverage has been devastating to our finances. Our cost for silver coverage
(the standard on which the ACA is built) is over $15k per year and we have
high deductibles. My husband was in the hospital this year for only two days.
With our deductibles, copays and items not covered at all, we will pay over
$23k for our premiums plus the medical bills, prescriptions, etc. That is if
we have no further incidents this year. And we are healthy adults that have
rarely used health care in the past.

With income levels just above the subsidy thresholds this is anything but
affordable. Our coverage before was better and it was $5k less per year -
which is still a lot to pay. The percentage of our income that goes to
healthcare is absurd and egregious.

The ACA does not hurt the wealthy - they can afford it regardless of price.
The ACA helps the poor. The ACA kills those of us on the lower end of middle
America.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

June 17, 2014 at 3:10 pm

Debbie,

I am very sorry to hear about the rising cost of health care for you. In any
government-led change, there are winners and losers. $23K in medical bills is
outrageous.

Is it a possibility to make within the income limits in my chart to lower your
premiums?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fd32c23b8171619c88d68afd51adea3f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Linda says

June 17, 2014 at 10:43 am

So does ira contributing count tward lowering magi under the afforadable care
act or not? One site says yes and another will say no?

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

June 17, 2014 at 10:48 am

Yes it does. The amount contributed to your IRA will directly lower your MAGI
by the amount you contributed.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f39a14d8e1a27fdba71f744a75b358f7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Jody says
    

November 2, 2014 at 8:34 am

If you don't work and live off dividends and interest, can you still
contribute to IRA?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2b8cbc02c61b5b444237016fb4d5dd44?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Greg Collings says

June 16, 2014 at 6:07 am

If MAGI is used for subsidey calculations, then one cannot lower his AGI by
contributing to IRA'a and 401k's correct?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ef4ed8e6de3c9055b5bca00e428bd014?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)gw says

May 15, 2014 at 6:32 am

ObamaCare is going to destroy my finances, my home and/or my health.

And no, this is not some GOP troll saying this. I was a 2008 Obama campaign
volunteer, the team leader for my community. And this is a true story…..

Six months ago I heard Obama say on the news that if you like your health
insurance plan, you can keep it. So I did, and ignored all the health care
brouhaha this winter. I thought the first 2014 bill I received from my
provider was for two months, and just paid it. Then found out yesterday that,
no, it had been for ONE MONTH. My monthly premium had DOUBLED!

I went into shock and scrambled, finding that though the new policy
application period has passed, I qualified to seek a "marketplace" quote. But
all the policies available are $200+ a month MORE than my previous policy,
with less coverage!

I can't afford this! I'm 59 years old, living on savings. My income is too low
to qualify for a "subsidy" and my state has no Medicaid expansion. I suddenly
find I have the choice of going without insurance, risking my health. Or
paying for a policy I can't afford, at the cost of my savings, my assets and
possibly my home.

Go bankrupt, lose savings/house. Or lose access to health care. Which would
you choose?

I'm in great health, slender, active, healthy diet, rarely see a doctor
outside of annual check-ups. I'm a smoker, but unlike everyone else, my blood
pressure is low, I'm not obese and I'm not on any prescription drugs. Moreover
I'm frugal and careful to stay out of debt. I'd be fine if not for current
state of apoplexy.

I have to decide today, for if I don't buy a policy today there will be a gap
in my coverage and I'm not sure I can buy a policy later. I'm in shock. Nobody
cares. You remember the Obama campaign logo, with the road going into the
hills? Well, I'm just the roadkill.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d31e6fb70e55206fcfd713af9ef9e76d?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)jj says

April 16, 2014 at 10:57 pm

I am unclear as to how you have been able to afford your medical costs with
such a cheap policy. I also have serious medical problems and when I had a mid
range policy I was getting buried in debt with my medical problems. Now with
ACA the max set at like 6000 max. I had around 20,000 out of pocket four years
in a row just for prescriptions.

I do not think people really had any idea what happened to a lot of us WITH
INSURANCE if we developed a chronic health problem. They do not understand
that prior to this you could easily loose everything you accumulated and end
up on the street even if you had health insurance. Moreover, if we lost our
insurance we were out of luck due to preexisting and were on the way to
loosing our houses in order to pay for healthcare. I was so young when I got
sick but I was lucky I had a retirement account I could start burning through
and help pay my med expenses. I am not complaining because thank God I had it.

Now I have medicare with prescription plan and supplement costs me around 360
a month and that is comparatively cheap. It does cover just about everything
though. BTW I have a graduate degree and was known enough in my field that I
could call just about any corporation in my field and gotten flown out for an
interview and look around. I am putting this out there because people think if
they worked hard and were good at their job and had health insurance they were
safe with the old plans. Not true. Once I got sick that all education and
experience meet absolutely nothing. I could have easily been homeless if
medicare had not kicked in. And I luckily have lots of people that love me. My
"good" insurance sucked long term.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1d43c0be18bcdfe6d40e8da67c082e33?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Sidney says

April 16, 2014 at 3:24 pm

Sam,  
I'm working on some modeling for a non-profit. Any chance you can send me the
.xlsx of the screenshots in this post?  
sv

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

April 16, 2014 at 3:34 pm

You're free to take a snapshot and attribute the picture to
FinancialSamurai.com.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e55eb4d26490700949003238058b6fa5?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Claire D says

April 5, 2014 at 5:31 am

My husband and I net 28,000 a year at the moment in San Francisco and are
being quoted about $600 per month for health coverage ( on the low end). Who
do we call? This is impossible it's almost a quarter of our income and we are
just above the poverty line, but too poor to take this on.  
Thanks for any help  
Claire

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fa5ec995db0052f09db1e1c8381c2b9c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)LW says

February 6, 2014 at 10:47 am

I am 51 and have a severe hereditary heart/aorta problem. I am asset heavy and
income light. I have savings and investments, so I do not qualify for medicaid
and in TX it is not an option anyway (TX is one of 26 states that opted out of
medicaid increase). The act and the website did not plan for those 26 states
opting out or for people who cannot work. I fall into a category of being too
poor (no income) to get a subsidy. My premium went from $177/mo to $434/mo. I
can afford to live for 10 more years if my health allows it and the stock
market doesn't tank. I have been denied disability even though I worked & paid
in my entire life and will probably not live long enough to draw SS. Last year
I worked parttime for 8 months and my condition took a dramatic downslide. I
now have dissected carotids to go along with my severely dissected aorta. I am
too sick to work, most of the time too afraid to leave the house. I watch my
much wealthier friends get the great rates for the premium plan and cry. I was
against ACA, but then thought it would actually help me - wrong. The only good
thing I have received is the fact that no one can deny me insurance because of
my bad health. I should have stayed with my old plan and then maybe I could
afford to live a little longer. In my eyes, this seems to be not a plan for
the poor, but for the wealthy.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

February 6, 2014 at 10:53 am

Sorry to hear this LW. It doesn't seem right you can not get a subsidy at all
with your conditions. This seems like a loophole that should be, and will be
closed.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/68b4aab72083c4ae26194213d7d1cea9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)SJ says
    

November 12, 2014 at 5:05 pm

We are in a similar situation in Indiana, another state that didn't expand
Medicaid-in that asset rich/income light situation after I suffered a detached
retina in my early 50's and have permanent impairment…not enough to be
disabled but enough that I can no longer drive at night and commute to a job
in my field. All our congressman will do is say he will look into my personal
situation after I've pointedly asked him several times what Congress plans to
do to eliminate the loophole that denies subsidies to people in our situation,
yet provides huge subsidies to a family with an income of 140% FPL who would
pay no federal income tax at all after exemptions and standard deductions!
That's patently stupid. I'm not asking him to help just me, I'm asking him
what he will do to correct a clearly unjust provision of the law…and all I get
are crickets from him. He just wants to skirt the obvious, glaring problem
with the ACA for political reasons.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d31e6fb70e55206fcfd713af9ef9e76d?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)jj says
    

April 16, 2014 at 10:37 pm

I am sorry about your situation. I am unclear as to what you would like to
have happen though? I am a disabled person and have been for 15 years. I pay
100 for medicare. If you were to qualify for Medicare you would end up paying
close to $400 a month for that if you are single if you included a medicare
supplement, which you need with severe medical problems as medicare only
covers 80%. I pay $185 for that. I know this because I tried to wing it for
awhile without the supplement and it cost me much more. Then you must add on
your prescription drug benefit. I pay 70 for that. So total I pay $365 and I
have no assets but an old car and a house that is not close to paid for as I
became disabled so young.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/090aa366a21064aa0f6858b662433e61?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)MackK says
    

November 4, 2014 at 6:55 am

We are in the same boat. Can't get subsidy. Spouse on medicare. I'm too young
for medicare but too sick to work. We live on fixed income from SS &
retirement. Our state didn't expand medicaid. We can't afford any of the ACA
plans, AND we have an adult special needs son at home. I'm told the only way
we can escape homelessness from this "affordable" healthcare nightmare is to
divorce, sell our home, and/ or kick our son out onto the streets.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/bb0fa6a19938509793d15c17f48f1f93?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Sam Davis says

December 19, 2013 at 1:14 pm

Saw on "Fox Noise" that if you accept a subsidy for healthcare beside Medicare
- it is "Medicaid" & assets, (home) will become property of gov't. Given its
"Fox" I question this, but I am checking nonetheless. If true, this is
alarming.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/92e42e586c84422ca7d42ad98924241c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dorothy says

November 25, 2013 at 9:58 am

I have a question some of you might think is stupid. But here goes… we are 2
people on social security income. We do not work outside the home, and one of
us just went on Medicare a few months ago, the other is 63, so one person
needs health insurance. We just had to cancel our insurance plan we had for so
many years because it went up to over $1,600 a month for just one person based
on a new age bracket.

Anyway to get to my question….I went to the exchange site and put in all our
info. Our combined SS checks are just around 27,500 total. Our monthly
mortgage payments are 2,000 per month that we pay from our savings account. We
don't really have any other large expenses, cars are paid for, property tax is
included in mortgage payment. When I put the info in at first, I did not put
in any expenses or mortgage, just our SS income. It said a premium of 775.00 -
1,020.00 per month, choose between 4 plans, with a subsidy of over 700.00, so
we would only be paying roughly between 50.00 - 250.00 depending on plan
choice. Fine by me.

When I had put in our figures with our mortgage payment in there, it kicked me
into Medicad with no monthly insurance premium at all, so I eliminated the
expenses section. I do not want Medicad and I want pay for this insurance
every month. How does the mortgage deduction work? I saw it mentioned briefly
in a post here but don't understand it.

Can you get in trouble for not claiming your mortgage payment as an expense
deduction, in other words paying more for health insurance than you are really
supposed to? Are mortgage payments in whole deducted from the income section
to reach the MAGI that rates are based on? Is it the whole monthly payment or
just the "interest" part of your monthly mortgage payment (excluding principal
& property tax) that counts? Should our son be giving us the money to pay our
mortgage payment to make it "legitimate" or paying it directly for us to
eliminate that expense on our part?

I truly do not understand this and hope someone can explain this part of it
better. I'd be willing to pay up to 400.00 per month for medical insurance,
but seems the government doesn't want our money! We cannot afford the 1,600
premium for just one person by going off the exchange. Thanks in advance!

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7898a61bdb72f0ac4fdf56c475d88743?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Little House says

October 25, 2013 at 6:56 am

Nice breakdown, Sam. I'm fortunate that my profession covers our health care
benefits in full, but I'm holding my breathe this month as the new policies
are rolled out. I'm a little concerned about how the healthcare act will
affect them. As for retirement, I won't be covered (I missed out on the
"benefits for life") and will have to fend for myself. Maybe by then this
nationwide healthcare plan will have the kinks all worked out. Fingers
crossed!

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 25, 2013 at 10:11 am

That's good to hear you have full coverage no premiums. Best to do research
now before heading off to the wilderness. To know our backstop provides a lot
of confidence!

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e1fc24853c2fe01719e586a56755358?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)JW says

October 24, 2013 at 10:03 pm

Great article, Sam.

I support the ACA, but I'm not blind to its shortcomings. Paying $800 a month
for health insurance would be prohibitively expensive for me right now on a
$100k+ income. However, it isn't socialist…no one is required to get health
insurance through this outlet. My corporate HMO is still going to provide
affordable insurance for me…and many, many companies will be doing the same
for their employees.

I think we forget that this program is for ppl who can't get coverage
elsewhere or choose not to work some where that provides a group plan.

Last, the ACA can only be improved upon, and IT WILL!

At the very least we can all still vote in or out the officials that will (or
don't) make or fight for the changes we want, don't let yourself become
passive to politics - local and Federal!

P.S. Sam, I believe the source on your charts is wrong, the data came from The
Kaiser Foundation, no? I know what you were doing, but Let's try to be honest
with the facts so the readers aren't mislead.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 10:58 pm

JW,

This is the paragraph I wrote above the charts,

"The below are four charts I painstakingly put together by inputting income
levels from the Kaiser Family Foundation Subsidy Calculator. A Silver Plan is
used in the example where insurance will pay for 70% of the medical expense.
Premium expense is capped at 9.5% of income, and out of pocket expense
excluding premium expense ranges from $6,350 for a single individual up to
$12,700 for a family of four. You are welcome to play around with the
calculator to fit your situation."

So as you can see, I give credit to Kaiser Family. And I indeed spent more
than an hour creating these charts on my own. It's like an artist who paints a
famous landmark. I'm signing my name on my work. You are free to do the same.

Regards,

Sam

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f48cab434101c4f3cd0b53713674d0da?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)MH says

October 24, 2013 at 8:14 pm

@Ken  
So if heaven forfend something happens to you or your family, and your medical
costs are 10s or 100s of thousands of dollars, you are going to go it alone?
Or are you going to sign up on the way to the hospital? Or just let whatever
happens happens?

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/090aa366a21064aa0f6858b662433e61?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)MackK says
    

November 4, 2014 at 7:09 am

You can't just sign up on the way to the hospital. There is only one open
enrollment per year (except if you have a "life changing" event such as a
death, marriage, divorce, etc)

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c67bb766f979a3ef6119dc937152f3b2?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)D says

October 24, 2013 at 7:10 pm

Taxable Income does not = MAGI. In your dividend example you reduced income by
the mortgage deduction, but the mortgage deduction reduces AGI to Taxable
Income. Would have no impact on MAGI (which is basically AGI plus tax exempt
interest IIRC). Now if it was margin debt, then the investment interest
expense would lower yield, which would lower gross income, which would lower
AGI. But margin debt is variable and has a lot more nasty elements than a
fixed rate mortgage.

That said, the real action for the asset rich, early retired is to get the
cash into IRAs and other sheltered accounts, limit your income generation and
use a HELOC, or spend down non-sheltered assets to handle cash needs without
spiking the income.

My guess is these games will be lessened when I am ready in ten or so. Alas.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 8:09 pm

I like your suggestion of using a HELOC to take money out of our homes to
spend on living expenses, which won't count as income! Good idea.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4be6dfce6ac98ab62ae3f8ef5ca0a4d7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Maverick says

October 24, 2013 at 5:33 pm

Oh, I just looked at Group CGI Inc., the Canadian SW Company. It appears that
their stock actually went UP after the website launched! Moral here is to buy
the healthcare stocks and take your dividends to pay the healthcare premiums.
Can't beat 'em, join 'em.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 5:49 pm

Damn, shoulda bought the company. Too busy trading Apple and Netflix stock.

Anybody who goes against the government will be crushed, fined, and thrown in
jail. We must comply and try to go with the flow. Lots to be made betting with
the government and the Fed!

Resistance is futile.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4be6dfce6ac98ab62ae3f8ef5ca0a4d7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Maverick says

October 24, 2013 at 4:30 pm

The Canadian SW Co was the lowest bidder, I would presume. Now the Canadian
company is getting a lot of help! I hope they have good contract
administrators and lawyers, because this is going to be messy to clean up.
From my understanding, many, many lines of code will be trashed an rewritten.
I also understood our govt made updates and new requirements near the website
launch date. Gee, good recipe for failure, right?

Since I couldn't get to the govt web site for quotes, my numbers are from
ehealthcare and from my wife's "retiree" plan prices. I've had colleagues from
my former employer confirm these numbers as well. Not cheap to be an early
retiree for medical. That's why I firmly believe we need to ration healthcare
more effectively to manage cost. People won't like it, but that's related
topic for another day. :)

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4be6dfce6ac98ab62ae3f8ef5ca0a4d7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Maverick says

October 24, 2013 at 4:05 pm

Wow, I knew this topic would be a lightning rod. I thought I'd share my
example. Like Joe/RB40 I'll remain on my wife's plan for now. The wife's plan,
like other corporate plans I assume, are being changed to align with the ACA.
That means deductibles in the employee plan are going up in 2014. I tried to
get on the government website to check out prices in my state…no go, system
down or not working fully. I went to ehealthcare and their prices have gone up
to match the ACA guidelines of the metallic plans. Bottom line is that
healthcare cost for us two adults is ranging from $1,300 - ~1,500 per month in
premiums when I compare to my wife's corporate plan which is ~200 per month as
payroll deduction.

Now for my opinion. While I believe it would be nice to have a backstop for
medical services, I just don't trust my government to get this ACA working
even close to the promises made…for years, if ever. I worked in the
aerospace/defense industry and got to see just how poorly in general our US
Government works on RFPs (request for proposals), their SOWs (Statements of
Work) and requirements documents. If you want to know why projects usually go
over budget and don't meet expectations, go first to the requirements
document. If you get a hold of it and read it, you will likely find it's weak
or bloated. In other words, you get what you ask for. This is why the
Presidential helicopter got cancelled…the govt kept on adding technical
requirements; more features, electronic hardening, increased protection from
radiation, which adds more weight…so now I need more engine power…gee this is
going to cost more! This is what's now going on within the walls of the
Canadian software company who wrote the code for the healthcare web site.

Again, in principle I'd like for it to succeed, but I believe Obamacare will
be the legacy that will haunt this president and well documented in the
history books.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 4:12 pm

I wonder why we didn't hire an American company to create healthcare.gov. Kick
backs perhaps?

$1,500 for you and your wife doesn't sound right at all. How do you come to
this? Did you use the calculator in the post? My examples above are pretty
standard for couples and it's nowhere near what you say.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 24, 2013 at 4:42 pm

It's probably his age.  
I plugged in our info and changed it so that we were 54 instead of 34…plus our
two kids. If we were 20 years older, the cheapest premiums available start at
$1,241 per month and go up to $1,650 per month. If we were 64, we would be
praying for Medicare to kick in because the cheapest premiums available would
be $1,646 per month for a plan with a $10,000 deductible. To have a $5,700
deductible, our premiums would be over $2,100 per month. Should this be
considered affordable for a family that makes 94K per year?

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4be6dfce6ac98ab62ae3f8ef5ca0a4d7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Maverick says
    

October 24, 2013 at 4:46 pm

Yes, I'm (cough, cough) a few yrs older than Holly. :)

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 24, 2013 at 5:06 pm

I also ran the numbers for a few different scenarios for my state (Indiana):

Two 44-year-olds, no kids: plans start at $628 per month with a $12,000
deductible  
Two 54-year-olds, no kids: plans start at $952 per month with a $12,000
deductible  
Two 64-year-olds, no kids: plans start at $1,357 per month with a $12,000
deductible

This is not affordable for families making $94,000 per year. A childless
54-year-old couple making slightly over $94,000 per year would have to pay
almost $12,000 per year in premiums and still have a $12,000 deductible to hit
before any coverage kicked in! If they got sick, they would have to pay over
25% of their GROSS INCOME in healthcare costs.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 5:09 pm

I would take 20 years of compounded returns and increased savings and pay
$1,650 a month vs $800 a month. I bet people at 54 are much wealthier than
people at 34. Makes sense. We have to compare relative variables. And as we've
learned, assets are more important than income here. At 54, most people's
homes are very close to being paid off as well.

Maverick, how much more percentage wise or absolute would you say your net
worth is vs 20 years ago?

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4be6dfce6ac98ab62ae3f8ef5ca0a4d7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Maverick says
    

October 24, 2013 at 5:29 pm

In general, I'd have to agree with you FS. Let's see, 20 yrs ago…gee, I dunno
for sure, maybe 4X assets today excluding housing. I'll say this, earlier this
year when I solidified my early retirement dream, I did plan for just under
$1,300/month for medical. I'm going to have to re-address my going forward
spreadsheet plan and add an inflation factor of 8%/year for medical inflation
and 3% for overall inflation to the remainder of my budget.

[in deep thought] Maybe I should start a blog to help pay for medical? I feel
odd without a hyperlink for my name! :)

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 5:33 pm

You are a wise man to agree with me!

A 4x asset increase over 20 years ain't too shabby at all :)

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 29, 2013 at 1:16 pm

Yeah, Sam..

I don't think that anyone is arguing that the wealthy won't do okay. But, what
about those who aren't wealthy? What about my friend, for instance, who just
got "the letter" from her insurance company that her plan is going to expire
on March 1, 2014. They're a self-employed married couple in their 50's who
have hit the 100K mark in income the past two years. And since they're both
healthy, they've been paying about $500 per month for a catastrophic plan.  
The letter from the insurance company stated that they'd have to pay over
$1500 per month to stay on a similar plan that meets the new ACA guidelines.
And they checked the exchange, and found nothing cheaper since they already
have a very high deductible.

How would you feel if your expenses just rose $1,000 per month while you had
two kids in college? How can you continue to dismiss these kinds of results
when they're so evident all across the country? All you have to do is read a
few news stories to find hundreds just like this one. And, it's only going to
get worse as more people get kicked off of their plans and find our what kind
of price increase they're in the with the new exchange.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 29, 2013 at 1:24 pm

I would feel bad if I had to pay $1,000 more a month. But if I was making
their type of income in Indiana with 25+ years of saving and investing under
my belt, I wouldn't expect anybody to feel sorry for wealthy 'ol us. It would
be my way of helping those with less financial means. It's the same way every
time I had to pay six figures a year in income taxes and the government
raising taxes higher to 39.6%. Just gotta pay and hope the money gets
redistributed to help others.

Take a look at all the success stories of people saving $8,000+ a year online
or even on Twitter.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 29, 2013 at 2:42 pm

But, your comment assumes that all people in their 50's are well off, which
you and I both know isn't true. What about those who have had financial
hardship? Or who haven't "saved and invested" for the past 25 years and are
just now trying to catch up?

If you have to push down one segment of the population to pull up another,
have you really accomplished anything? If you have to create a whole host of
new problems to solve existing problems, have you really solved anything?

There were winners and loser before the ACA took hold. All the ACA does is
redefine who those losers and winners are.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 29, 2013 at 2:57 pm

Let's talk specifically about your $100k friends because talking in
generalities becomes an endless debate. How are they doing financially?

I do believe someone in their 50s making $100k is generally more well off than
someone in their 20s making $30k.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 29, 2013 at 3:27 pm

I think they're doing fine but they have two kids in college. So, their
monthly budget will take a $1,000 hit in the near future, and they don't even
get a lower deductible to show for it. She told me that they're going to pay
the penalty next year at least then see how it goes from there. I think
they've earned plenty but it doesn't sound like they have the room in their
budget to pay $1,500 per month for healthcare.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/090aa366a21064aa0f6858b662433e61?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)MackK says
    

November 4, 2014 at 7:15 am

No, because the older couple most likely has more and larger expenses like
kids, mortgage,prop tqx & insurance, possibly kids in college, etc.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/776e46cc3a598f59b44e5dddbe9440bb?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)The Phroogal Jason says

October 24, 2013 at 10:09 am

I for one is excited to enrolled in ACA. I've always had insurance through my
employer and since I'm self employed now I had no insurance. I'm relatively
healthy but do go in for routine check ups. I got turned away for service
earlier this year by a doctor's office who stated I should just go to the
emergency room. I argued that the cost of ER for something that wasn't an
emergency would be astronomical. They said at least it would be "free." Mind
you I was ok to pay out of pocket but my money was no good. The doctor wanted
insurance.

Anyhow my premium is actually less than what I was paying when I was working
as an executive with a comparable plan. I guess I am that target market who is
young healthy guy who can help subsidize the others. I'm ok with that knowing
I do have coverage in the event of a health emergency.

My friend who is a contractor and using Cobra had been able to slash her cost
close to 50% through the exchange.

So for some of us it's working.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c6595e6f2d85844da68c2ce5e6ec7a88?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Joe says

October 24, 2013 at 8:41 am

No complaint here. We are still on my wife's employer sponsor plan. When she
retires, our income will be pretty low so I'm sure pretty sure we'll get a
little subsidy.  
My mom should be able to get a lot of subsidy because she doesn't make much at
all. I'll need to call up and enroll soon.  
I'd rather have public healthcare too. Hopefully we'll get there someday.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d11ccae05f6c50b820b91c201fb04559?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)krantcents says

October 23, 2013 at 6:18 pm

There are a lot of other reasons to reduce your taxable income than just
medical insurance. Investing in a business or income property are great ways
to increase your income and use the tax code to subsidize your effort.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d7a297fb4303c3ed9fc9096ae707bb53?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Shaun says

October 23, 2013 at 6:14 pm

I'm wondering if any parts of obamacare help with any of the points listed in
the "bitter pill" time magazine article which points out how hospitals
massively overcharge patients/insurance companies for things like bottles of
tylenol or basically everything they can. Tough to read that and even come up
with words as to how frustratingly broken that system was/is. Hopefully
bringing in millions more people isn't just adding new customers to a broken
system and there are actually reforms that make a difference in the law
somewhere.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5f4ab62294ecd3a2ea13b0a47aee0b6a?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Justin @ RootofGood says

October 23, 2013 at 5:23 pm

Great post, Sam! I have to laugh at the level of contention among many
posters. I mean I get their concerns, but so much outrage over a government
program that is along the same vein as what EVERY OTHER INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRY
IN THE WORLD does?

I for one look forward to living in the 21st century. A time when the poor,
disadvantaged, and underserved can now get access to health insurance. They
have always had healthcare, just the kind found at the emergency room. You
know, the very expensive kind. The kind that taxpayers have been paying for
already.

The only logical argument for denying lower income citizens access to health
insurance and health care is to deny them access to emergency rooms. Have a
bouncer at the front door where the ambulances pull up. Proof of insurance or
no admittance. They could even have an undertaker right next door to
efficiently pick up the bodies left piled outside the emergency room when they
can't get emergency care. Either accept that scenario as optimal, or figure
out a way to get care in a cost efficient manner. My 2 cents anyway.

As for how to fare well under obamacare with the subsidies, you have it right.
Keep your MAGI low enough to scoop up a decent subsidy. And for states that
haven't extended Medicaid, make sure you have enough MAGI to hit 100% of the
federal poverty level or you won't be able to get any subsidy (and can't get
on medicaid).

One technique I plan on using to keep my income high enough (at 100% or 133%
FPL) is the Roth conversion. I can convert enough of my Trad. IRA to Roth to
get to a desired MAGI in any given year. This "income too low" problem is
something I face as a very frugal financially independent person. Having 3
kids also means our FPL is a lot higher than a childless couple's or a single
persons.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 24, 2013 at 8:08 am

"so much outrage over a government program that is along the same vein as what
EVERY OTHER INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRY IN THE WORLD does?"

This is the problem as I see it. The ACA is not along the same vein as regular
single payer that the rest of the industrialized world enjoys. The ACA
discourages people from earning more and punishes those who do. It keeps the
hugely profitable health insurance companies making billions of dollars per
year. It does nothing to control costs or encourage the use of preventative
care. And, we'll still be burdened and hassled by health insurance company
bills and red tape, huge premiums, and huge deductibles.

I would be thrilled to have single payer paid for through progressive
taxation. I agree that everyone deserves healthcare. This isn't the way to do
it.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 8:25 am

Not sure how ACA discourages people from earning more. Instead, the ACA
encourages people to:

1) Make so much they don't need subsidies  
2) Save and invest to build assets and live off those assets even if they are
in the millions because subsidies are still given to millionaires.  
3) Start a business/buy rental properties to take advantage of deductions.
Entrepreneurship and homeownership are two parts of the American dream.

In no way am I feeling discouraged to make less money at all. Are you feeling
discouraged to make less?

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 24, 2013 at 11:44 am

Sam,

Please stop pretending that your financial inclinations are typical. Most
middle class people aren't going to use the ACA as a reason to buy investment
property or start building massive assets that they can live off of. Most
middle class people are just getting by.

I personally am not feeling encouraged to earn less but I think those who are
getting subsidies may. For instance, at certain thresholds you may lose part
of your subsidy if you get a part-time job. And those who get Medicaid know
that they need to keep their income under a certain level to keep it.

My problem with the ACA isn't how well it's going to work out for YOU, or me
for that matter. It's about how it will work for everybody else. As I
illustrated in my own post on the topic, a family making 50K with the bronze
plan will either have to choose between highly subsidized premiums or a
ridiculous deductible. The ACA sucks.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 11:57 am

I can only speak for myself about how I feel, and I feel emboldened the ACA
helps me get health care if I need to get health care through the government.
Although I currently won't get a subsidy, at least I know what the back stop
cost is so I can plan accordingly. When there is a temporary tax cut, people
don't spend more, they SAVE because they feel taxes will simply go up the
following year. With the ACA, this is a new permanent health care solution, so
now people can mentally feel more comfortable about moving on to do something
else, and can also budget accordingly.

And this post is also written for everybody else, not just me. That's why I've
included the subsidies for singles, couples, family of three, and family of
four, which basically encapsulates 90%+ of the population who could
potentially qualify. Nothing is perfect, but I choose to look at the positives
since we can't change the system now.

Here is a recent comment below.

"I for one is excited to enrolled in ACA. I’ve always had insurance through my
employer and since I’m self employed now I had no insurance. I’m relatively
healthy but do go in for routine check ups. I got turned away for service
earlier this year by a doctor’s office who stated I should just go to the
emergency room. I argued that the cost of ER for something that wasn’t an
emergency would be astronomical. They said at least it would be “free.” Mind
you I was ok to pay out of pocket but my money was no good. The doctor wanted
insurance.  
Anyhow my premium is actually less than what I was paying when I was working
as an executive with a comparable plan. I guess I am that target market who is
young healthy guy who can help subsidize the others. I’m ok with that knowing
I do have coverage in the event of a health emergency.  
My friend who is a contractor and using Cobra had been able to slash her cost
close to 50% through the exchange."

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8264572e4790109032b908cf670b2737?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lisa Joyce says
    

August 21, 2014 at 6:07 am

I agree im disabled my sons disabled im on disability and must work part time
because even though we only make 40,000 a year I don't qualify for Medicaid of
anykind to help pay medical cost.i pay out about 800.00 a month I only
earn650.00 the rest comes out of my disability check. I don't qualify for
income restricted housing either an am expected to pay out 900$ or more a
month in housing. an a car payment. cant wait till we get a new president. I
don't know why hes still there.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/17fc568d8ca05592563273616d369839?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Joe says

October 23, 2013 at 4:33 pm

Thank you for pointing out the access to care point. With all the rhetoric and
buzzwords that get tossed around (fascism, big government, socialism, etc)
critics never seem to offer an alternative solution to providing EVERY SINGLE
American access to affordable healthcare. We are the United States for crying
out loud. If anything the red tape surrounding ACA is simply an example of
what too much focus on gaining consensus gets you in passing a bill.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4e824b6c4e39308f7bfe4c15645d26e9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Micro says

October 23, 2013 at 3:24 pm

My company is still going to offer us health insurance but they are switching
us over to a high deductible plan. Because of this, we now qualify to open up
HSA accounts. This will save me a lot of money in taxes and let me build up a
nice e-fund for medical expenses when I get older and will likely need it.
Even though I have to pay more for my prescription every month, the tax
savings actually puts me ahead $700 next year. It might not be perfect (single
payer would have been nice or at least a public option) but it at least
attempts to address a huge problem we have. There are far too many who do not
have access to basic health care. Which given the wealth of our nation, is
ridiculous.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a30b8215d89a0f1590a856138e2cf117?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Ken says

October 23, 2013 at 1:44 pm

I'm against the ACA because it's just another tax. I don't currently have
health insurance, but now the Gov't is requiring me to get it. Something I
don't want. And if I don't get it I pay a fine. And every year the fine grows
exponentially. They are requiring me to buy something I don't want so it helps
pay for people who cannot afford it. It's Socialism. My wife and I combined
make roughly 55k/year and we'll have to pay at least $400/month for some
crappy plan on the exchanges, a plan we don't even want. That $400/month would
better serve us staying in our pockets to pay for regular bills and expenses
of living with the rising costs of inflation. But the Gov't knows what's best
for us, we're not allowed to make our own decisions, and we must obey. The
fine is roughly $300 for us the first year, then $2,000 the second year we
don't get insurance, and then $12,000 the third year without insurance.
Another thing that pisses me off is how everyone's premiums will go up because
they are now subsidizing people who make poor life choices that would normally
bear the burden of higher premiums. People who smoke or are grossly overweight
will cause everyone's premiums to rise since they cannot be charged more for
their "conditions". And if they don't get enough healthy people who don't need
health insurance paying for those that do the entire system will collapse. Who
knows, maybe that's what they want after all.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e1fc24853c2fe01719e586a56755358?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)JW says
    

October 24, 2013 at 10:40 pm

I hope you're also for gay marriage, pro-choice, and legalization of marijuana
too, because those are issues where the gov't imposes their will on the
people. They're also freedoms that a specific partisan line typically rejects,
alongside the ACA, allowing them to be terribly inconsistent with their logic
and reasoning.

This is a program that finally requires all people with means to pay for their
own coverage, as a responsible contributor to society. Frankly, I don't want
to pay for you or your wife when you (heaven forbid) get caught in an accident
or with an ailment that you can't afford the cost of healthcare for. And you
can rest assured that you won't have to pay for me!

The mandate to have insurance is as much about self responsibility has taking
care of yourself in the first place.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1b2dea42f240f303da15395ec42b141c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Stevo says

October 23, 2013 at 10:47 am

I mentioned in my last post that due to the ACA my current premiums went up
50% and my deductibles more than doubled. My insurer stated in the letter this
was directly related to the ACA. The latest correspondence this past week was
to inform us retirees that there will be a meeting in January to inform us of
the likelihood that our group will get another rate hike and be kicked off the
dental and Vision portions of our plan come April. Less insurance, increased
costs, increased out of pocket. I expect the next correspondence to be even
more dismal.

Now that I've come across as a selfish sob, let me say I'm for insurance for
everyone. Utopia has arrived! I just don't have faith in our government to do
it right. 300,000 people received notice in Florida that they will be kicked
off their plans. It looks like this is where we're headed for me and my
retired friends in Vegas too.

Sam, if the government were a private business would you invest in the ACA
over Humana, USPS over FedEx. So far for me none of the promises were kept.
There have been nothing but surprises. Bad ones.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:14 am

Utopia for all Steve! Love it!

Don't look beyond insurance companies to blame ACA in order for them to jack
up their premiums so they can simply make more profits. Everyone MUST fight
and do their due diligence on insurance of all types since there are so many
options.

I would invest in anything that had a monopoly and the world's mightiest
arsenal of weapons to get people to do what I want. Give me all your money or
die is a good business model!

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1b2dea42f240f303da15395ec42b141c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Stevo says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:33 am

With regard to your last statement, I do wonder if there was collaboration
between insurance and government on the ACA. The monstrosity wasn't written
overnight. Insurance lobbyists wrote it long before the 08 election and have
found a way to use the government to bend the people to its will. They got 16%
of the economy in the process. I think I would invest in the key players in
the private sector who put the plan forward, they will profit handsomely. How
do I find that out? Prob too late.

Steve

Las Vegas

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e1fc24853c2fe01719e586a56755358?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)JW says
    

October 24, 2013 at 10:49 pm

I think you're confusing the ACA with the insurance company, it's merely the
law. Humana, Kaiser, BCBS, etc. are still providing the insurance (whether you
buy through an exchange or through an HMO or some other avenue.) Your analogy
is a kin to saying would you invest in the right to receive mail on weekdays
over the USPS…

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73e2a7760c87af9f0aa2653005a5d0d3?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Kristy says

October 23, 2013 at 10:42 am

I think people are complaining because even if you have private insurance
currently your rates are going to almost double. I do not have evidence of
this myself (yet), but have heard from others whose insurance premiums are
skyrocketing. As Holly said, even if you make $94,000 a year, if your premiums
are $800 a month that is still a lot of money to be spent on healthcare.

Before having children, my premiums at the office were $1,600 a month, which
included maternity coverage. I still had copays of $20 a visit and a
deductible (though I can not remember it was at the time). I work for a small
company and they can not (or will not) pay for the coverage for their
employees, however, they do offer insurance. After having children, our family
switched to a private insurer where we pay $518 a month. That is a huge
savings. Even though it did not cover my sons tube surgery when he was 1 to
the tune of $3,000…..we still saved on premiums.

I don't mind helping other people who are struggling, but my guess is that the
people who really need the insurance are not going to sign up, even with the
subsidies. Thus, the premiums are still going increase for everyone that does
use it. I could be wrong, but from what I have seen and heard from my
husband's employees, they are not planning on signing up for the health
insurance. They are going to pay the fine.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:11 am

Score one for the private exchanges then to save you 40%? It just seems like
ACA simply provides more options for all income types across all work types.

The other question is, if more money is being paid with less service, then who
is making all the money? We have to invest in those entities! Unless of course
the entity is the bottomless pit government.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73e2a7760c87af9f0aa2653005a5d0d3?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Kristy says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:35 am

I would say the ACA provides options for the lower income levels, however, for
the higher earners they are going to pay more regardless (or so it appears
based on my limited knowledge and anecdotal evidence). I also agree with Steve
below, I just don't have faith in the government to handle this correctly. We
will see what happens I guess.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73e2a7760c87af9f0aa2653005a5d0d3?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Kristy says
    

October 24, 2013 at 5:50 am

By the way, I still can't log into the site to see what my premiums will be. I
tried again last night so I could compare what I am currently paying through a
private company to what I would have to pay for the ACA.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 7:38 am

That is concerning. The good thing is that President Obama is trying to extend
the mandatory sign up by another 6 weeks before he sends out the Sentinels. So
keep the faith!

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6741eeccf699d4e0c97f9701f7e8e5f8?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Done by Forty says

October 23, 2013 at 9:39 am

This is one of the more thoughtful pieces I've seen written on the ACA by
personal finance bloggers. As you noted, the key for early retirees is
acquiring assets and minimizing taxable income. And I love the notion of the
healthy subsidizing the cost of healthcare in the same way that high earners
subsidize via taxation - great comparison.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2b8cbc02c61b5b444237016fb4d5dd44?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)greg says
    

June 16, 2014 at 7:58 am

Not minimizing taxable income..that would be much more fair..you have to
minimize you MAGI. That is your AGI after you add back in your IRA and/or 401K
deductions and other deductions…

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7806dce1047dd0c539a1aefd6c162cbb?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Konrad says

October 23, 2013 at 9:33 am

Hi Sam, thought-provoking post as always. I wonder how you came up with your
figures for subsidy amounts? I used the Kaiser calculator to which you linked
and it confirmed that the income cutoff for premium subsidy for a single
person was 400% of federal poverty level or $45,960 in 2014. This is quite a
bit higher than the $30,000 you cite in your table. Thanks!

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 9:51 am

Konrad, I was wondering the same thing, but when I plug in any number above
$30,000 per individual (1 person in family, 1 adult over 21, no kids) out
comes the $0 subsidy error. I went back again and plugged in $35,000, $40,000,
$45,000 and it still comes out as zero. Being consistent and going up to 400%
of federal poverty level would seemingly make sense, but I don't see it.

What is the subsidy amount for $35,000, and $40,000 you see?

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7806dce1047dd0c539a1aefd6c162cbb?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Konrad says
    

October 23, 2013 at 10:26 am

Subsidy @ $35,000 income is $1,062/yr.

Subsidy @ $40,000 income is $587/yr.

Which makes sense since it ties to the 9.5% cost of premium % to income
calculation.

But do a Google search and you'll the $45,960 maximum income for subsidy
cutoff is well documented. Weird.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 10:36 am

Doesn't add up given the calculator spits out a $181 subsidy for an individual
making $29,000 a year. A $1,062/year subsidy on $35,000 a year when the plan
only costs $2,535 a year in this example sounds like a lot. Must be different
plans as the explanation for why the subsidy stops at $30,000.

But I hear you on the $45,960 maximum income for an individual = 400% of
poverty level.

Did you get the numbers from the calculator linked in the post?

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f8ece2876b1684bf773e121f9645fc3?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Untemplater says

October 23, 2013 at 8:33 am

Thanks for making this so easy to understand! I've been a bit confused on how
the ACA works but now it all makes sense. The tables you made are really
helpful to grasp what's being offered too. I certainly hope there will be more
corresponding education and outreach for people to better learn how to stay
healthy, exercise, and eat right. We need to get more preventative conditions
like type 2 diabetes, obesity, heart attacks, and strokes in better control.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/500fad76fcbf9b5b139dc626460346aa?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Austin says

October 23, 2013 at 7:35 am

First of all, this is a great article.

The ACA is anything but affordable. Fascism.

Sure, we can game our taxable income down to play the system. But, only like
3% of population has the both the intelligence and drive to do that.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 8:03 am

Austin, how is the ACA unaffordable when before the ACA there were no
subsidies? There's no gaming the system. Our government is encouraging us to
invest in assets and businesses to build wealth. They know if we become
financially fit, the government won't have to take care of us as much. So as a
reward for building a lot of assets, we can retire earlier and potentially
gain subsidies as well.

Please elaborate on your position as to why you think ACA is unaffordable and
fascist. The median household income is ~$52,000 a year. There are subsidies
up to $94,000 for a family of four, which means the large majority of the
population can receive subsidies if they want to retire early, work a part-
time job, travel, be an entrepreneur, etc.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/500fad76fcbf9b5b139dc626460346aa?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Austin says
    

October 24, 2013 at 7:38 pm

Sam,

You clearly take offense to my concerns with the ACA.

First of all, I respect you and your intelligence. I am quite sure that you
have interesting insights into this matter. I don't care to enter into an
argument and am more than willing to consider alternative viewpoints.

My concerns with the ACA stem from the fact the populace will naturally need
to subsidize those subsidies which were not a concern before the ACA. The
subsidies you speak of must be paid for by someone. You say, "the median
household income is ~52,000 a year" and that there are subsidies up to $94k
for a family of four. Surely I don't have to remind you that that makes up
roughly 90% of the population. In effect, 10% of the population will be
subsidizing 90% of the population. This, certainly, is not capitalism. At best
this is socialism. I would be tempted to say that this is at worst corporatism
but it is not.

And, here is why it is not corporatism. Within the insurance field there is a
concept known as the "death spiral". A recent NPR broadcast discusses death
spiral in depth. In short, the idea is that if a particular health care
provider takes on too high of an at risk profile they will naturally have to
raise rates across the board to compensate for those who burden the actuarial
tables. The following year, when the price rises take effect, they will
naturally face attrition from those healthy customers who can no longer afford
the increased premiums. This phenomena compounds to lead the corporation into
a "death spiral". It's a legitimate concern that the health care system,
forced by the government, could face the same set of events in aggregate.
Already we are seeing providers revoke policies literally by the hundreds of
thousands.

But, from a short sighted sense. I suggest running your own circumstance
through an exchange and see what kind of premiums and deductibles you receive.
I have done so. I found that the premiums were roughly what I would expect
while the deductibles for the "silver" plan were in the 6k-10k world. Way way
way above what I would find acceptable. Thus, unaffordable as a practical
matter.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 24, 2013 at 8:08 pm

Austin, I'm not offended at all about your concerns for ACA. I have similar
funding concerns, but the American way is to pass the costs off to our
children and to let rich people pay for it. Who am I to go against the
American way?

Just like how a progressive tax gets the rich to subsidize the poor, the ACA
is no different to help the poor and the unhealthy.

$6-10K out of pocket is a lot for the Silver plan, however, how many of us
actually get into accidents or medical situations that requires us to spend
$6-10K? It's not every year. And during those none years, everyone is
hopefully saving.

There's no point fighting ACA b/c it's here to stay.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8f6ed370bc4263e9b90b45b9ceab0237?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Julien Pierre says
    

April 4, 2015 at 1:56 am

I realize this is an old post, but I thought I would comment still.

Some of us do have chronic conditions, and they are expensive.

HIV medications for example must be taken for a lifetime and cost $30k per
year per person of average. A married couple where both are HIV+ will have
$60k of medical expenses each and every year, at least. This is our situation.
I'm currently working, in my late 30s and covering my husband through work.

I have calculated OOP costs with an ACA silver plan in California would be
about $6,000 every year, in addition to the premium. The premium at age 64 for
two will be about $20,600 a year. That's $26,500 of medical expenses when you
add the out of pocket costs. If we end up having an AGI of $63,000 a year, and
be just over the threshold for subsidies, that means we will be paying 42% of
our gross income for healthcare. That doesn't meet the definition of
affordable, in my book.

Of course, it's still much less than paying for the $60k of medication out of
pocket each and every year. And before the ACA we couldn't even hope to have
any insurance at all outside of work after COBRA before age 65.  
I'm glad the ACA happened. But it's still looking like we may have to relocate
abroad if retiring before age 65, due to the healthcare costs.  
I have been working since age 19 and I don't plan to work 46 years.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d734118620a5340503e14b2f8c838608?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Tal says
    

April 5, 2019 at 11:44 pm

I have a question about the ACÁ for those who have been hit with losses.

I’m recovering from a -($1,700,000) loss as of last year. I’ve downsized
everything and Have started a business that’ll just cover a cheap rental and
necessities for 2019 and perhaps 2020 as it grows -$25,000 is about it for
“spending” cash for these necessities… Now, if this were my AGI, I’d get most
Silver Plans at near zero cost per month  
BUT,  
Schedule C is coming up < $0, as AGI goes.  
SO,  
Can I get coverage, as noted, based upon the $25,000 that IS the present
REALITY??

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3cf31ea4e46f31e555334cc640fda583?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Alan says
    

November 17, 2014 at 4:36 pm

Austin, you say that only 3% of the population has the intelligence and the
drive to play the system, but whose fault is that? The opportunity for a free
education is there, so almost all should be able to play the system. We are
talking about 94K in income and an education. Just what is beyond the reach of
that much in assets?  
ACA is a compromise that we have because Ted Kennedy turned down an offer by
Nixon for single payer health care. That was 45 years ago, in the late 60's.
Kennedy said, before his death, that it was the biggest mistake of his career.  
Also, it is not possible that 90% of the population is contained in families
of 4. Many are single, many have children above age of inclusion, many have
fewer or no children, and lastly, there are still many who have no coverage.
In the end, much fewer than 90% percent of the population have health care
supported by much more than 10%. The biggest support of universal coverage is
the by the healthy for the sick.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says

October 23, 2013 at 7:16 am

I think that the subsidy levels are ridiculous for a lot of reasons. $94,000
is not that much money and I'm offended that that's considered the cut-off for
the "rich." My personal premiums will double under the ACA from $377 per month
to $738 per month and we'll still have a 10K deductible with a maximum out of
pocket of $12,700. If we pay our premiums and hit our out-of-pocket max, we
will spend over $21,000 on healthcare in a year. That, to me, is completely
absurd. Of course, we could get a plan with a lower deductible but that would
just cost more per month and wouldn't be a good value unless one of us got
extremely sick.

The ACA is not affordable except to those on the very bottom who are getting
highly subsidized premiums.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 7:37 am

I don't think President Obama is saying $94,000 for a family of 4 is "rich." I
think he's saying that if you make $94,000 or more, you no longer need
subsidy. He told us during his re-election campaign that $200,000 or more in
income is considered rich, and the level where he wants to raise taxes.

I think making $94,000 in Indiana is not bad no? And you mentioned in your
excellent post (https://clubthrifty.com/affordable-care-act-cruel-joke-middle-
class/) that you guys make "much more than $94,000," so is it really that bad?
This is how those who are making over $380,000 a year for the longest time
were feeling, paying 36% Federal and now 39.6% Federal taxes and being
demonized despite paying the most taxes.

What health care plan/network were you using first? Have you checked out a
place like eHealthInsurance.com to get a free private exchange quote to see
how it compares yet? That's what I recommend for folks making much more than
the subsidized amounts as determined by ACA.

At the end of the day, it's about helping the poor and those struggling to get
by.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 23, 2013 at 7:56 am

We have Anthem now for $377 per month but our plan expires next year. I
checked the exchange and the cheapest plan was $738 per month with a 10K
deductible. I also checked eHealthInsurance.com and found that the cheapest
plan was over $800 per month.

I'm sorry, but cutting off subsidies at 94K is pretty much the same thing as a
tax. If, at the end of the day I'm paying significantly more than other
people, what difference does it make? I also remember distinctly when
President Obama said that the ACA would lower premiums “by up to $2,500 for a
typical family per year.”

Are we not a typical family? Two 34-year-old adults with two small children?
And yes, $94,000 is plenty of money in Indiana but it isn't enough to justify
such absurd premiums with a high deductible to boot.

I don't have a problem "helping the poor and those who are struggling to get
by." However, I do have a problem with people making 94K possibly having to
pay 20% or more of their income for healthcare. I also have a problem with my
family's premiums doubling just to subsidize all of that. I don't think
there's a certain income level where you aren't allowed to complain about your
premiums doubling. And if there were, it definitely shouldn't be 94K.

And, for the record, I've always been for single payer WITHOUT the health
insurance compaies involved, WITHOUT the ridiculous income penalty cut-offs,
and WITHOUT policies that encourage individuals to earn less.

The ACA was sold as the "next best thing" to single payer. It isn't. The ACA
is going to be awful for the economy when millions of people have thousands of
dollars less per year to spend and invest. It doesn't take an economist to
figure that out.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 8:21 am

I agree it does suck that your premiums are doubling. One thing to consider is
that your premiums would have gone up next year with Anthem, regardless. So
the question is, by how much incrementally due to ACA?

Do you think the ACA will help create sympathy for the highest income earners
who pay the highest marginal tax rates and highest absolute tax dollars and
still are asked to pay more? Perhaps the ACA will inadvertently reduce class
warfare as more middle class entrepreneurs who voted for higher taxes without
having to pay more themselves start feeling the pain of the wallet.

I've always believed that first the government will come for the rich, and
then they will come for everyone else. Perhaps this is happening now as health
is unavoidable. But at least folks who need health care most will gain access.

You mentioned you guys make much more than $94,000 a year. $94,000 a year is
like making $200,000 in San Francisco given our $840,000 median home price
which buys something not so desirable. Let's say your much more figure is
$125,000 a year in Indiana. At $300,000 equivalent a year in SF, I'd be
annoyed with the increase, but I would just chalk it up to the way things will
be.

I've seen America's future, and I've embraced it. There's no point fighting
the Government as they will run you over. Instead, we must think smarter and
shelter our income or at least downplay what we make. Big brother is watching.
Always.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:17 am

"Do you think the ACA will help create sympathy for the highest income earners
who pay the highest marginal tax rates and highest absolute tax dollars and
still are asked to pay more? Perhaps the ACA will inadvertently reduce class
warfare as more middle class entrepreneurs who voted for higher taxes without
having to pay more themselves start feeling the pain of the wallet."

I think that could be accurate. I personally think that 200K is a low bar to
set for higher tax rates anyways since so much of the wealth in this country
is accumulated at the very top. I think I'm slightly biased because of the
people I'm surrounded with, but I still feel like 200K is middle class. My
brother and SIL in law make 200K and live nearly month to month because they
have six kids and live in the most expensive town in the state.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b4655d4230bf90cc524fb4ae8fb951da?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Rick Caputo says
    

October 28, 2013 at 12:48 pm

People have not read the bill, there is no mandate. If you don,t pay the fine
the law states the gov. won't come after you. and prevents liens to collect .
Page 139

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b6c17424e42031736c51f4472e1e4f04?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)janet says
    

October 28, 2016 at 8:31 pm

200k middle income? Not in most people lives. I would be more than happy with
100k. Beware of talking about the poor because to get it free you have to make
no more than about 900.00. God I make 300.00 to much.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/26e2718b3388988d1a222bed1abf06fb?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)JT says
    

October 23, 2013 at 10:06 am

Fellow Hoosier here. $94k in Indiana is a lot -- easily $200k in SF since
there are plenty of high-quality homes that are in the $100k range, and our
state income tax is flat at ~3%. A family of four could max retirement
accounts, own a home, and potentially pay for private schooling for their kids
on roughly that income.

It's worth noting that Indiana will have some of the highest Obamacare
premiums in the country. Why? I'll admit my own ignorance here and say I have
no idea whatsoever, but would welcome any explanation.

I partially agree with Holly. I think her primary concern is how the subsidies
phase out. Up to $94k you can only pay up to 9.5% for health care. One dollar
past that and, in Holly's example, your max could be 20%+. It's kind of like
how earning $113k sucks because payroll taxes hit 100% of your income.

I'm not too keen on Obamacare, but I do like the fact that I know I can get
health insurance no matter my employment situation or my health. For single
people who can't rely on a spouse's health care, the freedom to choose a
career without consideration for coverage is an intangible that has monetary
value. As a single dude, I dig it. Without it I would be forced to make
suboptimal decisions just for insurance coverage starting at age 26.

tl;dr We're all biased by our own position.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:13 am

Hey fellow Hoosier! =)

Also keep in mind that we just sold our house in Hancock County and are moving
to Hamilton County where housing is significantly higher. So, $94,000 doesn't
go as far as it would in Hancock County or nearly any other county in the
state.

Our higher income this year is mainly due to the fact that I basically worked
two-full time jobs from January through April. Next year, it might be less and
we could be nearly subsidy levels after contributing to SEP IRA, health
savings account, etc. So, we may actually fare better next year than we would
this year.

Honestly, I never think it's a bright idea to "chalk things up to how they're
going to be and live with it." Sure, complaining won't change anything but
quietly accepting it isn't an option either. I think we should all complain
about things we're unhappy about, loudly if needed. Otherwise we all might as
well bend over, grab our ankles, and quit watching the news or caring about
anything altogether.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2b8cbc02c61b5b444237016fb4d5dd44?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)greg says
    

June 16, 2014 at 7:38 am

As far as I can tell, the ACA uses MAGI to determine your subsidy. This means
that you will NOT be able to use your SEP or IRA's, 401 k's or Health Savings
accounts to lowere your inceome for subsidey purposes.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:17 am

If you can buy a high quality home for $100,000-$150,000 in Indiana and earn
the same, then that's like Holly making $1-$1.5 million a year in SF since
that's what a good quality home in a safer location costs!

I would not bother protesting a $800/month premium if I was making $1-$1.5
Mil. I'd count my lucky stars! :)

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b6c17424e42031736c51f4472e1e4f04?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)JANET HOPPER says
    

March 23, 2015 at 3:33 am

Agree! We make together 25,000.00,own our older home, and support our dogs. We
have everything we need and want except marriage. For some reason instead of
doubling the long income chart as they should for two, if you marry they half
it. Yep want people single and poor and that is one reason people can't get
married. We would love to marry but the cut in income for the subsidy would
make it to hard for us. At 62 you have to think of those things.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 1:44 pm

JT, I think we know why Indiana may have some of the highest premiums. It's
based on the health levels of the Indiana population.

But then again, $1,000/month for a family of 4 would be good value for folks
living in NYC, California, Jersey etc, so maybe Indiana isn't so expensive at
all.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9799dfac9c2a39fb9cbfcc7b75074535?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Jenna says
    

October 24, 2013 at 12:33 pm

Good point about income and median house price. If you're making much more
than $94,000 a year in Indiana, that sounds like a great income!!!

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f39a14d8e1a27fdba71f744a75b358f7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Jody says
    

November 2, 2014 at 8:24 am

This is an old post but I have to respond. You said, "Up to $94k you can only
pay up to 9.5% for health care. One dollar past that and, in Holly’s example,
your max could be 20%+. - See more at:
https://www.financialsamurai.com/subsidy-amounts-by-income-limits-for-the-
affordable-care-act-obamacare/#sthash.IWDnxDKl.dpuf" and just wanted to
clarify, this is NOT accurate.

The 9.5% is not for HeathCARE, it's for premiums. We get a small subsidy
($200/mo) and we are at $93K for family of 4, so just under the cutoff (thanks
to HSA or we'd be over). That's for the premiums only. This year, even though
we're healthy, we had a few minor things checked out and we hit our
deductible, thanks to the insane cost of something like a simple endoscopy
($6K+). So that $12,700 max out of pocket we still had to pay on top of our
9.5%, so we're at 21.5% of our income going toward heath CARE, and that's WITH
the subsidy.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/68357bff1703adba8387c1f15b6ad059?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Valerie Hall says
    

February 6, 2019 at 7:09 pm

I'm paying over $1400 a month for our family of 3. Last year I had $38,400 in
medical expenses. Yes, I have a LOT of deductions, which is good since losing
our exemptions (taxes go UP!). That's well over 33% of our estimated income.
How is this "affordable care act"? Really? There is NOTHING affordable about
$38,000 in medical expenses. Only reason my "income" was so high is selling
stocks and savings and taking withdrawls from IRAs, some have had for 25
years, to PAY for all that medical care and insurance Premiums! Its' all BS!
Insurance doesn't even cover cough medicine and other drugs perscribed by doc,
refuse any and all medical tests like MRIs, and you spend hours on phone
arguing about whether or not the primary care doctor is in the plan. (he is
for the wife, but not the husband on same plan…what? that took 5 months to
fix!). We are going to drop the insurance altoghether, I need my $17,000 in
premiums to live on.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6ed5bb562ac155a037a87e97bce2d25c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Rick says
    

April 11, 2019 at 7:33 am

It is very interesting reading this entire post from over a 6 year period. All
those that spoke of how great it would be back in 2013-14 must be pretty
disappointed. The lack of plans, many states only have 1 or 2 insurers to
choose from, the extremely high cost, the fact that it costs the government
over 53,000 dollars for every person on obamacare. The fact that you could not
keep your plan or your doctor, the fact that it double or tripled the cost of
insurance for most Americans and that they did not see the $2,500 in reduced
premiums that were promised by obama. The fact that you can have millions in
assets but still qualify for subsidies. The fact that it did nothing to stop
the class warfare that continues and is only worse. The fact that there is a
presidential election in 2 years and all we hear from the democrats is how
they are going to "fix" healthcare, WASN'T THIS THE FIX TO ALL OUR HEALTHCARE
WORRIES? Trillions of dollars spent and still nothing accomplished. I too, as
you can tell, am waiting to retire in the "another year syndrome" because our
healthcare insurance premium came in at $18,500 BEFORE we actually even see a
doctor. As a pharmacist I know that low income people had insurance long
before the ACA came into effect and I now I see more people then before being
punished by healthcare cost. The ACA may have given insurance to millions but
millions more are now paying deeply for it.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ca1c692a7c717d1ad3ed74d610bbef0f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Pam mccarty says
    

July 5, 2014 at 12:18 pm

I work for the WIC program. Everyday we see people who are on government
programs who come in with Coach purses, nice phones and are going out of town
on trips. So many of the women on WIC are not married and are having children
left and right. After working there for 24 years I do not feel the way I used
to about helping the "poor" Now I feel we are giving the store away and those
who come after us and work and make any kind of money are going to be paying
for those who don't for many years to come. Pam

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

July 6, 2014 at 7:38 am

On the question of children, why do you think they have a lot of children even
though they might not be able to comfortable afford?

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/113d6b632bec4e120ebf868fb53abdb3?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Cat says
    

April 7, 2017 at 3:28 pm

Lack of education, and no cultural stigma attached to single motherhood.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4589a02345613a3f9581ad16a3e959a9?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Matt says
    

February 20, 2015 at 6:53 pm

I agree I worked in a supermarket going on 30 years and many times WIC
customers would leave the store and hop into the Cadillac Escalade. I went
part time and now in 2015 lost employer based health care and I am thinking
that when you add my earning to my investment income I wouldn't get any
subsidy. So i'm paying $360 /mo in premiums and facing much higher out of
pocket costs. So ACA is really telling me to quit and reduce income because
maintaining a little part time job to keep active is just going to hurt me
financially. Also it could push my long term cap gains and dividends into the
taxable range. So it would be a double hit. Obama care hurts the responsible
saver and worker. But I starting to think if you can't beat them join them.
That isn't my belief but one does get tired of those who abuse the system.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 23, 2013 at 11:40 am

Making 100K in Indiana is not the same as making 1.5 million in SF. That's
absurd. You choose to live there despite the fact that real estate prices are
ridiculous.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 12:41 pm

Just using JT's income to housing example.

Same thing with you choosing to move to Hamilton county. In other words, life
is all about choices. All good!

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b0d295f9857bcc5e3800911570a7fa20?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Holly@ClubThrifty says
    

October 23, 2013 at 12:44 pm

Yeah, but my 160K house in Hancock County would sell for about 175K in
Hamilton County, not 1.5 million!!!!! =)  
Plus, living in Hamilton county will allow me to send me kids to the top-rated
schools in the state…for free.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 12:57 pm

The point is if you are earning $125,000 and can buy an awesome house for
$175,000, that's like earning $1,000,000 to buy an awesome house for
$1,350,000 based on JT's example.

Your $175k house might very well sell for $1.5 million in a middle of the road
SF neighborhood.

Just think paying more for ACA as your patriotic duty and all is good! If it
makes you feel better, I've paid more than $1 million in federal taxes alone
over 13 years since college. I doubt I'm getting that much more in benefits
than the median income earner.

Reply

    
    
            * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d734118620a5340503e14b2f8c838608?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Phil says
    

April 5, 2019 at 11:20 pm

First and foremost, one doesn’t need a 7 figure income to get a 1,000,000
mortgage.

If you gross 4K/mo - even $3,500 (under $50K/ur, you’ll get a $100k mortgage;
ie: a $120k house w/ @20% down. So, a 96k/yr income gets you there and then
some, based on < $10K/yr in mortgage payments.

I Don’t live in SF, But DC area is close. I have $840 mortgage @$6800/MO.
Totaling $81,000 /yr and make < $400k/yr - it was a $1M house when buying 8
yrs ago, now $1.4-5

It’s a struggle BECAUSE I go overboard with other things, but it was VERY
doable at the beginning when income was only 340k and NOTHING ELSE.

Just like the 96k income/ 100k house - stick with $10-15k car loans, not
50–k60++, and the like ….

But a $1.5M income will afford a several million dollar mortgages

So let’s not exaggerate!!

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/49b99f96e5685716361b6f114aa8f455?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Kathy R. says
    

July 3, 2015 at 9:40 am

I am not a supporter of the ACA! I completely agree with this being NON-
AFFORDABLE CARE!  
We are a family of 5 3 kids 2 adults both who work regular jobs, total income
equaling only 86,000.00 Per yr. Anyone who has children knows this is not
"RICH" ! We would receive some ridiculous plan with high deductibles and still
high monthly premiums. I want to quit my job and live on welfare, strip myself
of citizenship, and get the silver platter handed to me! Obama blew this big
time!

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b5f1e80dc48bc509610c564b59eaa2aa?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Cash Rebel says

October 23, 2013 at 6:06 am

I hadn't looked at the charts too closely until this point because I have
employer sponsored health insurance, but you make a really strong point. If
you can bring your taxable income down to a reasonable level, you can get
great subsidies even though you're a millionaire. Now I need to sort out
whether I'd have a moral dilemma with doing that. Probably not, it's just
playing by the rules…

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 8:00 am

Being asset heavy and income light is the name of the game. The government is
fully aware of this and by giving subsidies to lower income folks, they are
indirectly ENCOURAGING people to save and invest their money over their
lifetimes. This is great for personal finances long term. Not sure where the
moral dilemma is coming from to build assets unless you think the government
is unaware of their policies.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 2:42 pm

Indeed, one of the key positives of ACA, subsidies for millionaires!

Have a $2 mil portfolio yielding 3% for $60,000 and no debt and get a $3,700 a
year subsidy according to my chart above!

The government is encouraging us to save aggressively, invest and build
assets! A win for the nation.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fd4a03a5a5c84aa42cebc2e17feae8a2?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)seth says
    

February 9, 2017 at 2:27 pm

I feel the intent of the ACA was to help those who couldn't afford it buy
insurance, not subsidize savvier rich people who might be living off trust
income, gifts etc. in addition to an officially lower income. Taking legal
advantage of this is not morally wrong but a defect in the law which should be
fixed…

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a64c5ce30f90edf1a122a16c8be726c5?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Bill says
    

January 19, 2019 at 7:20 am

So penalize someone who saved their whole life .You should get the same
benefit not made to carry someone else on your back.

Reply

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a2b60c366601f10e594fc120c377c902?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Winston says

October 23, 2013 at 5:50 am

Great article, Sam! I'm glad you took the time to look into it and break down
the numbers for all of us. Unfortunately, I think that most of the people that
are against the ACA/Obamacare have reached that stance on principal instead of
by examination.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/00ac01efef6a120830f85021f5d2ab69?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Nathan says
    

October 23, 2013 at 6:54 am

I am opposed to the ACA because the economics don't make sense. Subsidizing
more people into an insurance market, while at the same time limiting or
reducing compensation for such services (Medicare) will only result in
shortages of Doctors taking new patients and increasing wait times to see
specialists. If you subsidize you get more of it (demand curve shifts right, P
increases, Quantity increases), limiting compensation reduces the supply of
such services (supply shifts left, Price increase, quantity decreases) result:
Ambiguous shift in quantity of care, and price definitely increases.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

October 23, 2013 at 7:52 am

Nathan, that's what private health networks are for. People who have financial
means can simply opt to pay more for better service. My doctor has a
$1,500/year concierge plan that provides weekend access, an even more
comprehensive physical, and his private mobile for questions.

I'll sign up if my health begins to deteriorate. The ACA doesn't restrict
people from paying more and getting better service if they want to pay more.
We're talking about helping the uninsured and those who can't comfortably
afford health care.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/00ac01efef6a120830f85021f5d2ab69?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Nathan says
    

October 23, 2013 at 9:56 am

Private exchange insurance plans are still subject to affordability targets
set forth in the ACA and the cadillac tax for rich benefits. For companies
that are in both public and private exchanges the risk pool to the company is
the same so premiums will rise on the private exchanges when the reimbursement
rates are capped in the public option. You are not insulated.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/672c5e78eebdaad9a10d90e24d84dac7?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)John Johnson says
    

August 26, 2014 at 10:07 am

We are retired couple, 63 & 61. Working class people that lost both our union
contracted post retiree healthcare benefits when both our employers were able
to shed responsibility in bankruptcy. Our combined fixed income is slightly
over 400% poverty and we get no subsidies at ACA. (Kaiser and HHS reply, tough
luck). How can we legally lower our fixed income That is from combined ( PBGC,
SS, and Monthly employer sponsored annuity payments)?  
It is frustrating that income of 1K over 400% poverty costs us over 9K in ACA
subsidy. Have looked all over web and this article was the closest we found
that may offer some good advice. Help!

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cac582c3201096a664788484ef963016?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Financial Samurai says
    

August 26, 2014 at 10:11 am

Hi John,

Do you still have your pension, and savings? If so, unfortunately it seems
like the government will ask you to help subsidize others. Their rationale is
that you've had a lifetime to save and invest, and if you have a pension +
social security, then you should be able to pay under the guidelines.

A lot of younger people will never have a pension. What is your actual income
and costs?

Sam

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9eb986183c2cfc117ad5644ae92767f3?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)ROBERT says
    

September 4, 2014 at 8:28 am

Hello. I'm in a similiar situation. I was told for every dollar you contribute
to a traditional IRA, note, traditional, not Roth, will lower your your
adjusted gross income by a dollar.  
So, if your gross income is say, 65,000, if you simply contribute 5,000
dollars to a traditional IRA, this will bring your income down to 60,000 as
far as ACA is concerned. (Note the subsidy cut-off for married couple of two
is 62,040).

Reply

    
    
            * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4eba78b5532fa2e76d4a9033903559ea?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Michael Cocozza says
    

October 2, 2014 at 12:13 pm

True, however, one needs earned income to contribute to an IRA. The gentleman
to whom you responded has no earned income.

    
    
            * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3a4e70fd7e5f10cc62ee1411449e074c?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Corbett says
    

December 23, 2018 at 3:52 pm

Its not the Governments Job to pay for anyone's retirement or Insurance. I
worked for 40 years still retired early never made over 46,000. a year but
saved $10.00 a week invested in the Markets got a IRA when the Government
allowed it. Now I.m on Medicare with a Supplement Policy that pays everything.
My Policy cost 250,00. a month including Drug Policy D. And my wife and I draw
right at $100,000. a year. Everyone can do it self discipline. Set Goals, mine
was to retire early.

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/894d0e53a83fc3c5d2a9763b2cc173ed?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dave says
    

November 21, 2014 at 4:16 pm

During this open enrollment you can find a plan that is HSA Qualified and then
put any amount up to $7,000 plus in to a Health Savings Account which is a
deduction for MAGI. This would legally lower your income by what ever you put
into your account and you can qualify for a credit. There are rules that you
need to follow but it is very do-able.

Reply

    
    
            * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5c8f9e9222c414616bb566e617bc527d?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)CINDY L COLLINS says
    

February 3, 2019 at 6:48 am

This is what we are doing for our last year before Medicare. It was difficult
to get someone to tell us it was legal. Everyone knew about IRAs for earned
income, but it took time for someone to explain that you could use any income
for an HSA, especially since it isn't a line item on the ACA form. Very
stressful process and few people seemed clear on the answers.

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/894d0e53a83fc3c5d2a9763b2cc173ed?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dave says
    

November 25, 2014 at 1:59 pm

Hi John,

So, in your case, if you have a health insurance plan that is HSA qualified
all you have to contribute to the Health Savings Account is a little over
$1,000 or just enough to bring your income down to qualify for the credit.
Remember the Health Savings Account that you establish is your savings
account. It can be used tax free on your behalf to pay for out of pocket
qualified expenses like Co-Pays, prescription drugs and many other medical
expenses. The amount that is not used up can be rolled over for use in future
years.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/58f9167e440f930ac4f8fd62ff9a53f1?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)BEK in Texas says
    

November 6, 2017 at 10:39 am

I am in the same predicament. My daughter (26) has permanent employment now
and insurance through her employer. I called Obamacare and informed them that
I needed to take her off of my insurance and it constituted a "Life Change".
In so doing, it reduced us to a "Family of (2) instead of (3) as we were. My
income from retirement + MRD from inherited IRA was okay for the 3 of us and
kept us within the 400% poverty threshold. When we became just the two of us,
now the threshold was lower and I lost all the subsidy for these last two
months. Invest $4K in IRA to reduce AGI to within the 400% range again?

Reply

    
    
            * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7a0a94bdf1f7a07fc1d17b3911321201?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Lu says
    

December 10, 2018 at 10:25 am

I am getting same results on tax credit with or without IRA contribution ?? Is
this correct? Thanks L

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b4655d4230bf90cc524fb4ae8fb951da?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Rick Caputo says
    

October 28, 2013 at 12:55 pm

Please, the only docs quitting are the ones close to retirement . Docs love
medicare because they must be paid in 14 days. My friend wrote the software. I
believe the oath they took doesn't mention money.

Reply

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f49bb98f935a7e080ef7644f57fd5cee?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)mark says
    

December 30, 2013 at 1:48 pm

Can you source this?  
I have a friend that runs a physical therapy practice and she is always
complaining about how inconsistent the government payments are.

Reply

    
    
          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6f9aea8cc03a6980e1b263f94a6f3f2f?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Robert Fowler says
    

January 21, 2017 at 12:25 pm

ARNP here. Medicare is our most consistent payer as long as we have our ducks
in a row. Every quarter my clinic meets to discuss the financial aspects of
the clinic and every quarter the payers we have the biggest problem with are
the privates who change the rules mid stream. Medicare and MedicAid push hard
to lower costs. The privates have a price in mind based on how much they think
the patient will tolerate.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/65ac3e6ece40a92ab0f798ef81585c39?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)smibbo says
    

July 1, 2014 at 9:26 pm

WHen price changes, demand nor supply curves shift. When it is price that
changes, there is movement along the curves. That's called a change in
quantity demanded. That's econ 101 and that's exactly what's happening now
with the ACA: lower prices have resulted in increase in quantity demanded.
That doesn't necessarily predict anything about supply.

Reply

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5f582b4a6f3dee8ae30861e228af2891?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Dr. H. Eady says
    

October 28, 2016 at 5:23 pm

Nonsense and Liberal garbage!  
Be a physician and learn that the government now wants to tell you how to
practice your patients health care needs.  
The rates are going uo dramatically for the paying public. The deadbeats get
care on the backs of the working!  
Hold on!!!  
The numbers and graphs are BS!  
Drs. don't get paid for months and this causes increased costs. When they do
get paid, the amounts are arguably reduced! Foulplay on this propaganda
article!

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/72fdf4995df1692e4bdbf15500610726?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)Hilary says
    

December 5, 2016 at 10:15 am

What about the working whose employers don't offer coverage. 12 years with the
same job and still no coverage.

Reply

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fa31c6b8d6bd36faf6e0161698d7597b?s=100&d=wavatar&r=pg)D.S. says
    

October 17, 2018 at 9:53 am

I am SELF EMPLOYED and NOT a deadbeat! Actually, if one does not meet the
income required to get a tax break, he is referred to state assistance and
does not even qualify for the Affordable Care Act. This is helpful to millions
of people who are either self employed like me or are not offered insurance
through their job. Yes, the medical field has been hit and this system does
need improvement but your attitude towards the hard working people who qualify
for the tax break needs to be adjusted!

Reply

### Trackbacks

  1. **Is It Better To Be A Full-time Employee Or Contractor (Freelancer)? | Financial Samurai** says:

April 29, 2015 at 8:00 am

[…] cost is still outrageously expensive here in the United States if you
don't fall in the income levels that receive a subsidy. But at least everybody
can affordably get disaster health insurance. A silver plan for two will […]

Reply

  1. **Stringent Credit Card Approval Standards On The Rise | Financial Samurai** says:

March 18, 2015 at 9:30 am

[…] over $5 million when you die (estate tax). You can be worth millions of
dollars and still receive Obamacare subsidies if your income is below ~$45,000
per individual or $95,000 for a family of four for example. At the […]

Reply

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

Don't subscribe All Replies to my comments Notify me of followup comments via
e-mail. You can also subscribe without commenting.

you MUST enable javascript to be able to comment

Sign up for the private Financial Samurai newsletter!

####

**Top Product Reviews**

  * Personal Capital review (free financial tools)
  * Fundrise review (real estate crowdfunding)
  * RealtyMogul review (real estate crowdfunding)
  * LendingTree review (mortgages)
  * Wealthfront review (digital wealth advisor)
  * PolicyGenius review (life insurance)
  * SoFi review (student loans)
  * Esurance review (auto loans)
  * Bluehost review (web hosting)

**Real Estate Resource Center**

  * Real Estate Crowdfunding Learning Center
  * Why Real Estate Is One Of The Best Investments
  * BURL: Buy Utility, Rent Luxury Strategy
  * Why Invest In The Heartland Of America
  * Example Of A Strong Rental Lease Agreement
  * A Guide To Buying And Managing Rental Property
  * Buying Real Estate In A Rising Interest Rate Environment
  * Why Real Estate Will Always Be More Desirable Than Stocks

**Investment Resource Center**

  * Ranking The Best Passive Income Investments
  * After-Tax Investment Amounts By Age To Comfortably Retire
  * The Proper Asset Allocation Of Stocks And Bonds By Age
  * Historical Returns Of Different Stock And Bond Portfolio Weightings
  * Why Investors Prefer Stocks Over Real Estate
  * Things To Do Before Making Any Investment
  * How To Reduce Excessive Portfolio Fees
  * Net Worth Asset Allocation Recommendation By Age
  * 401(k) Target Amounts By Age

![Financial Samurai Featured In](https://www.financialsamurai.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/AsFeaturedIn-v16.png)

#### Categories

  * Automobiles
  * Big Government
  * Budgeting & Savings
  * Career & Employment
  * Credit Score
  * Debt
  * Education
  * Entrepreneurship
  * Family Finances
  * Gig Economy
  * Health & Fitness
  * Insurance
  * Investments
  * Mortgages
  * Most Popular
  * Motivation
  * Podcast
  * Real Estate
  * Relationships
  * Retirement
  * Taxes
  * Travel

Copyright (C) 2009-2019 Financial Samurai * Read our disclosures

**PRIVACY:** We will never disclose or sell your email address or any of your
data from this site. We do highly welcome posts and community interaction, and
registering is simply part of the posting system.  
**DISCLAIMER:** Financial Samurai exists to thought provoke and learn from the
community. Your decisions are yours alone and we are in no way responsible for
your actions. Stay on the righteous path and think long and hard before making
any financial transaction! Disclosures

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-e7rAgP3t_Iq_6.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

