

  * Education 

    * Reference 

    * Dictionary 

    * Investing 101 
    * The 4 Best S&P; 500 Index Funds 
    * World's Top 20 Economies 
    * Stock Basics Tutorial 
    * Options Basics Tutorial 
    * Economics Basics 
    * Topics 

    * Stocks 

    * Mutual Funds 
    * Options 
    * Tech 
    * ETFs 
    * Bonds/Fixed Income 
    * Commodities 
  * Markets 

    * News 

    * Watchlist 

    * Company News 
    * Market/Economy News 
    * Popular Stocks 

    * Apple (AAPL) 

    * Tesla (TSLA) 
    * Amazon (AMZN) 
    * AMD (AMD) 
    * Facebook (FB) 
    * Netflix (NFLX) 
  * Simulator 

    * Simulator 

    * Create an Account 

    * Join a Game 
    * My Simulator 

    * My Game 

    * Create a Game 
  * Your Money 

    * Personal Finance 

    * Credit 

    * Budgeting/Saving 
    * Taxes 
    * Retirement 
    * Mortgage 
    * Insurance 
    * Small Business 
    * Wealth Management 
    * Reviews & Ratings 

    * Broker Reviews 

    * Charles Schwab Review 
    * E*TRADE Review 
    * Robinhood Review 
  * Advisors 

    * Financial Advice 

    * Advisor Insights 

    * Investopedia 100 
    * For Financial Advisors 

    * Join Advisor Insights 

    * Your Practice 
  * Academy 

    * Popular Courses 

    * Investing for Beginners 

    * Become a Day Trader 
    * Trading for Beginners 
    * Technical Analysis 
    * Courses by Topic 

    * All Courses 

    * Trading Courses 
    * Investing Courses 
    * Financial Professional Courses 

Submit

  * Login
  * Advisor Login
  * Newsletters

Corporate Finance & Accounting

  * Financial Analysis
  * Corporate Finance
  * Financial Statements
  * Financial Ratios
  * Accounting
  * Debt
  * Mergers & Acquisitions
  * Corporate Insurance

Corporate Finance & Accounting Financial Ratios

# Price Elasticity of Demand

Reviewed by Will Kenton

Updated Oct 22, 2018

### What is Price Elasticity of Demand

Price elasticity of demand is an economic measure of the change in the
quantity demanded or purchased of a product in relation to its price change.
Expressed mathematically, it is:

**_Price Elasticity of Demand = % Change in Quantity Demanded / % Change in
Price_**

Price elasticity is used by economists to understand how supply or demand
changes given changes in price to understand the workings of the real economy.
For instance, some goods are very inelastic, that is, their prices do not
change very much given changes in supply or demand, for example people need to
buy gasoline to get to work or travel around the world, and so if oil prices
rise, people will likely still buy just the same amount of gas. On the other
hand, certain goods are very elastic, their price moves cause substantial
changes in its demand or its supply. Here, we will look just at how the demand
side of the equation is impacted by fluctuations in price by considering the
price elasticity of demand - which you can contrast with price elasticity of
supply.

1:40

#### What Is Elasticity?

### BREAKING DOWN Price Elasticity of Demand

If the quantity demanded of a product exhibits a large change in response to
changes in its price, it is termed "elastic," that is, quantity stretched far
from its prior point. If the quantity purchased has a small change in response
to its price, it is termed "inelastic"; or quantity didn't stretch much from
its prior point.

The more easily a shopper can substitute one product with a rising price for
another, the more the price will fall – be "elastic." In other words, in a
world where people equally like coffee and tea, if the price of coffee goes
up, people will have no problem switching to tea, and so the demand for coffee
will fall. This is because coffee and tea are considered good substitutes to
each other.

The more discretionary a purchase is, the more its quantity will fall in
response to price rises, that is, the higher the elasticity. So, if you are
considering buying a new washing machine but the current one still works (it's
just old and outdated), and if the prices of new washing machines goes up,
you're likely to forgo that immediate purchase and wait either until prices go
down or until the current machine breaks down.

On the other hand, the less discretionary a good is, the less its quantity
demanded will fall. Inelastic examples include luxury items where shoppers
"pay for the privilege" of buying a brand name, addictive products, and
required add-on products. Addictive products may include tobacco and alcohol.
Sin taxes on these types of products are possible to introduce because the
lost tax revenue from fewer units sold is exceeded by the higher taxes on
units still sold. Examples of add-on products are ink-jet printer cartridges
or college textbooks. These items are usually more necessary (as opposed to
discretionary) and lack good substitutes (only HP ink will work in HP
printers).

Time also matters. Demand response to price fluctuations is different for a
one-day sale than for a price change over a season or year. Clarity in time
sensitivity is vital to understanding the price elasticity of demand and for
comparing it across different products.

### Examples of Price Elasticity of Demand

Generally as rules of thumb, if the quantity of a good demanded or purchased
changes more than the price change, the product is termed elastic. (The price
changes by +5%, but the demand falls by -10%). If the change in quantity
purchased is the same as the price change (say, 10%/10% = 1), the product is
said to have unit (or unitary) price elasticity. Finally, if the quantity
purchased changes less than the price (say, -5% demanded for a +10% change in
price), then the product is termed inelastic.

To calculate the elasticity of demand, let's take a very simple example:
Suppose that the price of apples falls by 6% from $1.99 a bushel to $1.87 a
bushel. In response, grocery shoppers increase their apple purchases by 20%.
The elasticity of apples would thus be: 0.20/0.06 = 3.33 - indicating that
apples are quite elastic in terms of their demand.

Compare Popular Online Brokers

Provider

Name

Description

Advertiser Disclosure

×

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which
Investopedia receives compensation.

### Related Terms

Learn about Elasticity

Elasticity is a measure of a variable's sensitivity to a change in another
variable.

more

Understanding the Cross Elasticity of Demand

The cross elasticity of demand measures the responsiveness in the quantity
demanded of one good when the price changes for another good.

more

Learn About Demand Elasticity

In economics, demand elasticity refers to how sensitive the demand for a good
is to changes in other economic variables.

more

What Does Elasticity Mean?

Elasticity is an economic term describing the change in the behavior of buyers
and sellers in response to a price change for a good or service.

more

Inelastic

Inelastic is a term used to describe the unchanging quantity of a good or
service when its price changes.

more

Understanding Arc Elasticity

Arc elasticity is the elasticity of one variable with respect to another
between two given points. It is used when there is no general function to
define the relationship between the two variables.

more

Partner Links

### Related Articles

![](//:0)

Microeconomics

### Elasticity vs. Inelasticity of Demand: What's the Difference?

![](//:0)

Macroeconomics

### How Does Price Elasticity Affect Supply?

![](//:0)

Microeconomics

### Which factors are more important in determining the demand elasticity of

a good or service?

![](//:0)

Microeconomics

### How price inelasticity and inelasticity of demand differ

![](//:0)

Microeconomics

### How does price elasticity change in relation to supply and demand?

![](//:0)

Behavioral Economics

### Why We Splurge When Times Are Good

  * Terms
  * News
  * Tutorials
  * About Us
  * Advertise
  * Contact
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use
  * Careers

  * # 

  * a
  * b
  * c
  * d
  * e
  * f
  * g
  * h
  * i
  * j
  * k
  * l
  * m
  * n
  * o
  * p
  * q
  * r
  * s
  * t
  * u
  * v
  * w
  * x
  * y
  * z

Investopedia is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

  * The Balance
  * Lifewire
  * TripSavvy
  * The Spruce
  * and more

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

