

__NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please
upgrade your browser. LEARN MORE »

__Sections __Home __Search

## The New York Times

###### The Upshot |The Best Health Care System in the World: Which One Would

You Pick?

Log In __0 __Settings

__Close search

## Site Search Navigation

Search NYTimes.com

__Clear this text input

Go

https://nyti.ms/2y8Ew9F

  1. Loading...

See next articles

See previous articles

## Site Navigation

## Site Mobile Navigation

Advertisement

Follow Us:

  * __ Visit The Upshot on Facebook
  * __ Visit The Upshot on Twitter
  * __ Follow The Upshot via RSS

Get the Upshot in your Inbox

## The Upshot

## |The New Health Care

# The Best Health Care System in the World: Which One Would You Pick?

By AARON E. CARROLL and AUSTIN FRAKT SEPT. 18, 2017

To better understand one of the most heated U.S. policy debates, we created a
tournament to judge which of these nations has the best health system: Canada,
Britain, Singapore, Germany, Switzerland, France, Australia and the U.S.
Related Article

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

“Medicare for all,” or “single-payer,” is becoming a rallying cry for
Democrats.

This is often accompanied by calls to match the health care coverage of "the
rest of the world." But this overlooks a crucial fact: The “rest of the world”
is not all alike.

The commonality is universal coverage, but wealthy nations have taken varying
approaches to it, some relying heavily on the government (as with single-
payer); some relying more on private insurers; others in between.

Experts don’t agree on which is best; a lot depends on perspective. But we
thought it would be fun to stage a small tournament.

We selected eight countries, representing a range of health care systems, and
established a bracket by randomly assigning seeds.

To select the winner of each matchup, we gathered a small judging panel, which
includes us:

  * **Aaron Carroll,** a health services researcher and professor of pediatrics at Indiana University School of Medicine 
  * **Austin Frakt,** director of the Partnered Evidence-Based Policy Resource Center at the V.A. Boston Healthcare System; associate professor with Boston University’s School of Public Health; and adjunct associate professor with the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health

and three economists and physician experts in health care systems:

  * **Craig Garthwaite** , a health economist with Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Management
  * **Uwe Reinhardt** , a health economist with Princeton University’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs
  * **Ashish Jha** , a physician with the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and the director of the Harvard Global Health Institute

A summary of our worldviews on health care is at bottom.

So that you can play along at home and make your own picks, we’ll describe
each system along with our choices (the experts' selections will decide who
advances). When we cite hard data, they come from the Commonwealth Fund’s
International Country Comparison in 2017.

But enough talk. Let’s play.

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### FIRST ROUND

## Canada vs. Britain: Single-Payer Showdown

Both have single-payer systems, but vary in the government’s role and in what
is covered.

In Canada, the government finances health insurance, and the private sector
delivers a lot of the care. Insurance is run at the province level. Many
Canadians have supplemental private insurance through their jobs to help pay
for prescription drugs, dentists and optometry. The government ends up paying
for about 70 percent of health care spending in all.

Britain has truly socialized medicine: The government not only finances care,
but also provides it through the National Health Service. Coverage is broad,
and most services are free to citizens, with the system financed by taxes,
though there is a private system that runs alongside the public one. About 10
percent buy private insurance. Government spending accounts for more than 80
percent of all health care spending.

U.S. analogues are Medicare (more like Canada) and the Veterans Health
Administration (more like Britain).

Canada and Britain are pretty similar in terms of spending — both spend just
over 10 percent of G.D.P. on health care. They also have reasonably similar
results on quality, although neither ranks near the top in the usual
international comparisons. In terms of access, though, Britain excels, with
shorter wait times and fewer access barriers due to cost.

**Our pick: Britain, 4-1**

Aaron: **Britain.** It’s efficient. Given the rather low spending, it provides
great access with acceptable outcomes.

Craig: **Britain.** Patients in Britain have a greater ability to shop across
providers (using additional private insurance). This, combined with reforms
within the N.H.S., helped increase competition and quality.

Austin: **Britain.** While the countries are close in spending and quality,
Britain has much lower cost-based barriers to access.

Ashish: **Britain.** Access problems can be profound in Canada — nearly one in
five Canadians report waiting four months or more for elective surgery, which
can be more than just an inconvenience.

Uwe: **Canada.** The Canadian system is simpler for citizens to understand and
highly equitable.

1 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

Britain

0%

Canada

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### FIRST ROUND

## U.S. vs. Singapore: A Mix of Ideas

The United States has a mix of clashing ideas: private insurance through
employment; single-payer Medicare mainly for those 65 and older; state-managed
Medicaid for many low-income people; private insurance through exchanges set
up by the Affordable Care Act; as well as about 28 million people without any
insurance at all. Hospitals are private, except for those run by the Veterans
Health Administration.

Singapore has a unique approach. Basic care in government-run hospital wards
is cheap, sometimes free, with more deluxe care in private rooms available for
those paying extra. Singapore’s workers contribute around 37 percent of their
wages to mandated savings accounts that may be spent on health care, housing,
insurance, investment or education, with part of that being an employer
contribution. The government, which helps control costs, is involved in
decisions about investing in new technology. It also uses bulk purchasing
power to spend less on drugs, controls the number of medical students and
physicians in the country, and helps decide how much they can earn.

Singapore’s system costs far less than America's (4.9 percent of G.D.P. versus
17.2 percent). Singapore doesn’t release the same data as most other advanced
nations, although it’s widely thought that it provides pretty good care for a
small amount of spending. Others counter that access and quality vary, with
wide disparities between those at the top and bottom of the socioeconomic
ladder.

**Our pick: United States, 4-1**

Aaron: **United States.** Singapore is intriguing, because it’s so different
from other systems. But its huge mandatory savings requirement would be a
nonstarter for many in the United States.

Craig: **United States.** Singapore, a scrappy underdog, has become a fan
favorite of conservatives. But its reliance on health savings accounts is
problematic: When people are spending more of their own money on health care,
they tend to forgo both effective and ineffective care in equal measure.

Austin: **United States.** It’s hard for me to overlook Singapore 's lack of
openness with data.

Ashish: **United States.** The lack of data in Singapore is a problem, and it
had higher rates of unnecessary hospitalizations and far higher heart attack
and stroke mortality rates than the United States. Plus, the U.S. has a highly
dynamic and innovative health care system. It is the engine for new
diagnostics and treatments from which Singapore and other nations benefit.

Uwe: **Singapore.** It’s hard to defend the messy American health system, with
its mixture of unbridled compassion and unbridled cruelty.

2 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

United States

0%

Singapore

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### FIRST ROUND

## France vs. Australia: Everyone Covered

The list of services covered in France is more extensive than in Australia --
perhaps more than in any other health care system. Australia has the advantage
in expense.

Australia provides free inpatient care in public hospitals, access to most
medical services and prescription drugs. There is also voluntary private
health insurance, giving access to private hospitals and to some services the
public system does not cover.

The government pays for at least 85 percent of outpatient services, and for 75
percent of the medical fee schedule for private patients who use public
hospitals. Patients must pay out of pocket for whatever isn’t covered. Most
doctors are self-employed, work in groups and are paid fee-for-service. More
than half of hospitals are public.

Everyone in France must buy health insurance, sold by a small number of
nonprofit funds, which are largely financed through taxes. Public insurance
covers between 70 percent and 80 percent of costs. Voluntary health insurance
can cover the rest, leaving out-of-pocket payments relatively low. About 95
percent of the population has voluntary coverage, through jobs or with the
help of means-tested vouchers. The Ministry of Health sets funds and budgets;
it also regulates the number of hospital beds, what equipment is purchased and
how many medical students are trained. The ministry sets prices for procedures
and drugs.

The French health system is relatively expensive at 11.8 percent of G.D.P.,
while Australia’s is at 9 percent. Access and quality are excellent in both
systems.

**Our pick: France, 4-1**

Aaron: **France.** It provides almost everything you’d want, and it’s
expensive only compared with countries other than the United States. (Compared
with the U.S., it’s a bargain.)

Craig: **France.** It has seemingly done a better job of using markets to
create competition across public and private hospitals — which provides
incentives for quality provision and innovation.

Austin: **Australia.** It was a close call. Australia achieves good outcomes
(by some but not all measures better than France) with a lot less spending,
making it a better value.

Ashish: **France.** Both countries cover everyone, but people in France report
somewhat fewer problems getting access to care, as well as shorter waiting
times.

Uwe: **France.** The Australian system is basically two-tiered: a public
insurance-and-delivery system, and another based on private health insurance,
each of which cover roughly half the population. This seems to work well in
Australia, but in the U.S. the public system most likely would be badly
underfunded. Therefore, France would be superior.

3 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

France

0%

Australia

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### FIRST ROUND

## Switzerland vs. Germany: Neighborly Rivalry

Germany’s system and Switzerland’s have a lot in common. Germany has slightly
better access, especially with respect to costs. Switzerland has higher levels
of cost-sharing, but its outcomes are hard to beat — arguably the best in the
world.

Like every country here except the U.S., Switzerland has a universal health
care system, requiring all to buy insurance. The plans resemble those in the
United States under the Affordable Care Act: offered by private insurance
companies, community rated and guaranteed-issue, with prices varying by things
like breadth of network, size of deductible and ease of seeing a specialist.
Almost 30 percent of people get subsidies offsetting the cost of premiums, on
a sliding scale pegged to income. Although these plans are offered on a
nonprofit basis, insurers can also offer coverage on a for-profit basis,
providing additional services and more choice in hospitals. For these
voluntary plans, insurance companies may vary benefits and premiums; they also
can deny coverage to people with chronic conditions. Most doctors work on a
national fee-for-service scale, and patients have considerable choice of
doctors, unless they've selected a managed-care plan.

A majority of Germans (86 percent) get their coverage primarily though the
national public system, with others choosing voluntary private health
insurance. Most premiums for the public system are based on income and paid
for by employers and employees, with subsidies available but capped at
earnings of about $65,000. Patients have a lot of choice among doctors and
hospitals, and cost sharing is quite low. It's capped for low-income people,
reduced for care of those with chronic illnesses, and nonexistent for services
to children. There are no subsidies for private health insurance, but the
government regulates premiums, which can be higher for people with pre-
existing conditions. Private insurers charge premiums on an actuarial basis
when they first enroll a customer, and subsequently raise premiums only as a
function of age — not health status. Most physicians work in a fee-for-service
setting based on negotiated rates, and there are limits on what they can be
paid annually.

Both systems cost their countries about 11 percent of G.D.P.

**Our pick: Switzerland, 3-2**

Aaron: **Switzerland.** It has superior outcomes. It’s worth noting that its
system is very similar to the Obamacare exchanges.

Craig: **Switzerland.** The Swiss system looks a lot like a better-functioning
version of the Affordable Care Act. There’s heavy, but quite regulated,
competition among insurers and an individual mandate.

Austin: **Germany.** Germany has a low level of cost-based access barriers —
tied with Britain for the lowest among our competitors.

Ashish: **Switzerland.** Switzerland outperformed Germany on a number of
important quality measures, including fewer unnecessary hospitalizations and
lower heart attack mortality rates.

Uwe: **Germany.** The Swiss social insurance system — a late comer, enacted
only in the 1990s, and financed by per-capita premiums — is less equitable
than many other European systems, including Germany’s.

4 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

Switzerland

0%

Germany

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### SEMIFINALS

## Switzerland vs. Britain: Meaning of a Market

How does the cost-effectiveness of Britain's "socialized medicine" stack up
against the competitive but heavily regulated private system of Switzerland?

**Our pick: Switzerland, 3-2**

Aaron: **Switzerland.** It has better quality, and perhaps access, but those
come at a higher cost. I’m willing to make that trade-off.

Craig: **Britain.** Switzerland’s system — privately funded with private
insurers — is often held up as a bastion of competition. But it is not
necessarily more of a market than Britain; it just hides the heavy hand of
government a bit more. In reality, the insurance and provider market is
heavily regulated.

The U.K. system is almost entirely publicly funded, but it has done a lot to
try to increase the competition between facilities, which has increased the
quality of service.

Austin: **Britain.** It systematically incorporates cost effectiveness into
coverage decisions.

Ashish: **Switzerland.** These are two countries with high-performing health
systems, but Switzerland has better access and quality, albeit at somewhat
higher costs.

Uwe: **Switzerland.** Switzerland has better facilities and speed of access to
care.

5 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

Switzerland

0%

Britain

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### SEMIFINALS

## France vs. U.S.: Access vs. Innovation

France has extensive coverage, with costs that are high relative to many other
nations. The U.S. system, praised as dynamic and innovative, is even more
expensive, falls short of universal coverage and can be bewilderingly complex.
Which do our experts prefer?

**Our pick: France, 3-2**

Aaron: **France.** France provides an amazing level of access and quality for
the cost. The U.S. is considered the driver of health care innovation, which
comes at a high price. But there are other ways to incentivize innovation in
the private sector besides how we pay for and deliver care.

Craig: **United States.** The U.S. system is a bit of a mess in that it is
quite expensive and doesn’t offer complete coverage to its populace. But the
system really does have the strongest incentives for innovation on medical
technology — which provides an amazing amount of welfare for citizens around
the globe.

Austin: **France.** It’s hard to justify the very high level of U.S. spending
based on innovation alone, particularly without mechanisms to steer innovation
toward technologies that are cost-effective.

Ashish: **United States.** France has a far more equitable system, with few
delays and reasonably good outcomes. However, the U.S. delivers a superior
quality of care on the measures that matter most to patients, and the system
is far more dynamic and innovative. It was close, but I picked the United
States.

Uwe: **France.** The U.S. is just too expensive for what it delivers, and
includes too much financial insecurity to boot. At international health care
conferences, arguing that a certain proposed policy would drive some country’s
system closer to the U.S. model usually is the kiss of death.

6 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

France

0%

United States

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

##### FINAL

## France vs. Switzerland: Top of the Mountain (Alps Edition)

France's system is impressively comprehensive and in some respects simpler.
Switzerland relies on a competitive yet much-regulated system of private
insurers. Which has the edge and why?

**Our pick: Switzerland, 3-2**

Aaron: **Switzerland.** This is a tough call. Switzerland does a good job of
combining conservative and progressive beliefs about health care systems into
a workable model providing top-notch access and quality at a reasonable cost.
It doesn 't hurt that it does so through private (although heavily regulated)
insurance.

Craig: **France.** Its system has more competition among providers than
Switzerland’s does.

Austin: **Switzerland.** The Swiss system is so close to the A.C.A.’s
structure (which, to date, has survived all manner of political attacks) that
something like it could work in the U.S.

Ashish: **Switzerland** Both of these countries spend a lot on health care,
outpacing the average among high-income countries, and both perform comparably
on measures of access to care. However, in general, the Swiss health care
system delivers a higher quality of care across a range of measures and
invests more in innovation that fuels new knowledge and, ultimately, better
treatments that we all benefit from.

Uwe: **France.** It is cheaper, its financing is more equitable, and its
system is simpler.

7 of 7

**What’s your pick?**

0%

France

0%

Switzerland

![](https://static01.nyt.com/packages/flash/multimedia/ICONS/transparent.png)
Case Jernigan

**Conclusion**

Germany would have tied Switzerland had we averaged our rankings of the
nations instead of using head-to-head matchups in a bracket system
(Switzerland eliminated Germany in the first round). It’s an example of how
close the voting was. Not one vote was unanimous among the judges, and all the
semifinal and final votes were 3-2. Clearly, there is room for disagreement
about the relative merits of health systems, and different experts would
surely reach different conclusions.

Some judges took a global view, giving the edge to countries, like the United
States, that promoted innovation that benefited the rest of the world. In
other cases, how health systems treated the poorest of society was paramount.

To nobody’s surprise, the United States could do better at balancing health
care costs with access, quality and outcomes. But there are many ways to reach
that goal, and there will always be trade-offs. Learning about them from other
systems and debating them honestly would probably do us a lot of good.

We hope that readers will consider this to be merely the beginning of a
discussion, not the end. We welcome your questions or comments. In fact, we
look forward to writing articles in which we answer those questions and ask
other experts with different views to weigh in.

Have you experienced a health system outside the United States? Tell us its
best or worst feature. And what advice would you give Americans?

Discuss your ideas in the comments.

Discuss your ideas in the comments

**The panel:**  
Craig Garthwaite is a conservative economist who believes that well-regulated
markets offer the best means of providing quality and innovation. He’s a
lifelong Republican but has been broadly supportive of the market-based A.C.A.

Uwe Reinhardt, who has analyzed health care systems around the world for half
a century, has been a longtime supporter of single-payer, although he has said
he doesn’t believe the United States could manage that system well because
it’s captured by special interests.

Ashish Jha and Aaron Carroll believe in universal coverage. Austin Frakt is
less invested in universal coverage than universal access to affordable
coverage. All three pay less attention to whether a system is more government-
run or more market-based because they think either approach can succeed if
devised well. Aaron and Austin blog at The Incidental Economist. For more
information on health care systems, you can view Aaron's Healthcare Triage
playlist of videos. Ashish blogs at an Ounce of Evidence.

The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and
everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Sign up for our newsletter.

## The New Health Care

  * ![Buried in Bernie Sanders’s Health Bill: A Fallback Plan](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/09/16/upshot/16up-buyin1/16up-buyin1-mediumThreeByTwo225.jpg)

## Buried in Bernie Sanders’s Health Bill: A Fallback Plan

June 21, 2018

  * ![How Bernie Sanders’s plan would both beef up and slim down Medicare.](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/09/13/upshot/up-sandersplan/up-sandersplan-mediumThreeByTwo225-v2.jpg)

## How Bernie Sanders’s plan would both beef up and slim down Medicare.

June 21, 2018

  * ![How a single-payer health care could trip up Democrats.](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/09/12/upshot/12up-singlepayer/00up-singlepayer-mediumThreeByTwo225.jpg)

## How a single-payer health care could trip up Democrats.

June 21, 2018

  * ![Blaming Medicaid for the Opioid Crisis: How the Easy Answer Can Be Wrong](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2017/09/15/upshot/15up-medicaid/merlin-to-scoop-104178894-872458-mediumThreeByTwo225.jpg)

## Blaming Medicaid for the Opioid Crisis: How the Easy Answer Can Be Wrong

Dec. 22, 2017

Advertisement

## Site Information Navigation

  * (C) 2019 The New York Times Company
  * Home
  * Search
  * Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
  * Contact Us
  * Work With Us
  * Advertise
  * Your Ad Choices
  * Privacy
  * Terms of Service
  * Terms of Sale

## Site Information Navigation

  * Site Map
  * Help
  * Site Feedback
  * Subscriptions

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

