

skip to Main Content

USER CONFERENCESUPPORT866-672-2666

  * ![en_AU](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-content/plugins/multisite-language-switcher/flags/au.png)
  * ![en_GB](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-content/plugins/multisite-language-switcher/flags/gb.png)
  * ![en_US](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-content/plugins/multisite-language-switcher/flags/us.png)

![BoardEffect](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/BoardEffect_primary_logo_v2.svg)

  * PRODUCT
    * BOARD PORTAL SOFTWARE
    * SECURITY
    * PRICING
  * HOW IT WORKS
    * BOARD MEETING CYCLE
    * ANNUAL MEETING CYCLE
    * BOARD DEVELOPMENT CYCLE
  * CLIENT SUCCESS
  * RESOURCES
    * BLOG
    * WHITEPAPERS
    * BOARD PORTAL BUYER'S GUIDE
  * REQUEST A DEMO

Open Mobile Menu

![Government Regulations For Nonprofit

Organizations](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/02/Government-Regulations-for-Nonprofit-

Organizations.jpg)

  * March 6, 2017

# Government Regulations for Nonprofit Organizations

  * Written by Jeremy Barlow

The federal and state governments reward nonprofit organizations for the good
work they do by not requiring them to pay taxes. The trade-off is that all of
their funds must be allocated for the purpose stated in their charter.
Nonprofit organizations can accumulate profits, but they can’t distribute them
to the founders or owners, or use them to increase employee salaries beyond
the norm.

Each type of nonprofit organization has government regulations that it must
follow to retain its nonprofit status. The federal government delegates most
of the responsibility for regulation and oversight of nonprofit organizations
to the state governments. Currently, nonprofit organizations have little or no
impact on the political landscape, but will that soon change?

## **Types of Tax-Exempt Organizations**

The most common type of tax-exempt organization is a nonprofit 501(c)(3)
organization, but there are many types of tax-exempt entities, including:

  * Social clubs
  * Business leagues
  * Veterans’ associations
  * Labor unions
  * Political parties
  * Advocacy organizations

## **State Governments Follow the Government Regulations for Nonprofits**

The laws that govern nonprofit entities vary from state to state. Nonprofit
organizations must follow the laws of their states and other states in which
they operate. This rule also applies to fundraising efforts. Nonprofits need
to pay attention to the laws of other states when seeking donations from out-
of-state donors.

The board of directors has the final say on making decisions for the
organization. There are only two authorities higher than the board that have
the authority to override board decisions. They are the Attorney General and a
state court of law.

## **The Purpose of the Charter Documents**

One of the first duties that a new nonprofit board of directors takes on is to
write the charter documents and bylaws. The articles of incorporation state
the name and location of the organization and the names and addresses of the
founding members. The articles also state that the nonprofit organization is
being formed for the exclusive purpose of charitable, religious, educational
or scientific purposes. The articles will also spell out that no one should
profit from the organization and indicate how assets would be distributed in
the event that the organization dissolves.

Attorneys that specialize in nonprofit law are the best resource to review the
charter wording for new nonprofits to make sure that the organization
qualifies as a tax-exempt organization. Attorneys can help the founding
members understand the things they can and can’t do to avoid legal concerns.

Founding board directors and all directors who come after them have duty of
care, duty of loyalty and duty of obedience. As part of these duties, board
members need to manage the organization’s money and other assets responsibly.

## **Government Regulations for Public Charities and Nonprofit Organizations**

Two types of nonprofit organizations qualify as tax-exempt under section
501(c)(3) of the IRS code. Organizations can qualify as tax-exempt by
incorporating as a public charity or charitable nonprofit. There are some
important similarities and differences between them.

Public charities get their funding from investment income and large donors.
Public charities are subject to an excise tax on any investment earnings, and
they are subject to stricter rules than charitable nonprofits. Nonprofit
entities get their funds from grants, donors, service income, government
contracts and fundraising.

While there are many benefits to being a public charity or nonprofit
organization, there are a few things that the government doesn’t allow such
organizations to do. Nonprofit organizations cannot participate in
electioneering, which means that they can’t do anything to improve or damage a
politician’s chance of winning an election. Nonprofit organizations also have
limited power to advocate for policies that affect their cause, and they can’t
dedicate any substantial part of their activities to lobbying. Activities like
electioneering and lobbying put nonprofit organizations at risk of receiving a
penalty or having their 501(c)(3) status revoked.

Nonprofit organizations are not allowed to divert undue benefits to any person
or organization. This includes inurement and excessive compensation. Inurement
is when an insider takes the nonprofit’s money or assets without justifying
that it pertains to the organization’s mission. A nonprofit is guilty of
offering excessive compensation when it pays employees amounts over a
customary wage for those positions.

## **Regulations for Conducting Business with Nonprofit Organizations**

While federal and state governments play a central role in setting regulations
for nonprofit organizations, 501(c)(3) entities have other rules to which they
must pay attention. Nonprofit organizations frequently conduct business with
other businesses like landlords, marketers, caterers and many other types of
vendors that are required to pay taxes. Some businesses mistakenly believe
that their interactions with nonprofits might be different than those with
their other business partners, but in reality, the tax-exempt status doesn’t
affect normal business transactions.

## **How Might the Johnson Amendment Change the Future of Nonprofits?**

The provision in the 501(c)(3) code that prohibits nonprofit organizations
from endorsing or opposing political candidates is called the Johnson
Amendment, which dates back to 1954. It was named after its sponsor, Lyndon B.
Johnson, who was a U.S. senator at the time.

President Trump has announced that he plans to work toward repealing the
Johnson Amendment to allow churches and other nonprofit organizations to speak
freely about the candidates they support. Currently, churches and other
nonprofit organizations can publish and promote their views on social and
political matters, but they can’t openly endorse any particular candidate.

A repeal of the Johnson Amendment would have serious implications for
political campaigns. In essence, the donations that the public makes to their
favorite charitable organizations could be used to support political
candidates. This would also mean that large religious sects would have a much
stronger influence on the outcome of major political contests.

President Trump will not be able to abolish the Johnson Amendment without
significant help from Congress. To repeal an amendment, he would need for two-
thirds of both Houses of Congress to propose a new amendment to repeal it.
Another way that he could accomplish this is to get two-thirds of the state
legislatures to call a constitutional convention, where the new amendment
would then need to be ratified by three-quarters of the states.

## **Concluding Thoughts about Government Regulations of Nonprofits**

**** Nonprofit organizations are like every other type of organization in that
the type of IRS filing guides the activities that they can and cannot perform.
As long as they follow the federal, state and local laws for their type of
organization, they will remain fully compliant with tax laws.

As for the future, the Johnson Amendment is now more than a half-century old.
The near future may decide if it will last for another half century.

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b24812d06d57c146df1708d440480b02?s=70&d=mm&r=g)

#### Jeremy Barlow

Jeremy is the Director of Digital Marketing at BoardEffect.

TwitterLinkedIn

Most Popular Posts

![Trends In Quorums, Virtual Meetings, And Board Meeting

Attendance](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Trends-in-

Quorums-Virtual-Meetings-and-Board-Meeting-Attendance.jpg)

#### Trends in Quorums, Virtual Meetings, and Board Meeting Attendance

What happens when a board chair tries to counter low attendance at board
meetings with…

![Free Board Management Software Is Not Worth The Risk For Boards And Their

Organizations](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Why-

Free-Board-Management-Software-is-Costly.jpg)

#### Why Free Board Management Software Is Costly

Have you ever gotten something for free and then become disappointed because
it wasn’t what…

![Executive Director Performance Evaluation](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/04/executive-director-performance-evaluation.jpg)

#### How to do an Executive Director Performance Evaluation

The executive director’s primary responsibilities are to direct the
organization’s financial health and to drive…

Search Submit

Get Board Governance best practices directly to your inbox!

  * *

  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Instagram
  * LinkedIn
  * RSS

  * previous post: Nonprofit Board Development: Building the Ordinary into the Extraordinary

  * next post: Best Practice Board Reporting

![BoardEffect](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/BoardEffect_primary_logo_v2.svg)

MORE

AboutBoard PortalContact SupportToll Free: 866-672-2666

FOLLOW

  * Facebook
  * Instagram
  * LinkedIn
  * Twitter
  * RSS

NEWS

  * Grants for Startup Businesses: What You Need to Know June 10, 2019
  * Why Free Board Management Software Is Costly June 7, 2019
  * How to Approach Reputation Management for Nonprofits June 5, 2019

DOWNLOAD

![App Store](/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/app-store-logo.png)

![Google Play](/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/appstore_button_google.png)

![Amazon Kindle](/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Amazon_Kindle_logo.png)

![SOC](https://www.boardeffect.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/soc-

logo.png)![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-

seal/seal?rid=0a628954-ed7e-47a8-a137-868e68fc4a41)

©BOARDEFFECT 2019 • ALL RIGHTS RESERVED • PRIVACY POLICY

  * PRODUCT
    * BOARD PORTAL SOFTWARE
    * SECURITY
    * PRICING
  * HOW IT WORKS
    * APPROACH
    * BOARD MEETING CYCLE
    * ANNUAL MEETING CYCLE
    * BOARD DEVELOPMENT CYCLE
  * CLIENT SUCCESS
  * RESOURCES
    * BLOG
    * WHITEPAPERS
    * WEBINARS
    * BOARD PORTAL BUYER'S GUIDE
  * CONTACT SUPPORT
  * REQUEST A DEMO

Back To Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

