

# Full Fact - The UK’s independent factchecking charity

![Full Fact](/static/img/logo.png)

Menu Close

  * Home
  * About
  * Blog
  * Contact
  * Toolkit
  * Donate

  * Economy

  * Europe
  * Health
  * Crime
  * Education
  * Immigration
  * Law

![Full Fact](/static/img/logo.png)

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * LinkedIn

  * About

  * Economy
  * Europe
  * Health
  * Crime
  * Education
  * Immigration
  * Law

  * Home

  * Blog
  * Contact
  * Toolkit
  * Donate

×Close ![]()

  1. Home
  2. Health
  3. Health spending
  4. Spending on the NHS in England

# Spending on the NHS in England

Published: 21st Jun 2018

![](/static/img/social/facebook-logo.svg)

Share

![](/static/img/social/twitter.svg)

Tweet

Total health spending in England was around £125 billion in 2017/18 and was
expected to rise to over £127 billion by 2019/20, taking inflation into
account.

In 2017/18 around £110 billion was spent on the NHS England budget. The rest
was spent by the Department of Health on things like public health
initiatives, education, training, and infrastructure (including IT and
building new hospitals).

The government has recently announced that an additional £20 billion in real
terms will be made available for the NHS in England by 2023/24—though it’s
unclear how much money will be spent on health overall.

Health experts have said this money will “help stem further decline in the
health service, but it’s simply not enough to address the fundamental
challenges facing the NHS, or fund essential improvements to services that are
flagging.”

The NHS is facing severe financial pressures, with trusts across the country
spending more than they’re bringing in. The NHS was also asked several years
ago to find £22 billion in savings by 2020, in order to keep up with rising
demand and an ageing population.

Health experts from the Nuffield Trust, Health Foundation and King’s Fund say
tight spending in recent years and increasing demand for services have been
“taking a mounting toll on patient care”. They add that there is “growing
evidence that access to some treatments is being rationed and that quality of
care in some services is being diluted.”

The £20 billion of additional funding for the NHS in England will be spread
out over the five years to 2023/24. This means an average increase on the
NHS’s budget of around 3.4% a year, taking inflation into account.

When this increase is considered in the context of the whole Department of
Health budget, the Nuffield Trust think tank has said that this is increase is
more likely to be around 3% a year.

## The NHS faced a £20 billion funding gap by 2020

In 2013, NHS England said it faced a funding gap of £30 billion by the end of
the decade, even if government spending kept up in line with inflation. So it
needed that much more to deliver care to a growing and ageing population,
assuming it made no savings itself.

A year later the NHS laid out plans for how it might handle this gap. One
ambitious option was that the NHS itself would find £22 billion in savings,
leaving the other £8 billion to be filled by the government.

The Conservatives said in their 2015 election manifesto they would provide
that £8 billion in government, and expect the other £22 billion in savings
from the NHS. The Nuffield Trust, writing in our election report, said this
still left unanswered questions on funding:

“£8bn is the bare minimum to maintain existing standards of care for a growing
and ageing population …

“improving productivity on this scale [£22 billion] would be unprecedented”

The new Conservative government followed through on the commitment and started
claiming it was giving £10 billion, giving the NHS what it asked for, and
more.

In their 2017 election manifesto, the Conservatives said they would increase
NHS spending by at least £8 billion in real terms over the next five years,
and increase funding per head of the population for the duration of the
parliament.

Last year the think tanks said there would be a £4 billion gap in health
spending in 2018/19 alone, but the £1.9 billion provided by the government at
the end of last year meant that “around half of the minimum gap we calculated
has been filled.”

They said even based on the government’s current spending plans there is
likely to be a spending gap of over £20 billion by 2022/23.

To mark the 70th birthday of the NHS in 2018 the Prime Minister has announced
that funding for the NHS in England would be increased by £20.5 billion by
2023/24, or by an average of 3.4% per year.

This has been welcomed by the think tanks and others like the Institute for
Fiscal Studies (IFS), who have said that the money will allow the NHS to “help
stem further decline in the health service”. But they’ve said that increases
of at least 4% a year on average are needed in order to meet the NHS’s needs
and see any improvement in its services.

## It’s unclear what this means for other areas of health spending

The think tanks and IFS have also said it is “worrying” and “unclear” what the
£20 billion funding announcement will mean for other areas like public health.

We’ve written more about this here.

Before the announcement public health spending was expected to fall up to
2020/21 and spending on social care was also set to fall short of what experts
think is needed.

In her announcement of extra funding for the NHS on its 70th birthday, the
Prime Minister also said that budgets for social care and public health would
be put forward at the next Spending Review. She said these areas needed to be
supported “both for the benefits they bring in themselves and to relieve
pressure on NHS care.”

## NHS providers are in deficit

About 44 % of NHS trusts—which provide secondary care to patients who’ve been
referred there by a GP—were in the red in 2017/18. The figure was 65% just
among acute hospital trusts—which make up the bulk of NHS trusts across
England.

Collectively they finished 2017/18 with a deficit of around £960 million.

The size of the deficit has risen since the year before—in 2016/17 the overall
deficit was just under £800 million. But it’s lower than in 2015/16 when the
deficit was £2.5 billion.

The Nuffield Trust has said that a large amount of the decrease in the deficit
in 2016/17 came from one-off savings, accounting adjustments and £1.8 billion
in sustainability funding—money from the Department of Health to help trusts
plan for the future. Without these funds the Nuffield Trust says that NHS
trusts deficit would have been at £3.7 billion.

By contrast the Department of Health underspent overall in 2016/17 by £560
million. Figures for 2017/18 haven’t yet been published.

## UK-wide spending has been rising long-term, but more slowly in recent years

Looking at the wider UK, the amount spent on health has been increasing over
the long-term. That’s true whether it’s expressed in cash, cash adjusted for
inflation, per person, or as a proportion of the size of the economy. All
those trends show spending stalling or falling slightly in the years after
2010/11—at the same time as most other departments saw reductions in
spending—and picking up again in more recent years.

Health spending grew at an average annual rate of about 3.7% from 1950/51 up
to 2016/17, accounting for inflation. Public spending on health usually
increases year on year, and there are only a handful of times in the last 60
years when it hasn’t.![](/media/uploads/FINAL_5y_average_1950_onwards.PNG)We
can also look at the level of UK health spending year on year when successive
governments were in office. Health spending is devolved so the UK government
is only responsible for health spending in England (though changes in health
spending may affect the overall budgets of the devolved
governments).![](/media/uploads/FINAL_govt_average_1979_onwards.PNG)The
average growth between 2009/10 and 2014/15 under the Coalition government was
1.1% and since then under the Conservative government has been 2.3%.

At the moment, UK public health spending is the equivalent of about 7% of GDP,
similar to what it was back in 2010 and higher than in previous years. Back in
1955, it was worth about 3% of GDP.

Demand for health services has also increased over time. Adjusting the same
figures above to account for the population, the average annual growth in per
person spending between 1949/50 and 2016/17 was about 3.3%, and was 0.6% since
2009/10.

## Full Fact wants to see greater accountability for public figures who

mislead us—and we need your help.

Political debate in the UK is in flux right now. The UK’s exit from the
European Union is approaching, we will soon have a new prime minister and
potentially a general election.

We want politicians to tell the truth, and while the best politicians realise
that their work should be done honestly, some aren't taking their
responsibilities seriously. Both sides in the EU referendum campaign let
voters down, from deceptively designed leaflets to some of the arguments made
on each side. The public rightly expects more from politicians.

We want to see greater accountability for public figures who mislead. Full
Fact will continue to advocate for higher standards and call out those who
don't uphold them.

But we rely on the generosity of our supporters to make sure we can spot the
most harmful misinformation when we most need to.

Can you help us?

Support better public debate today.

By Full Fact Team

* * *

### Related posts:

  * Mental health spending in the English NHS
  * Is £84 billion being spent on the NHS?
  * How much of the NHS budget is spent on people over 85?
  * Does the ‘Brexit dividend’ exist?
  * What is the NHS paying for Private Finance Initiatives?
  * Global health spending: how does the UK compare?
  * The government has misquoted the head of NHS England on spending plans
  * Is the government’s £10bn NHS funding commitment more than NHS leaders asked for?
  * Can a "seven-day NHS" be paid for?
  * What is a "seven-day NHS"?
  * Would leaving the EU cost the NHS?

Published: 21st Jun 2018

![](/static/img/social/facebook-logo.svg)

Share

![](/static/img/social/twitter.svg)

Tweet

### NHS explainers

  * What is the NHS? 
  * What is the NHS budget? 
  * How many NHS employees are there? 
  * Is the NHS in crisis? 
  * Spending on the NHS in England 

We aim for our factchecks to be as accurate and up-to-date as possible. If you
think we've made an error or missed some relevant information, please email
team@fullfact.org.

**Get Your Facts Straight**

Join the mailing list

![](/static/img/social/twitter-outline-sm.png)

Tweet

![](/static/img/social/facebook-outline-sm.png)

Share

#### **Inside Full Fact**

  * ##### **Independence**

We're independent of government, political parties and the media. We've been
quoted by politicians on all sides and corrected people on all sides.

  * ##### **Neutrality**

We don’t support any view or political party and have rigorous safeguards in
place at every level of our organisation to protect our neutrality.

  * ##### **Funding**

We rely mainly on donations from people like you and from charitable trusts. A
wide range of funders helps us maintain independence.

  * About Full Fact

### Full Fact is the UK's independent

factchecking charity.

We provide free tools, information and advice so that anyone  
can check the claims we hear from politicians and the media.

Thanks to **Bytemark** for donating our web hosting, and **Alamy** for
providing stock photos.

A registered charity (no. 1158683) and a non-profit company (no. 6975984)
limited by guarantee and registered in England and Wales. © Copyright 2010 -
2019 Full Fact.

**Privacy, terms and conditions**.

### Get In Touch

team@fullfact.org

020 3397 5140

2 Carlton Gardens, London, SW1Y 5AA

  * Twitter
  * LinkedIn
  * Facebook

![Full Fact](/static/img/logo.png)

Thanks to **Bytemark** for donating our web hosting, and Alamy for providing
stock photos.

A registered charity (no. 1158683) and a non-profit company (no. 6975984)
limited by guarantee and registered in England and Wales. © Copyright 2010 -
2019 Full Fact.

**Privacy, terms and conditions**.

Back to top

![Full Fact](/static/img/logo.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

