

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

  * Comments & replies 
  * Public profile 
  * Account details 
  * Emails & marketing 

* * *

  * Membership 
  * Contributions 
  * Subscriptions 

* * *

  * Sign out 

Search

  * switch to the International edition 
  * switch to the UK edition 
  * switch to the US edition 
  * switch to the Australia edition 

current edition: International edition

  * News 
  * Opinion 
  * Sport 
  * Culture 
  * Lifestyle 

Show More __

  * __News
    * World news 
    * UK news 
    * Science 
    * Cities 
    * Global development 
    * Football 
    * Tech 
    * Business 
    * Environment 
    * Obituaries 
  * __Opinion
    * The Guardian view 
    * Columnists 
    * Cartoons 
    * Opinion videos 
    * Letters 
  * __Sport
    * Football 
    * Cricket 
    * Rugby union 
    * Tennis 
    * Cycling 
    * F1 
    * Golf 
    * US sports 
  * __Culture
    * Books 
    * Music 
    * TV & radio 
    * Art & design 
    * Film 
    * Games 
    * Classical 
    * Stage 
  * __Lifestyle
    * Fashion 
    * Food 
    * Recipes 
    * Love & sex 
    * Health & fitness 
    * Home & garden 
    * Women 
    * Men 
    * Family 
    * Travel 
    * Money 

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

  * Make a contribution 
  * Subscribe 

  * __International edition

    * switch to the UK edition 
    * switch to the US edition 
    * switch to the Australia edition 
  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 
  * The Guardian app 
  * Video 
  * Podcasts 
  * Pictures 
  * Newsletters 
  * Today's paper 
  * Inside the Guardian 
  * The Observer 
  * Guardian Weekly 
  * Crosswords 
  * Facebook 
  * Twitter 

  * Search jobs 

  * Dating 
  * Holidays 
  * Digital Archive 
  * Discount Codes 

  * UK 

  * UK politics 
  * Education 
  * Media 
  * Society 
  * Law 
  * Scotland 
  * Wales 
  * Northern Ireland 

More

NHS

This article is more than **7 years old**

# NHS waiting times increase for diagnostic tests

This article is more than **7 years old**

Growing number of patients not receiving tests such as x-rays and scans within
recommended six weeks, figures show

Denis Campbell and James Ball

Wed 5 Oct 2011 12.22 BST First published on Wed 5 Oct 2011 12.22 BST

  * Share on Facebook
  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email

![X-ray of hands](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-

images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2011/10/5/1317813406557/X-ray-of-

hands-007.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=21dca73301278e2f2c31b4192ff76b83)

NHS waiting times for diagnostic tests such as x-rays and ultrasound scans
have increased, despite a government pledge to keep waiting times low.
Photograph: Corbis

A growing number of patients are not receiving a diagnostic test such as an
x-ray or ultrasound scan within the NHS's recommended six-week waiting time,
official figures show.

The tests, which detect conditions such as cancer and heart problems, are
regarded as vital by doctors, and are one of the most politically sensitive of
the health service's waiting time targets.

David Cameron and the health secretary, Andrew Lansley, have repeatedly
pledged to keep all NHS waiting times low, despite the service facing rising
demand and a financial squeeze. The numbers of patients waiting longer than
recommended to be treated in hospital after referral by their GP has risen as
well.

Monthly performance data released on Wednesday by the Department of Health
(DH) for August shows that more people in England are not receiving one or
more of 15 key diagnostic tests undertaken by the NHS within six weeks. At the
end of August, 11,400 patients had been waiting longer than six weeks. That
was up by 700 from the previous month and by 5,500 on the same month last
year.

Some 11,119 people had been waiting more than six weeks for a diagnostic test
at an NHS hospital, compared with 5,795 a year ago – an increase of 92%. (The
281 others of the 11,400 were waiting to have an NHS-funded test at a private
clinic.) In addition, those waiting more than 13 weeks for such a test is
1,272 compared with 198 a year ago – a sixfold rise. Overall, 2.1% of people
are waiting more than six weeks, compared with 1.1% a year ago.

The biggest rises came in the numbers of those waiting for colonoscopy,
flexible sigmoidoscopy and urodynamics, in which 8.2%, 6.7% and 6.7% of
patients respectively were waiting more than six weeks. A year ago only 3% of
colonoscopy patients waited six weeks or more for their test, 1.9% of flexi-
sig, and 4.0% of urodynamics.

The British Medical Association said longer waits would be difficult for
patients. "It is concerning that there have been a noticeable increase in the
number of patients waiting beyond the recommended six weeks for a diagnostic
test. Longer waiting times cause stress for the patient concerned and have
knock-on effects for wider clinical care in the NHS," said a spokesman for the
doctors' union.

He added: "The government's demand for £20bn-worth of efficiency savings are
presenting an enormous challenge to all areas of the NHS. Managers must work
closely with healthcare professionals to produce innovative ways of
maintaining high quality care while delivering services efficiently."

John Healey, the shadow health secretary, said: "This is yet more evidence
that patients suffering long waiting times for tests for cancer and other
serious conditions is continuing to double under David Cameron. Even more
worryingly, the number of people still waiting at 13 weeks is once again up by
six times what it was a year ago."

The DH insisted that diagnostic waiting times remain stable and said the
figures were skewed by the poor performance of a handful of hospital trusts.
"This increase needs to be seen in context, including the rising pressures on
the NHS. Of the patients waiting at the end of August 2011, 98% had been
waiting under six weeks, and the average [median] waiting time was just 2.0
weeks. Waiting times are stable, despite rising demand," said a spokesman.

"We know that there are about five trusts responsible for around a third of
all over six-week waits. We are currently discussing performance with [NHS
regional] strategic health authorities to ensure that action is being taken to
reduce these waits quickly."

Of the patients waiting at the end of August 2011, 98.0% had been waiting less
than six weeks, compared with 98.2% in July 2011, and 98.9% in August 2010,
the DH said.

The Royal College of Radiologists, the professional body that represents NHS
radiologists, recently warned that "waiting times for diagnostic imaging tests
are showing a worrying trend upward. However, this has to be considered in the
context of an annual increase in demand for imaging, which is growing at 5%
per annum with a total growth over the last 10 years of 140%, according to DH
data."

A spokesman said: "The RCR sees little realistic prospect of increasing the
radiology workforce to meet rising demand over the next few years."

Topics

  * NHS 

  * Health 

  * news 

  * Share on Facebook

  * Share on Twitter
  * Share via Email
  * Share on LinkedIn
  * Share on Pinterest
  * Share on WhatsApp
  * Share on Messenger

  * Reuse this content

## View all comments >

Order by

  * newest
  * oldest
  * recommendations

Show 25

  * 25
  * 50
  * 100
  * All

Threads

  * collapsed
  * expanded
  * unthreaded

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## Most popular

  * UK 
  * UK politics 
  * Education 
  * Media 
  * Society 
  * Law 
  * Scotland 
  * Wales 
  * Northern Ireland 

  * Contact us

  * Complaints & corrections
  * SecureDrop
  * Work for us
  * Privacy policy
  * Cookie policy
  * Terms & conditions
  * Help

  * All topics

  * All writers
  * Digital newspaper archive
  * Facebook
  * Twitter

  * Advertise with us

  * Search UK jobs
  * Dating
  * Discount Codes

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=NHS%2CHealth%2CSociety%2CUK+news)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

