

for a free consultation, call 727.321.0099

![Scott and Fenderson, Attorney at Law](/images/stories/logo.png)

  * Welcome
  * About

    * About Scott and Fenderson PLLC
    * Mission Statement
    * Causes and Community Involvement
    * Scott and Fenderson in the News
    * Press Kit
    * Books & Publications
    * See Our Results
  * Practice Areas

    * Personal Injury
    * Car Accidents
    * Slip and Fall
    * Premises Liability
    * Motorcycle Accidents
    * Drunk Driving Accidents
    * DUI Defense
    * Brain Injury & Trauma

    * Truck Accidents

    * Wrongful Death
    * Industrial & Fork Lift Accidents
    * Dog Bites & Animal Attacks
    * Divorce & Family Law
    * Document Preparation Services
    * Estate Planning
  * Attorney Profiles

    * Charles D. Scott, Esq
    * Kathryn Fenderson Scott, Esq
  * Client Services

    * Reference Library
    * Should I consider female divorce attorneys?
    * How quickly after an injury should I file suit?
    * Independent Medical Examinations
    * Understanding Your Deposition
    * Personal Injury Protection Insurance, Rights and Benefits
    * About Your Property Damage
    * Subrogation Liens
    * Examination Under Oath
    * Communications With Others
    * Diagnosing Your Injuries
    * All About UM
    * Bicycle Accidents
    * Family Law Mediation
    * The Divorce Process - Florida Divorce Attorneys
    * Personal Injury Mediation
    * Your Appearance In Court

    * Letter of Protection

    * Preserving Evidence
    * Why Hire A Personal Injury Attorney?
    * How Bankruptcy Effects Personal Injury
    * Incorporating A Small Business
    * Personal Injury Lawyers and Auto Accident Cases
    * Settle or Go To Trial?
    * Child Custody Representation
    * Child Support Representation
    * Alimony Representation
    * Visitation Representation
    * Domestic Violence Injunctions
    * Pre-marital Agreements
    * Same Sex Divorce
    * DOR Child Support
    * Temporary Issues
  * Consumer Information

    * Choosing A Personal Injury Attorney
    * Car Insurance Tips
    * Choosing An Experienced Accident Lawyer
    * Personal Attention for Personal Injuries
    * Involved In An Accident?
    * Insurance Information
    * 10 Myths About Auto Accidents
    * Common UM Misconceptions
    * Why Not To Use Advanced Settlement
    * St. Petersburg Info
    * Clearwater Info
    * Tampa Info
    * Treasure Island Info
    * Pinellas Park Info
    * Kenneth City
    * Madeira Beach Info
    * Palmetto Information

    * Redington Beach Info

    * South Pasadena Info
    * When an Accident Occurs in Clearwater
    * Bradenton Information
    * Largo Information
    * Indian Shores Info
    * South Tampa Information
    * Memphis Information
    * Seminole Information
    * Disston Heights Information
    * Brandon Information
    * Town and Country Information
    * St. Pete Beach Info
    * Lakewood Ranch Info
    * Ellenton Info
    * What is my case worth?
    * Dating After Divorce
  * Connect

    * Video Center
    * Scott and Fenderson Blog
    * DUI Blog
    * Google Plus
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Linked In
  * Resources

    * Links
    * Statutes and Laws
    * Court Information
    * Legal Dictionary
    * Family Law Glossary of Terms
  * Contact Us

    * Case Evaluation Form
    * St. Petersburg Office
    * Seminole Office

# Settle or Go To Trial?

# Should I Settle, or File Suit in My Car Accident Case?

Often you hear personal injury lawyers advertising that they don’t settle
their cases, they take their cases to trial. The advertiser then concludes
that the insurance companies surely know which lawyers take cases to trial and
which ones settle, and that somehow makes a difference in the way the
insurance company is going to treat the lawyer handling your case. It implies
that the insurance company is afraid of lawyers that file suit and will surely
cave in and give that lawyer anything they ask for. There are two fallacies in
this logic, first that the insurance companies know which lawyers try cases
and which lawyers settle, and second that the insurance companies care or will
treat one law firm differently. Insurance companies most definitely do not
make their settlement offers based upon whom is representing the plaintiff,
rather offers are made based upon the facts of the case and nature and
severity of injury suffered by the plaintiff.

### FIRST THE STATISTICS

Four percent to five percent of the personal injury cases in the United States
go to trial. 95 percent to 96 percent of personal injury cases are settled
pretrial. (Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,
Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, Federal Tort Trials and Verdicts). In
addition another statistic that many experts report is that 90 percent of the
cases that do go to trial end up losing.

These statistics contradict the claims by lawyers advertising they that file
suit and they don’t just settle cases, when 95 percent of personal injury
cases are settled and 5 percent actually make it to trial. Further those
lawyers making such boastful claims are actually contradicting themselves,
because they imply that the insurance company fearing the lawyers history of
taking cases to trial, will make a better settlement offer, but wouldn’t that
lawyer then accept the great settlement instead of taking it to trial?.

# WHY DO MOST INJURY CASES SETTLE?

Taking an auto accident injury claim to court is a lengthy process. Once you
file a personal injury lawsuit, it could take a year, or even years, until the
date of the trial. While the case is pending, your attorney and the other
drivers insurance company’s attorney will engage in a process called
discovery. Discovery is the period in which the accident is researched by the
obtaining of documents and witness accounts, and by other information-
gathering. Both sides are required to share with the other what they have
learned in discovery. It is common practice for defense attorneys to try to
wear down a plaintiff, the person who brought the suit, during discovery. This
could be accomplished by requiring the sharing of mountains of information to
overwhelm you or by examining your personal affairs you may not want publicly
disclosed at trial. Often discovery becomes very intrusive and may require the
plaintiff to produce medical records going back many years. Further defense
attorneys will go to great lengths to discredit you, even conducting
surveillance of you when you are unaware you are being followed or video
taped. Even if your are successful in proving at trial that the other drivers
negligence caused the accident, and your injuries, with various post-trial
motions and a possible appeal, it could still be a very long time before you
actually receive your award. Litigation itself is stressful. If you take your
case to trial, the other drivers insurance company’s attorney will put you on
the witness stand, and work very diligently at discrediting you and your case
in front of a jury.

Litigation is also expensive. Most personal injury attorneys work on a
contingency basis, which means that they will collect their payment as a
percentage of your award. This is also true with settlements. However there
are significant costs associated with a personal injury trial such as
deposition costs, and witness fees, all of which can substantially eat up any
jury verdict you might achieve because the attorney is entitled to recover
costs he expended on the trial.

In addition there are certain financial risks that plaintiff’s face if you
chose to file suit. When suit is filed and an answer is served, the attorneys
fees increase from one third of the recovery to 40% of the recovery. Any
verdict obtained in court will be offset by your PIP coverage. In other words,
if you obtained a verdict of $50,000.00, that amount would be offset by your
**PIP coverage** so that the judgment would be $40,000.00.

There will also be expert fees and costs associated with the trial of your
case. Below is a sample disbursement summary of the same amount at both a pre-
suit (settlement) and a litigation (trial) situation:

Settlement

|

$30,000.00

|

Trial Verdict

|

$30,000.00

---|---|---|--- 

PIP Set Off

|

$0

|

PIP Set off

|

$10,000.00

Medical Bills

|

$5,000.00

|

Medical Bills

|

$5,000.00

Presuit Costs

|

$500.00

|

Presuit costs

|

$500.00

Suit costs

|

$0

|

Suit costs

|

$20,000.00

Attorney Fees

|

$10,000.00

|

Attorney Fees

|

$12,000.00

Net to Plaintiff

|

$14,500.00

|

Net to Plaintiff

|

-$17,500 (loss) 

Using the above example, if you achieve a settlement of $30,000.00 after
payment of medical bills, fees and costs, the plaintiff would net about
$14,500.00. If the same $30,000.00 represented a verdict in trial, the
plaintiff would end up with a net loss of $17,000.00. In order to net the same
amount at trial the verdict would have to be $80,000.00 to net as much as a
pre suit settlement of $30,000.00.

## RISK OF DEFENSE ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS

Another consideration is exposure with respect to the attorneys fees and costs
incurred by the defendant. When a suit is filed the plaintiff runs the risk
that he could be responsible for the other side's attorney's fees and costs
and for his own attorney's costs. So, it is important to think about these
risks when you are considering what type of settlement you would be willing to
accept. Florida courts have developed a system designed to facilitate
settlement known as an Offer of Judgment. The Offer of Judgement is explained
in Florida Statutes 768.79 which states as follows: "768.79 Offer of judgment
and demand for judgment.—(1) In any civil action for damages filed in the
courts of this state, if a defendant files an offer of judgment which is not
accepted by the plaintiff within 30 days, the defendant shall be entitled to
recover reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred by her or him or on the
defendant’s behalf pursuant to a policy of liability insurance or other
contract from the date of filing of the offer if the judgment is one of no
liability or the judgment obtained by the plaintiff is at least 25 percent
less than such offer, and the court shall set off such costs and attorney’s
fees against the award. Where such costs and attorney’s fees total more than
the judgment, the court shall enter judgment for the defendant against the
plaintiff for the amount of the costs and fees, less the amount of the
plaintiff’s award".

Therefore if the plaintiff fails to "beat" the defendants offer of judgement,
the defendants could then be entitled to attorney fees and costs from the
plaintiff. In plain English if you loose at trial, you might end up paying the
defense attorneys fees and costs, even though you were the one injured.

### THRESHOLD INJURIES

In a trial, sometimes, absent surgery, there is a very real chance of a
defense verdict on the issue of threshold injuries. "Threshold injuries" means
that in Florida if you wish to recover more than just your medical bills, you
must meet a threshold being that you must have a doctor state within a
reasonable degree of medical certainty that you have suffered a permanent
injury or a significant loss of a bodily function. In some cases, even if a
doctor, or doctors, have made those statements, the jury can still find that
the injuries have not met the threshold and can find against the plaintiff and
for the defendant meaning that the plaintiff would make no recovery and may
actually end up owing the other side's attorney's fees and costs. This is
codified in Florida Statute 627.737 (2) which states as follows: "In any
action of tort brought against the owner, registrant, operator, or occupant of
a motor vehicle with respect to which security has been provided as required
by ss. 627.730-627.7405, or against any person or organization legally
responsible for her or his acts or omissions, a plaintiff may recover damages
in tort for pain, suffering, mental anguish, and inconvenience because of
bodily injury, sickness, or disease arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation, or use of such motor vehicle only in the event that the injury or
disease consists in whole or in part of: (a) Significant and permanent loss of
an important bodily function. (b) Permanent injury within a reasonable degree
of medical probability, other than scarring or disfigurement. (c) Significant
and permanent scarring or disfigurement. (d) Death."

In a recent study of civil lawsuits, they found that most of the plaintiffs
who decided to pass up a settlement offer and went to trial ended up getting
less money than if they had taken that offer. The lesson for plaintiffs is, in
the vast majority of cases, they are perceiving the defendant’s offer to be
half a loaf when in fact it is an entire loaf or more," said Randall L. Kiser,
a co-author of the study and principal analyst at DecisionSet, a consulting
firm that advises clients on litigation decisions. Defendants made the wrong
decision by proceeding to trial far less often, in 24 percent of cases,
according to the study; plaintiffs were wrong in 61 percent of cases. In just
15 percent of cases, both sides were right to go to trial — meaning that the
defendant paid less than the plaintiff had wanted but the plaintiff got more
than the defendant had offered.

The findings suggest that lawyers may not be explaining the odds to their
clients — or that clients are not listening to their lawyers. "Most clients
think they are completely right," Michael Shepard, a lawyer at Heller Ehrman
in San Francisco. A good lawyer has to be able to tell clients that a judge or
jury might see them differently, he continued. "Part of it is judgment and
part of it is diplomacy."

### Related Articles

Your First Meeting with your St. Petersburg Car Accident Lawyer  
The Best Reason to Hire A Car Accident Lawyer  
Florida's Attorney and Doctor Referral Services are in for a Big Change  
New PIP Laws in Florida Take Effect  
PIP Changes May Not Lower Bills for Florida Drivers  
Personal Injury Lawyers and Auto Accident Cases  
The Easiest Way to Get a Good Personal Injury Lawyer in St. Pete  
Selecting a Trustworthy Attorney in St. Pete, FL

**Share This Article**

![nofee](/images/stories/headers/nofee.jpg)

SEE OUR RESULTS

### See What Our Clients Think

Write a review

![Danita

Thompson](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-Vl0kEaCwfhM/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAAA/ACHi3rdG7OYS9t6IcPimENvo4c2ezarUeQ/s100-c0x00000000-cc-

rp-mo/photo.jpg)

Danita Thompson

★★★★★

★★★★★

5 out of 5 stars

  * posted a month ago

I've dealt with them both for years and when referred people to them. I like
this firm the most.

![Dr. Martin K Blankenship DC

PA](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-GysUFxgkwvo/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAABxA/cDLd8GNokLo/s100-c0x00000000-cc-

rp-mo-ba4/photo.jpg)

Dr. Martin K Blankenship DC PA

★★★★★

★★★★★

5 out of 5 stars

  * posted 10 months ago

We have a number of patients that have hired Scott & Fenderson after being
involved in a Motor Vehicle Accident. All the feedback has been wonderful....

![Kimberly

Ready](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-w5AU91ZhxYk/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAAA/ACHi3rfLGxby_xBY6bjUsPTck6g_IDqs_w/s100-c0x00000000-cc-

rp-mo-ba3/photo.jpg)

Kimberly Ready

★★★★★

★★★★★

5 out of 5 stars

  * posted 6 months ago

Very nice and they explain how the process works. Highly recommend.

![Toni

Me](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-LrDtKHq53KY/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAAAA/ACHi3rf8gU7xZhRhvrUdZxF2-gJ5yV6FEw/s100-c0x00000000-cc-

rp-mo/photo.jpg)

Toni Me

★★★★★

★★★★★

5 out of 5 stars

  * posted 8 months ago

Thank you Thank you. I was referred to Scott & Fenderson by co-worker 2 days
after an automobile accidentI March 2018. I was T-boned by a...

![m

zamora](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-_eWYyrN_6lc/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAANw/YAheIaARD8U/s100-c0x00000000-cc-

rp-mo/photo.jpg)

m zamora

★★★★★

★★★★★

5 out of 5 stars

  * posted 12 months ago

I referred a matter to Charles and he handled it from start to finish with
professionalism and real advocacy. Very Impressive result on a tough case

### Quick Links

  * Blog
  * See Our Results
  * Video Center
  * Florida PIP Laws
  * S&F on YouTube
  * Choosing An Injury Lawyer
  * Scott & Fenderson
  * Join Our Mailing List
  * Client Service Survey
  * Home

![Scott and Fenderson Law](/images/stories/1-800-INJURED.png)

Scott and Fenderson | Florida Accident Injury Attorneys: Charles Scott and
Kathryn Fenderson Scott handle car accidents, all accident and injury cases,
wrongful death, slip and fall, brain injury, and drunk driving accidents. For
a free consultation at our Saint Petersburg Florida office, call 727-321-0099.

![CLICK HERE](/images/stories/clickhere.jpg)

### Contact Scott & Fenderson, PLLC

4755 Central Avenue  
St. Petersburg, FL33713  
P. 727.321.0099  
F.727.321.4499  
MAP TO THIS OFFICE

**Seminole, FL Office**  
Seminole Professional Center  
10823 Seminole Blvd, Suite 2  
SeminoleFL33778  
P. 727.321.0099  
MAP TO THIS OFFICE

SITEMAP | XML SITEMAP

This notice applies to all content on this web site as well as the Florida Law
Blog. The law firm of Scott and Fenderson, PLLC practices law in Florida only,
and only accepts clients for legal matters within the State of Florida. This
web site and the Florida Law Blog are owned and operated by S & F Media LLC.
Visitors to this site should not rely on any information contained within this
site when making legal decisions or handling legal matters. This site does not
constitute legal advice. Always seek the advice of a lawyer before making any
decision or taking any course of action on any legal matter. The hiring of a
lawyer is an important decision that should not be based solely upon
advertisements. Before you decide ask us to send you free written information
on our qualifications and experience.

READ OUR PRIVACY POLICY

This website is owned and operated by S&F Media, LLC

### Legal Notice

This notice applies to all content on this web site as well as the Florida Law
Blog. The law firm of Scott and Fenderson, PLLC practices law in Florida only,
and only accepts clients for legal matters within the State of Florida. This
web site and the Florida Law Blog are owned and operated by S & F Media LLC.
Visitors to this site should not rely on any information contained within this
site when making legal decisions or handling legal matters. This site does not
constitute legal advice. Always seek the advice of a lawyer before making any
decision or taking any course of action on any legal matter. The hiring of a
lawyer is an important decision that should not be based solely upon
advertisements. Before you decide ask us to send you free written information
on our qualifications and experience.

READ OUR PRIVACY POLICY

This website is owned and operated by S&F Media, LLC

### Contact Scott & Fenderson, PLLC

**St. Petersburg, FL Office**  
4755 Central Avenue  
St. Petersburg, FL33713  
P. 727.321.0099  
F.727.321.4499  
MAP TO THIS OFFICE

**![serving stpetersburg since 1993](/images/serving-stpetersburg-

since-1993.jpg)Seminole, FL Office**  
Seminole Professional Center  
10823 Seminole Blvd, Suite 2  
SeminoleFL33778  
P. 727.321.0099  
MAP TO THIS OFFICE

SITEMAP | XML SITEMAP

### Accident Injury Attorneys Serving

  * St. Petersburg & St. Pete Beach
  * Cleawater and Clearwater Beach
  * Tampa Bay
  * Treasure Island
  * Pinellas Park
  * Kenneth City
  * Madeira Beach
  * Redington Beach
  * South Pasadena

### Connect With Us

![Scott and Fenderson on Instagram](/images/icon-ig.png) ![Scott and Fenderson

Videos](/images/stories/icon-yt.png) ![Linkedin](/images/stories/icon-in.png)
![Facebook](/images/stories/icon-f.png) ![Twitter](/images/stories/icon-t.png)
![Blog](/images/stories/icon-b.png)

![“Best](https://proactiveresources.com/images/tampa-badge.jpg)  
**Congratulations to this year's honored business!**  
Featured in the _Tampa Bay Times_.  
Click here to view my profile  >>

  * Welcome
  * About
    * About Scott and Fenderson PLLC
    * Mission Statement
    * Causes and Community Involvement
    * Scott and Fenderson in the News
    * Press Kit
    * Books & Publications
    * See Our Results
  * Practice Areas
    * Personal Injury
    * Car Accidents
    * Slip and Fall
    * Premises Liability
    * Motorcycle Accidents
    * Drunk Driving Accidents
    * DUI Defense
    * Brain Injury & Trauma
    * Truck Accidents
    * Wrongful Death
    * Industrial & Fork Lift Accidents
    * Dog Bites & Animal Attacks
    * Divorce & Family Law
    * Document Preparation Services
    * Estate Planning
  * Attorney Profiles
    * Charles D. Scott, Esq
    * Kathryn Fenderson Scott, Esq
  * Client Services
    * Reference Library
    * Should I consider female divorce attorneys?
    * How quickly after an injury should I file suit?
    * Independent Medical Examinations
    * Understanding Your Deposition
    * Personal Injury Protection Insurance, Rights and Benefits
    * About Your Property Damage
    * Subrogation Liens
    * Examination Under Oath
    * Communications With Others
    * Diagnosing Your Injuries
    * All About UM
    * Bicycle Accidents
    * Family Law Mediation
    * The Divorce Process - Florida Divorce Attorneys
    * Personal Injury Mediation
    * Your Appearance In Court
    * Letter of Protection
    * Preserving Evidence
    * Why Hire A Personal Injury Attorney?
    * How Bankruptcy Effects Personal Injury
    * Incorporating A Small Business
    * Personal Injury Lawyers and Auto Accident Cases
    * Settle or Go To Trial?
    * Child Custody Representation
    * Child Support Representation
    * Alimony Representation
    * Visitation Representation
    * Domestic Violence Injunctions
    * Pre-marital Agreements
    * Same Sex Divorce
    * DOR Child Support
    * Temporary Issues
  * Consumer Information
    * Choosing A Personal Injury Attorney
    * Car Insurance Tips
    * Choosing An Experienced Accident Lawyer
    * Personal Attention for Personal Injuries
    * Involved In An Accident?
    * Insurance Information
    * 10 Myths About Auto Accidents
    * Common UM Misconceptions
    * Why Not To Use Advanced Settlement
    * St. Petersburg Info
    * Clearwater Info
    * Tampa Info
    * Treasure Island Info
    * Pinellas Park Info
    * Kenneth City
    * Madeira Beach Info
    * Palmetto Information
    * Redington Beach Info
    * South Pasadena Info
    * When an Accident Occurs in Clearwater
    * Bradenton Information
    * Largo Information
    * Indian Shores Info
    * South Tampa Information
    * Memphis Information
    * Seminole Information
    * Disston Heights Information
    * Brandon Information
    * Town and Country Information
    * St. Pete Beach Info
    * Lakewood Ranch Info
    * Ellenton Info
    * What is my case worth?
    * Dating After Divorce
  * Connect
    * Video Center
    * Scott and Fenderson Blog
    * DUI Blog
    * Google Plus
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Linked In
  * Resources
    * Links
    * Statutes and Laws
    * Court Information
    * Legal Dictionary
    * Family Law Glossary of Terms
  * Contact Us
    * Case Evaluation Form
    * St. Petersburg Office
    * Seminole Office

![click to call](/images/click-to-call.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

