

  * Billionaires 

    * All Billionaires 
    * World's Billionaires 
    * Forbes 400 
    * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
    * China's Richest 
    * India's Richest 
    * Indonesia's Richest 
    * Korea's Richest 
    * Thailand's Richest 
    * Japan's Richest 
    * Australia's Richest 
    * Taiwan's Richest 
    * Singapore's Richest 
    * Philippines' Richest 
    * Hong Kong's Richest 
    * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation 

    * All Innovation 

    * AI & Big Data 
    * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
    * Cloud 100 2018 
    * Consumer Tech 
    * Cybersecurity 
    * Enterprise & Cloud 
    * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
    * Games 
    * Green Tech 
    * Healthcare 
    * Oracle BrandVoice 
    * SAP BrandVoice 
    * Science 
    * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
    * Sharing Economy 
    * Social Media 
    * T-Mobile 
    * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership 

    * All Leadership 

    * Careers 
    * CMO Network 
    * Crowe BrandVoice 
    * Deloitte BrandVoice 
    * Diversity & Inclusion 
    * Education 
    * Entrepreneurs 
    * ForbesWomen 
    * Franchises 
    * Leadership Strategy 
    * Small Business 
    * Under 30 
    * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money 

    * All Money 

    * Banking & Insurance 
    * Crypto & Blockchain 
    * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
    * Fintech 
    * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
    * Investing 
    * Markets 
    * Personal Finance 
    * Retirement 
    * Taxes 
    * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
    * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer 

    * All Consumer 

    * Food & Drink 
    * Hollywood & Entertainment 
    * Media 
    * Real Estate 
    * Retail 
    * SportsMoney 
    * Industry 

    * All Industry 

    * Aerospace & Defense 
    * Energy 
    * Flexport BrandVoice 
    * Manufacturing 
    * Policy 
    * Transportation 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle 

    * All Lifestyle 

    * Arts 
    * Boats & Planes 
    * Capital One BrandVoice 
    * Cars & Bikes 
    * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
    * Dining & Drinking 
    * Forbes Travel Guide 
    * ForbesLife 
    * Watches & Jewelry 
    * Travel 
    * Vices 
    * BrandVoice 

    * AppDynamics 

    * Capital One 
    * Cole Haan 
    * Crowe 
    * Deloitte 
    * ExtraHop 
    * Flexport 
    * Impact Partners 
    * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
    * Oracle 
    * SAP 
    * ServiceNow 
    * T-Mobile 
    * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor 

    * All Advisor 

    * Credit Cards 
    * Personal Loans 
    * Brokerage 
    * Checking Accounts 
    * Savings Accounts 
    * Featured 

    * 30 Under 30 2019 

    * Daily Dozen Briefing 
    * Forbes8 
    * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
    * Forbes Editors' Picks 
    * Forbes Finds 
    * Forbes Insights: AI 
    * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
    * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
    * Forbes Video 
    * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
    * Newsletters 
    * PMI BrandVoice: 3 Ways To Future-Proof Your Business 
    * Tech MD 
    * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work 

# No Budget For More? How To Counter-Negotiate When The Other Party Says They

Can't Pay

![Caroline Ceniza-

Levine](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/144x144/https%3A%2F%2Fblogs-

images.forbes.com%2Fcarolinecenizalevine%2Ffiles%2F2019%2F02%2FCaroline-

Ceniza-Levine_avatar_1549221999-400x400.jpg)

Caroline Ceniza-Levine

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

  * Share to facebook __
  * Share to twitter __
  * Share to linkedin __

Shutterstock

When you tried to negotiate for more money – a raise at your existing
employer, a higher offer at a new employer – did you stop when the employer
said they just can’t pay any more? At a recent negotiation workshop, one
participant insisted that he caved because the prospective employer had no
budget. Another participant decided not to negotiate at all because he heard
his target employer was hiring more junior, less expensive people. In both
cases, the candidate took a constraint for the employer as immutable fact,
when it is never that cut and dry. Even if the other party says they can’t
pay, they still might. Here are four ways to counter the “no budget”
negotiation play:

**There is no "can’t." There is only "won’t." So find out why.**

The other party might sincerely believe there is no budget. They could have no
authority to go higher. They could have pressure from their boss or HR to stay
below a certain amount. However, it doesn’t mean that everyone else in the
company is similarly constrained. Therefore, every time you hear no, find out
why not. Every time you hear “cannot” recognize they are really saying “will
not” – companies absolutely _can_ and do make exceptions, so find out why they
_will_ not make one for you. One of our clients politely asked why the salary
couldn’t be raised and was told that the budget for the year was already
closed. Turns out, it would re-open in six months. Our client negotiated for a
pay adjustment after six months instead of having to wait the full year. It’s
not the same as more money right now, but offering to wait and therefore
remove the company’s constraint to paying more is one way of turning a no into
a yes. Find out what the constraint is, and solve for that.

_**Watch on Forbes:**_

**There is never only one budget.**

Another client was bumping up on the maximum base for her level, and the
company was concerned about pay equity with existing employees. But they were
able to give her a higher share of the performance bonus pool – that was a
separate budget. Other places where employers can add money are the relocation
allowance, equity grants, or expense budgets (e.g., for training or travel).
When the other party says there is no budget, they may only be thinking of the
salary budget or their department’s budget. Encourage them to think more
creatively by asking about other pools of money. Even an open-ended question
like “Is there anything else we can do?” can prompt the company to think more
broadly.

**More money is only one way to get more.**

Unless you’re angling for more money so you can actually hold onto piles of
cash, you’re probably negotiating for what the money will buy you and not the
bills themselves. Depending on what you’re trying to get, the company may be
able to buy it for you, while keeping your salary the same. I have seen salary
packages where school tuition for dependents is included – for example, in an
international relocation situation where the moving family has to enroll in an
international school. If this is already being done for relocations abroad,
could the company cover your dependents’ tuition even if you’re not
relocating, but as extra compensation outside the base salary? Other expenses
a company might cover include graduate education, training and conferences,
and car or other transportation. If you were going to pay for this out of your
salary, having the company pay these expenses essentially gives you more money
without any more money exchanging hands.

Subscribe To The Forbes Careers Newsletter  
Sign up here to get top career advice delivered straight to your inbox every
week.

**This negotiation is only one way to get more money.**

Just as “can’t” really means “won’t” no really means not now. If you try to
counter and you’re not getting anywhere, you may have to accept that the
current answer is no. (This doesn’t mean you have to accept the offer, since
you can still decline, but it does mean you accept that the other party is not
changing their no position and the offer stands unchanged.) If you still
decide to accept the offer, remember that not now means you can ask again
later. The no position, while couched as no budget, might also have been no to
how you asked or no to when you asked (others were also lobbying for a raise
same time). Take a step back and think about what you can change. Then set a
reminder in your calendar to ask again.

Learning how to counter the no budget argument respectfully but firmly is an
important negotiation skill, and not just for job seekers. In an increasingly
contingent workforce, you’ll be negotiating hourly fees, project fees, or a
salary for a temporary role. Entrepreneurs and freelancers also need to be
mindful that multiple budgets exist (more than one department can share a
consultant!), that perks and benefits are available to contingent staff and
can be as valuable as money, or that companies can be quite creative when they
really want and need you. The “no budget” claim is a statement, not a fact.
Don’t let it stop your negotiation prematurely.

Follow me on Twitter or LinkedIn. Check out my website.

![Caroline Ceniza-

Levine](https://thumbor.forbes.com/thumbor/144x144/https%3A%2F%2Fblogs-

images.forbes.com%2Fcarolinecenizalevine%2Ffiles%2F2019%2F02%2FCaroline-

Ceniza-Levine_avatar_1549221999-400x400.jpg)

Caroline Ceniza-Levine

Contributor

After changing careers multiple times myself (classical pianist, banker,
consultant, recruiter, actor, entrepreneur), I now help executives,
entrepreneurs, and creatives...

Read More

  * Print
  * Site Feedback
  * Tips
  * Corrections
  * Reprints & Permissions
  * Terms
  * Privacy

  * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.

  * AdChoices

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

