

Skip navigation

Menu

Menu

![HealthCare.gov](/images/logo.png)

Español Log in

![HealthCare.gov](/images/logo@2x.png)

  * Español
  * Log in

Search

  * Get Coverage
  * Keep or Update Your Plan
  * See Topics
  * Get Answers

Back

  * Enroll in Health Insurance

    * See if you qualify for a Special Enrollment Period
    * Coverage options outside Open Enrollment
    * Marketplace tips
    * Dental coverage
    * Medicaid & CHIP
    * How to apply and enroll
    * Picking a plan
  * Change or Cancel

    * See if you can change plans
    * Report income/family changes
  * Saving Money

    * See if you'll save
    * Save on your premiums
    * Cost-sharing reductions
  * How To...

    * Use your coverage
    * Estimate income
    * Find local help
    * Get login help
    * Submit requested documents
    * Appeal a Marketplace decision
    * Confirm your Special Enrollment Period
    * Pay premium & check coverage status
    * Cancel a plan
  * More Details If You...

    * Just had a baby or adopted
    * Are under 30
    * Have/offered job-based insurance
    * Are self-employed
    * Are unemployed
    * Qualify for Medicare
  * Taxes, Fees & Exemptions

    * Health care & taxes
    * The penalty for not having coverage in 2018 & earlier
    * See if you qualify for a 2018 health coverage exemption
  * Browse all topics >

Back

  * SHOP coverage

    * Why use the SHOP Marketplace?
    * Verify your eligibility for SHOP
    * Small Business Health Insurance Tax Credit
    * How to work with an agent or broker
    * Insurance for multiple locations & businesses
    * Minimum participation rates
    * Appeal a SHOP Marketplace decision
    * Additional resources for employers
  * SHOP Resources & Tools

    * Tools & calculators
    * See SHOP plans & prices
    * Tax credit estimator
    * FTE employee calculator
    * Find Local Help tool
  * SHOP for Agents & Brokers

    * How to register with SHOP
    * How to sell SHOP coverage
    * Additional resources for agents & brokers
  * Other Information for Small Businesses

    * Exploring coverage options for small businesses
    * How to get covered if you're a sole proprietor
    * How the ACA affects small businesses
  * Browse All Topics >

Get Coverage Keep or Update Your Plan

See Topics ****Has subitems

Enroll in Health Insurance

  * See if you qualify for a Special Enrollment Period
  * Coverage options outside Open Enrollment
  * Marketplace tips
  * Dental coverage
  * Medicaid & CHIP
  * How to apply and enroll
  * Picking a plan

Change or Cancel

  * See if you can change plans
  * Report income/family changes

Saving Money

  * See if you'll save
  * Save on your premiums
  * Cost-sharing reductions

How To...

  * Use your coverage
  * Estimate income
  * Find local help
  * Get login help
  * Submit requested documents
  * Appeal a Marketplace decision
  * Confirm your Special Enrollment Period
  * Pay premium & check coverage status
  * Cancel a plan

More Details If You...

  * Just had a baby or adopted
  * Are under 30
  * Have/offered job-based insurance
  * Are self-employed
  * Are unemployed
  * Qualify for Medicare

Taxes, Fees & Exemptions

  * Health care & taxes
  * The penalty for not having coverage in 2018 & earlier
  * See if you qualify for a 2018 health coverage exemption

Browse all topics >

Featured

![](/assets/moving-sep-post-oe5.jpg)

**See if you qualify for a Special Enrollment Period**

2019 Open Enrollment is over, but you may still be able to enroll in 2019
health insurance through a Special Enrollment Period.

Get Answers

Search

### Select an article

  * Common coverage questions
  * Getting prescription medications
  * Getting regular medical care
  * Getting emergency care
  * Using coverage and improving your health
  * Appealing an insurance company decision 

Using your health insurance coverage

Email Print

# Getting emergency care

  * Common coverage questions
  * Getting prescription medications
  * Getting regular medical care
  * Getting emergency care
  * Using coverage and improving your health
  * Appealing an insurance company decision 

In an emergency, you should get care from the closest hospital that can help
you. That hospital will treat you regardless of whether you have insurance.
Your insurance company can't charge you more for getting emergency room
services at an out-of-network hospital.

## I’m having an emergency. Should I go straight to the hospital or do I need

to call my insurer first?

In a true emergency, go straight to the hospital. Insurers can’t require you
to get prior approval before getting emergency room services from a provider
or hospital outside your plan’s network.

## What does it mean that insurance companies can’t charge me more?

Insurance plans can’t make you pay more in copayments or coinsurance if you
get emergency care from an out-of-network hospital. They also can’t require
you to get prior approval before getting emergency room services from a
provider or hospital outside your plan’s network.

## Will I have to pay anything?

This depends on the plan that you chose and the hospital you go to. This care
may be subject to a deductible, for example, or a hospital may have particular
rules in place.

## Footer

* * *

### Resources

  * About the Affordable Care Act
  * Regulatory and Policy Information
  * For Navigators, Assisters & Partners
  * For Agents & Brokers

  * For the Media

  * For Researchers
  * For States
  * Information in other languages

### Connect With Us

  * Questions? Call 1-800-318-2596

  * Find Local Help

  * Visit the HealthCare.gov blog

  * Facebook Twitter YouTube Google+

All Topics | Glossary | Contact Us | Archive

Nondiscrimination / Accessibility | Privacy Policy | Privacy Settings |
Linking Policy | Using This Site | Plain Writing

中文 | Kreyòl | Français | Deutsch | ગુજરાતી | हिंदी | Italiano | 日本語 | 한국어 |
Polski | Português | Русский | Español | Tagalog | tiếng việt |

HHS.gov A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244

  * Whitehouse.gov 
  * USA.gov 

* * *

### Resources

  * About the Affordable Care Act
  * Regulatory and Policy Information
  * For Navigators, Assisters & Partners
  * For Agents & Brokers
  * For the Media
  * For Researchers
  * For States
  * Information in other languages

### Connect With Us

  * Questions? Call 1-800-318-2596

  * Find Local Help

  * Visit the HealthCare.gov blog

  * Facebook Twitter YouTube Google+

All Topics | Glossary | Contact Us | Archive

Nondiscrimination / Accessibility | Privacy Policy | Privacy Settings |
Linking Policy | Using This Site | Plain Writing

* * *

中文 | Kreyòl | Français | Deutsch | ગુજરાતી | हिंदी | Italiano | 日本語 | 한국어 |
Polski | Português | Русский | Español | Tagalog | tiếng việt |

HHS.gov A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244

  * Whitehouse.gov 
  * USA.gov 

Back to top

×

# Sign up for updates & reminders from HealthCare.gov

Subscribe to get email (or text) updates with important deadline reminders,
useful tips, and other information about your health insurance.

## Your information contains error(s):

Please choose a state.

Sorry, that email address is invalid. Sorry, that mobile phone number is
invalid. You need to provide either your email address or mobile phone number.
You need to provide either your email address or mobile phone number. Please
select a topic. Please enter your email address.

Pick your state

Select a state Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut
Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana
Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota
Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New
Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania
Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia
Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa Guam Northern
Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands

Please choose a state.

Get email updates

Sorry, that email address is invalid.

You need to provide either your email address or mobile phone number.

Get text message updates (optional)

Sorry, that mobile phone number is invalid.

You need to provide either your email address or mobile phone number.

What would you like to get updates about?

## Your information contains error(s):

Please select a topic.

Health insurance for individuals & families

Health insurance for small businesses

News & information from the HealthCare.gov blog

Please select a topic.

Now that you’re signed up, we’ll send you deadline reminders, plus tips about
how to get enrolled, stay enrolled, and get the most from your health
insurance.

Privacy policy CLOSE

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

