

![OnTheIssuesLogo](../images/iss_2001.gif) |

# Dennis Kucinich on Health Care

## Democratic Representative (OH-10)

\---|---

Sub-sections under Health Care:

    * Voting Record
    * Other issues under Health Care 

### 2009: Obama presidency at stake with ObamaCare

Obama believed the outcome of health-care reform would profoundly affect the
entirety of his presidency, and most lawmakers in Washington agreed. Pass the
bill and he could become a historic president, generating the momentum to push
more of his ambitious ideas through Congress. Fail and he would appear weak,
even powerless. "Is the Obama presidency at stake here? Yes, it is," said
Congressman Dennis Kucinich, a Democrat from Ohio who had run against Obama in
the 2008 presidential primary. Jim DeMint, a Republican senator from South
Carolina, was even more blunt. "If we're able to stop Obama on this, it will
be his Waterloo," he said. "It will break him."

Obama had made health care reform his top priority during his first year in
office only to watch legislation stall in Congress and nearly die when Scott
Brown, a Massachusetts Republican, won a special election to the Senate in
January and diluted the Democratic majority. Source: Ten Letters, by Eli
Saslow, p. 90-91 , Oct 11, 2011

### Insurance companies make money by NOT providing health care

As long as you have the private insurance companies in involved in providing
health services, people arent going to get care. Doctors know that the
insurance companies want to substitute their judgment for their practice.
Everyone knows that the insurance companies make money not providing health
care. Im standing for Medicare for all. Just because you say its universal
doesnt mean its not-for-profit. Even the insurance companies want a universal
health care system. Source: 2007 Democratic debate at Drexel University , Oct
30, 2007

### Let the US be like every other industrialized democracy

Q: Do you favor universal coverage for everyone without exception, and how
would you pay for it?

A: Well, first of all, Im for a national health-care plan. The whole debate
about universal health care has been a fraud. All these other candidates are
talking about keeping the for-profit insurance companies in charge of health
care in America. Thats not what Im talking about, because these private
insurers make money NOT providing health care. And so, Im saying no more role
for them. Let the United States be like every other industrialized democracy
in having a health-care plan, a national plan where we take care of our
people. And were already paying for it. We spend $2.2 trillion on health
spending, but $600 billion of it goes for the activities of the for-profit
system each year. Im talking about taking that money, putting it to care for
people.

Q: And it would cost how much?

A: It would cost the same amount were spending now, except that all the money
goes into the system. Source: Huffington Post Mash-Up: 2007 Democratic on-
line debate , Sep 13, 2007

### Fake debate if we talk about maintaining present system

Q: Everyone recognizes that there are problems with healthcare, but no one can
fix it. What is the problem?

A: Let me explain something to the people who are here and who are watching.
This debate about health care is a fake debate in this campaign, because all
of these candidates are not telling the American people that what theyre
talking about is maintaining the present system, where you have insurance
companies controlling the system, and you are still stuck with premiums, co-
pays & deductibles Everyone knows that insurance companies make money not
providing health care, and everyone knows that as long as were stuck with this
system, where insurance companies make $600 billion a year out of spending
that ought to go directly into health care, were not going to get the care we
need. Its either health care as a right or health care as a privilege, and I
stand for the people. Source: 2007 Democratic primary debate on Univision in
Spanish , Sep 9, 2007

### FactCheck:Insurance industry profit is under $97B, not $600B

Rep. Dennis Kucinich used a vastly inflated figure for the profits of health
insurers. Kucinich said, Were stuck with this system, where insurance
companies make $600 billion a year out of spending that ought to go directly
into health care, were not going to get the care we need.

In fact, health insurance companies dont make nearly that much. According to
the most recent historical data from the Department of Health and Human
Services National Health Expenditures Accounts, the total of all premiums paid
for private health insurance was $694.4 billion in 2005. But of that total,
$596.7 billion was paid out in benefits. The remainder went to administrative
and net costs, such as claims processing, disease and care management, sales,
marketing, and taxes. These statistics dont break out a figure for profits,
but it would be some fraction of the $97.7 billion that doesnt go to benefits,
and a far cry from $600 billion. Source: FactCheck on 2007 Democratic primary
debate on Univision , Sep 9, 2007

### Challenge system of premiums, co-pays and deductibles

Every other [candidates] health care plan keeps the private insurers in
charge. Im the only one who challenges this system of premiums, co-pays and
deductibles. So lets give the American people a real choice, not a conditioned
choice, based on polls, but a choice thats based on their practical
aspirations for health care for their families, for a not-for-profit system.
We have to break the hold, which the insurance companies and the
pharmaceutical companies have on health care. Source: 2007 Democratic primary
debate on This Week , Aug 19, 2007

### Medicare For All: all long-term care totally covered

Under my plan for not-for-profit health care, system, single payer, universal,
Medicare for all, long-term care is totally covered. People should not be
locked into these higher premiums, co-pays and deductibles, which are
destroying peoples economic capabilities. So under the plan that I have, if
someone has AIDS, theyre totally covered. Under the plan that I have, if
anyone needs long-term care for any kind of an illnesses, theyre totally
covered. And the fact of the matter is, we already are paying for a universal
standard of care; were just not getting it.

Other candidates are talking about maintaining this for-profit health care
system, and anyone who has ever had a loved one who has needed medical care
and couldnt get it because they didnt have the money understands the urgency
of having someone not just in the race but in the White House whos ready to
rally the American people in the cause of not-for-profit health care, Medicare
for all. And Im doing that. Source: 2007 HRC/LOGO debate on gay issues , Aug
9, 2007

### Healthcare access is a basic right in a democratic society

We have a nation of such wealth, yet we have 46 million Americans without any
health insurance, another 50 million underinsured. Its time for us to make
every American know that they should have access. It is a basic right in a
democratic society. We should be able to fund all those diseases where people
are suffering, but we have to end for-profit medicine. It is time to take the
for-profit insurance companies out of the business and have a not-for-profit
health care where everyones covered. Source: 2007 Democratic Primary Debate at
Howard University , Jun 28, 2007

### Half of all bankruptcies come from medical bills

Half the bankruptcies in the country connected to people not being able to pay
their doctor bills or hospital bills, premiums, co-pays and deductibles going
so far through the roof -- 46 million Americans, no health care; another 50
million underinsured, there is only one way to get health care coverage for
all Americans, and that is to have a universal single-payer, not-for-profit
healthcare system, Medicare for All. Ive written the bill with John Conyers,
supported by 14,000 physicians. Source: 2007 Dem. debate at Saint Anselm
College , Jun 3, 2007

### Universal not-for-profit health care

Q: What are you planning to do to help Americans have affordable health care
premiums?

A: The problem with our health care system--premiums, co-pays and deductibles
which for-profit insurance companies run through the roof. Im the cosponsor of
the Conyers-Kucinich bill, H.R. 676, provides for universal, not-for-profit
health care, takes that $2.2 trillion and puts it all into health care for
people. We are already paying for a universal system of health care. Were just
not getting it. Source: 2007 South Carolina Democratic primary debate, on
MSNBC , Apr 26, 2007

### Break the hold of the insurance companies

Q: People say the consequence of trying to contain cost in a single-payer
system would ultimately be rationing.

A: The insurance companies, when they look at a single-payer not-for-profit
system, theyll say, my God, rationing. What do we have now? 46 million
Americans dont even have coverage. Talk about rationing. Theyre not even in
the line! Another 50 million people are underinsured and the rest are paying
these high premiums, co-pays and deductibles. Weve got to break the hold the
insurance companies have. And their public relations operations would say,
well, rationing. The fact of the matter is this plan Im talking about covers
everyone. How do you reduce costs? Lets look at the costs that are involved in
the system rights now. Corporate profits, stock options, executive salaries,
advertising, marketing, the cost of paperwork. All this takes about 31% out of
the health care dollar. Now, what does all that have to do with health care?
Zero, zip, nada. Source: SEIU Democratic Health Care Forum in Las Vegas , Mar
24, 2007

### Competition between insurers only drives up profits

If you have competition between insurance companies, everyone knows what
happens. That doesnt drive down costs, it drives up profits. Thats a fact. If
you say, well, youre going to give people a choice, either be on a private
plan or be with the government, what happens is that the private companies
start cherry picking the people in the best health, and then you end up with
whats called adverse selection, those as far as the most medically compromised
end up on programs that the government is paying for, and then the government
program starts to go down. You end up in an insurance death spiral, which is
what its called in the industry.

Candidates up here are advocating that government provide subsidies to the
insurance industry. Whats that about? I mean, didnt we have enough with
subsidizing the pharmaceutical companies with that phony Medicare D program
that President Bush had? How are we any different as Democrats? Think about
that. Source: SEIU Democratic Health Care Forum in Las Vegas , Mar 24, 2007

### Key to reform: end role for for-profit insurance companies

Q: Candidates here have debated whether or not its going to take raising taxes
to pay for universal health care. What do you think?

A: This health care debate is one of the biggest frauds thats been put on the
American people. In 2000 and 2004, I brought forth a proposal, Medicare for
All. Its embodied in the Conyers-Kucinich bill. It provides for covering
everyone. The big difference between what Ive been talking about and all the
other candidates are talking about is that my plan doesnt provide for a role
for for-profit insurance companies. Our party really isnt legit on the issue
of health care, because whenever you talk to these candidates, theres always a
role for the for-profit insurance companies. Do you know, almost 31% of the
spending that goes for health care goes for the for-profit system -- corporate
profits, stock options, executive salaries, advertising, marketing, the cost
of paperwork. Source: 2007 AFSCME Democratic primary debate in Carson City
Nevada , Feb 21, 2007

### Streamlined national health insurance as Enhanced Medicare

The current profit-driven system, dominated by private insurance firms & their
bureaucracies, has failed. We must establish streamlined national health
insurance, Enhanced Medicare for All. It would be publicly-financed health
care, privately delivered, and will put patients & doctors back in control of
the system. Coverage will be more complete than private insurance plans;
encourage prevention; and include prescription drugs, dental care, mental
health care, & alternative and complementary medicine. Source: 2006 House
campaign website, www.kucinich.us , Nov 7, 2006

### Single-payer isnt in platform because it offends donors

KUCINCIH: Washington right now is controlled by the insurance interests and by
the pharmaceutical companies. I went to our Democratic platform committee with
a proposal for universal single-payer health care. And it was quickly shot
down because it offended some of the contributors to our party. We must be
ready to take up this challenge of bringing health care to all the American
people. Source: Democratic 2004 primary debate at USC , Feb 26, 2004

### Not socialism, but a change from predatory capitalism

Q: On health care?

KUCINICH: My proposal is to have a universal single-payer, not-for-profit
health care system, because that would lift tens of millions of Americans out
of poverty.

Q: Harry Truman proposed that in 1948.

KUCINICH: Well, and you know what? John Conyers and I introduced the bill in
this Congress. And that would provide all coverage for everyone, all medically
necessary procedures, plus vision care, dental care, mental health care, and
long-term care.

Q: In other words, socialism?

KUCINICH: What we have now is predatory capitalism which makes of the American
people a cash crop for the insurance companies and the pharmaceutical
companies. And so Im talking about a change. Source: Democratic 2004 primary
debate at USC , Feb 26, 2004

### Not-for-profit system differs from Hillarys pro-HMO system

Q: Why is there so much resistance on the part of your colleagues to going to
a single-payer system? Is it the Hillary factor?

A: No. What Senator Clinton was proposing was really more HMOs, and the
competition in the insurance industry caused so many people in the insurance
industry to be afraid of it. My proposal shifts the whole system into a not-
for-profit system. It eliminates these corporate profits and stock options and
executive salaries, the advertising, lobbying, marketing costs. Source:
Democratic 2004 primary Debate in Greenville SC , Jan 29, 2004

### Tax employers to pay for single-payer plan

Q: How, if at all, would you change the new prescription drug benefit for the
elderly?

A: I will include complete coverage of prescription drugs in a single-payer
plan that provides every man, woman, and child with comprehensive health
coverage from whatever doctors they choose, and does so through a tax on
employers that is lower than what employers who now provide coverage pay on
average. Source: Associated Press policy Q&A;, Medicare , Jan 25, 2004

### Rally to elect a new Congress to pass new health care deal

Q: If you were President how would you work with Congress?

A: As a member of Congress I have had excellent relationships with both sides
of the aisle. It is important for the President to work with Congress and I
will use the relationships I have built through 4 terms to create a working
partnership. I am also aware that my legislative agenda, which will include
universal health care, will require support in the Congress which may not
currently exist. As the nominee of our party, I will call upon the American
people to support candidates for Congress who will take control of the health
care system in the US away from the insurance companies and the pharmaceutical
companies and create a system which truly serves all the American people with
guaranteed health care for all. When FDR was the nominee in 1932, he asked the
American people to give him a Congress which would help him implement the New
Deal. I intend to rally the American people in this election to create a New
Deal for a New Century. Source: Concord Monitor / WashingtonPost.com on-line
Q&A; , Nov 4, 2003

### Im not selling insurance-switch to not-for-profit system

Q: What makes your single-payer health care proposal different than other
candidates universal health insurance?

A: Many of the other candidates say they want to make sure all Americans have
health insurance. I am not selling insurance. I want to create a system which
makes it possible for all Americans to have health care. This means we must
move from a for-profit health care system which is controlled by insurance
companies and pharmaceutical companies, to a not-for-profit system. This is
the essence of my proposal for Universal Health care, Medicare for All. A
single payer system, it is embodied in legislation, HR 676. This fundamental
change in our health care system will provide all Americans with access to
quality health care. Whether you are working or not, you will be covered. The
scope of coverage will include all medically necessary procedures, dental
health care, mental health care, vision care, long term care and a
prescription drug benefit. Source: Concord Monitor / WashingtonPost.com on-
line Q&A; , Nov 4, 2003

### Single-payer for alternative medicine, mental health, more

KUCINICH: Dr. Deans plan would leave 10 million Americans out. Its important
that all Americans be covered, [including] alternative medicine, a
prescription drug benefit, vision care and dental care and mental health care,
and long-term nursing care- all covered under one Medicare For All, single-
payer program. Im the one who has that plan. Im the one whos offering it. Im
the only one on this stage who can say that.

DEAN: In all due respect to all the candidates here, these folks have been in
Washington a long time and talked about health insurance for a long time, and
we have very little to show for it. In my state, 99% of the kids that are
eligible for health insurance who are under 18, 96% have it. Everybody under
150% of poverty, all our working poor people, have health insurance. And a lot
of seniors have prescription benefits. This does need to be a system thats
built on what we have. Weve done that in Vermont. Id like the opportunity to
do that for the whole country. Source: [X-ref Dean] Debate at Pace University
in Lower Manhattan , Sep 25, 2003

### 7.7% tax to pay for full coverage

The pharmaceutical companies and the insurance companies control our health
care system. Ive introduced legislation that provides for a totally new
change; that has health care for people, not for profit. Its called Medicare
For All. Its a single-payer program. And its financed by a 7.7% tax paid by
employers. And it covers everything. It covers all medically necessary
procedures and a wide range of benefits. Source: Debate at Pace University in
Lower Manhattan , Sep 25, 2003

### Health is a right, not a privilege

Q: How do you get more of the uninsured covered, and do you have to repeal the
Bush tax cuts to do it?

KUCINICH: Ive introduced a bill which states that health care is a right, not
a privilege, and its to get the profit out of health care, and heres a copy of
it. Its H.R. 676. Congress right now has in front of it a plan that would
cover all medically necessary health services, all individuals. Source:
Democratic Primary Debate, Albuquerque New Mexico , Sep 4, 2003

### Take profit motive out of health care

In my bill H.R. 676, individuals would not have to pay premiums, deductibles
or co-pays. But what it would do is it would take the profit out of health
care. And with the exception of Ms. Moseley Braun, all the others here will
retain the role of private insurers. And we have to understand that the
insurance companies and the pharmaceuticals right now, they own us. We need to
take our health care system back. Source: Democratic Primary Debate,
Albuquerque New Mexico , Sep 4, 2003

### Insurance companies do not heal people; practitioners do

The Kucinich plan will remove private insurance companies from the healthcare
system-along with their waste, paperwork, profits, excessive executive
salaries, advertising, sales commissions-and redirect resources to actual
treatment. Insurance companies do not heal or treat anyone, physicians and
health practitioners do. Non-profit national health insurance will decrease
total healthcare spending while providing more treatment and services-through
reductions in bureaucracy and cost-cutting measures such as bulk purchasing of
prescriptions drugs. Funding will come primarily from existing government
healthcare spending (more than $1 trillion) and a phased-in tax on employers
of 7.7% (almost $1 trillion). The employers tax is less than the 8.5% of
payroll now paid on average by companies that provide private insurance. This
type of system-privately-delivered health care, publicly financed -- has
worked well in other countries, none of whom spend as much per capita on
healthcare as the United States. Source: 2004 House campaign website,
Kucinich.us, On The Issues , Aug 1, 2003

### Seniors forced to choose between medicine and food

Today there are senior citizens throughout America who are forced to make
cruel choices between paying the high cost of prescription drugs or buying
food; between prescription drugs or clothing. Seniors are splitting their
pills to make prescriptions last, splitting their budgets with $600 monthly
prescription bills, splitting their physical and their economic health.
Source: 2004 House campaign website, Kucinich.us, On The Issues , Aug 1, 2003

### Prescription for America: ceiling on drug company profits

The pharmaceutical industry is the most profitable in America, even more
profitable than the banking industry. America is a captive market. Our
government should place limits on the price which any manufacturer can charge
for prescription drugs. We need a new Prescription for America, a regulatory
structure which puts a ceiling on drug company profits the same way credit
laws establish what constitutes usury. Source: 2004 House campaign website,
Kucinich.us, On The Issues , Aug 1, 2003

### Regulate prescription drug prices like utility rates

As with utility rates, our government should be empowered to lower prices and
impose windfall profits taxes to correct excess pricing. Government has a
moral responsibility to ensure the purity and safety of the food supply. We
cannot abdicate this responsibility to global corporations whose goals may be
limited to profit-orientation. Source: 2004 House campaign website,
Kucinich.us, On The Issues , Aug 1, 2003

### Medicare for All: universal single-payer national system

The Kucinich plan is enhanced Medicare for All -- a universal, single-payer
system of national health insurance, carefully phased in over 10 years. It
addresses everyones needs, including the 40 million Americans without coverage
and those paying exorbitant rates for health insurance. This approach to
healthcare emphasizes patient choice, and puts doctors and patients in control
of the system, not insurance companies. Source: 2004 House campaign website,
Kucinich.us, On The Issues , Aug 1, 2003

### Private companies charge 18% admin & Medicare charges 3%

My health-care plan, Medicare for all, calls for a 7.7% tax paid for by the
employer. Employers are already paying 8.5%. So it actually saves businesses
money. That would raise about $920 billion. In addition to that, theres
already over a trillion dollars being spent a year in local, state and federal
dollars for health care. The American people are already paying for health
care for all, but theyre not getting it.

Thats why I say its time to take the profit out of health care. We have the
money in the system, but right now the private companies are charging about
18% for administration, while the cost of Medicare administration is only 3%.

I think it is urgent that we take profit out of health care. How many homes
have this discussion every day in America? Well, I dont feel well. Ah, we dont
have the money to go to the doctor. Or, Well, we cant afford that surgery. We
need to stop those kind of discussions in America. We have the money in this
country. Source: AFSCME union debate in Iowa , May 17, 2003

### Raise taxes for guaranteed, single payer, universal care

Q: Are you willing to raise taxes to cover everyone?

KUCINICH: We can phase in [an increase] in the payroll tax to 7.7% on all
employers and have that be our mainstay of our national health care plan. We
have to get the profit out of health care. And that means get the private
insurance companies out of health care. Any plan that fails to do that is not
going to deliver the best quality universal health care. I introduced HR676,
Medicare for all: guaranteed, single payer, universal health care. Its time to
have health insurance for the American people, not the insurance companies.

Q: The Republicans are going to say there they go again, Democrats are raising
taxes again. Is there anyone willing to rule out raising taxes?

LIEBERMAN: I am not willing to raise taxes to pay for health insurance in
[that] way. All I am going to do is put the tax rate back to where it was when
Bill Clinton was president, because we did a lot better under Bill Clinton
than we are under George Bush. Source: [X-ref to Lieberman] Democratic Debate
in Columbia SC , May 3, 2003

* * *

# Dennis Kucinich on Voting Record

### HR 676, Conyers-Kucinich bill, establishes Medicare for all

A not-for-profit health care system is not only possible, but HR676, the
Conyers-Kucinich bill, actually establishes Medicare for all, a single-payer
system and its a not-for-profit system. Its time to end this control that
insurance companies have not only over health care but over our political
system.

Were being told here today to buy into a view of the world which says that,
well, you know, but the insurance companies run the system. Well work out
competition between the insurance companies & maybe well have government
subsidize the insurance companies. Where is our call for greatness?

Im talking about a real deal for the American people, a universal single-payer
not-for-profit Medicare for all. Its already into legislative form. 62 members
of Congress have signed on. Over 14,000 physicians have signed on. We can do
this. Break the hold of the insurance company on our health care system and
lift the American people out of poverty. Thats what my presidency is going to
be about. Source: SEIU Democratic Health Care Forum in Las Vegas , Mar 24,
2007

### Voted NO on the Ryan Budget: Medicare choice, tax & spending cuts.

**_Proponent's Arguments for voting Yes:** _

[Sen. DeMint, R-SC]: The Democrats have Medicare on a course of bankruptcy.
Republicans are trying to save Medicare & make sure there are options for
seniors in the future. Medicare will not be there 5 or 10 years from now.
Doctors will not see Medicare patients at the rate [Congress will] pay.

[Sen. Ayotte, R-NH]: We have 3 choices when it comes to addressing rising
health care costs in Medicare. We can do nothing & watch the program go
bankrupt in 2024. We can go forward with the President's proposal to ration
care through an unelected board of 15 bureaucrats. Or we can show real
leadership & strengthen the program to make it solvent for current
beneficiaries, and allow future beneficiaries to make choices.

**_Opponent's Arguments for voting No:** _

[Sen. Conrad, D-ND]: In the House Republican budget plan, the first thing they
do is cut $4 trillion in revenue over the next 10 years. For the wealthiest
among us, they give them an additional $1 trillion in tax reductions. To
offset these massive new tax cuts, they have decided to shred the social
safety net. They have decided to shred Medicare. They have decided to shred
program after program so they can give more tax cuts to those who are the
wealthiest among us.

[Sen. Merkley, D-OR]: The Republicans chose to end Medicare as we know it. The
Republican plan reopens the doughnut hole. That is the hole into which seniors
fall when, after they have some assistance with the first drugs they need,
they get no assistance until they reach a catastrophic level. It is in that
hole that seniors have had their finances devastated. We fixed it. Republicans
want to unfix it and throw seniors back into the abyss. Then, instead of
guaranteeing Medicare coverage for a fixed set of benefits for every senior--
as Medicare does now--the Republican plan gives seniors a coupon and says:
Good luck. Go buy your insurance. If the insurance goes up, too bad.
Reference: Ryan Budget Plan; Bill HCR34&SCR21; ; vote number 11-HV277 on Apr
15, 2011

### Voted NO on repealing the "Prevention and Public Health" slush fund.

**_Congressional Summary:** _ Amends the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (PPACA) to repeal provisions establishing and appropriating funds to
the Prevention and Public Health Fund (a Fund to provide for expanded and
sustained national investment in prevention and public health programs to
improve health and help restrain the rate of growth in private and public
sector health care costs). Rescinds any unobligated balanced appropriated to
such Fund.

**_Proponent's Argument for voting Yes:** _  
[Rep. Pitts, R-PA]: Section 4002 of PPACA establishes a Prevention and Public
Health Fund, which my bill, H.R. 1217, would repeal. The PPACA section
authorizes the appropriation of and appropriates to the fund from the Treasury
the following amounts:

    * $500 million for FY 2010
    * $750 million for FY11
    * $1 billion for FY12
    * $1.25 billion for FY13
    * $1.5 billion for FY14
    * and for FY15 and every fiscal year thereafter, $2 billion. We have created a slush fund from which the Secretary of HHS can spend without any congressional oversight or approval. I would suggest to my colleagues that, if you wanted more funding to go towards smoking cessation or to any other program, the health care law should have contained an explicit authorization. By eliminating this fund, we are not cutting any specific program. This is about reclaiming our oversight role of how Federal tax dollars should be used.

**_Opponent's Argument for voting No:** _  
[Rep. Waxman, D-CA]: This bill represents the Republicans' newest line of
attack to disrupt, dismantle, and to ultimately destroy the Affordable Care
Act. For many years, Republicans have joined with Democrats in supporting
programs to prevent disease, to promote health and, in turn, to cut health
care costs. But today, the House will vote to end funding for the first and
only Federal program with dedicated, ongoing resources designed to make us a
healthier Nation. Reference: To repeal the Prevention and Public Health Fund;
Bill H.1217 ; vote number 11-HV264 on Apr 13, 2011

### Voted YES on regulating tobacco as a drug.

**_Congressional Summary:** _ Amends the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(FFDCA) to provide for the regulation of tobacco products by the Secretary of
Health and Human Services through the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Defines a tobacco product as any product made or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption. Excludes from FDA authority the tobacco leaf
and tobacco farms.

**_Opponent's argument to vote No:** _ Rep. HEATH SHULER (D, NC-11): Putting a
dangerous, overworked FDA in charge of tobacco is a threat to public safety.
Last year, the FDA commissioner testified that he had serious concerns that
this bill could undermine the public health role of the FDA. And the FDA
Science Board said the FDA's inability to keep up with scientific advancements
means that Americans' lives will be at risk.

**_Proponent's argument to vote Yes:** _ Rep. HENRY WAXMAN (D, CA-30): The
bill before us, the Waxman-Platts bill, has been carefully crafted over more
than a decade, in close consultation with the public health community. It's
been endorsed by over 1,000 different public health, scientific, medical,
faith, and community organizations.

Sen. HARRY REID (D, NV): Yesterday, 3,500 children who had never smoked before
tried their first cigarette. For some, it will also be their last cigarette
but certainly not all. If you think 3,500 is a scary number, how about 3.5
million. That is a pretty scary number. That is how many American high school
kids smoke--3.5 million. Nearly all of them aren't old enough to buy
cigarettes. It means we have as many boys and girls smoking as are
participating in athletics in high schools. We have as many as are playing
football, basketball, track and field, and baseball combined. Reference:
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act; Bill HR1256&S982; ; vote
number 2009-H187 on Apr 2, 2009

### Voted YES on expanding the Children's Health Insurance Program.

**_Congressional Summary:** _

    * Reauthorizes State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) through FY2013 at increased levels.
    * Gives states the option to cover targeted low-income pregnant women
    * Phases out coverage for nonpregnant childless adults. **_Proponent's argument to vote Yes:** _

Rep. FRANK PALLONE (D, NJ-6): In the last Congress, we passed legislation that
enjoyed bipartisan support as well as the support of the American people.
Unfortunately, it did not enjoy the support of the President, who vetoed our
bill twice, and went on to proclaim that uninsured children can simply go to
the emergency room to have their medical needs met. As the Nation moves deeper
into a recession and unemployment rates continue to rise, millions of
Americans are joining the ranks of the uninsured, many of whom are children.
We can't delay. We must enact this legislation now.

**_Opponent's argument to vote No:** _ Rep. ROY BLUNT (R, MI-7): This bill
doesn't require the States to meet any kind of threshold standard that would
ensure that States were doing everything they could to find kids who needed
insurance before they begin to spend money to find kids who may not have the
same need. Under the bill several thousands of American families would be poor
enough to qualify for SCHIP and have the government pay for their health care,
but they'd be rich enough to still be required to pay the alternative minimum
tax. The bill changes welfare participation laws by eliminating the 5-year
waiting period for legal immigrants to lawfully reside in the country before
they can participate in this program. In the final bill, we assume that 65% of
the children receiving the benefit wouldn't get the benefit anymore. It seems
to me this bill needs more work, would have benefited from a committee
hearing. It doesn't prioritize poor kids to ensure that they get health care
first. Reference: SCHIP Reauthorization Act; Bill H.R.2 ; vote number
2009-H016 on Jan 14, 2009

### Voted YES on overriding veto on expansion of Medicare.

**_Congressional Summary:** _

    * Extends Medicare to cover additional preventive services.
    * Includes body mass index and end-of-life planning among initial preventive physical examinations.
    * Eliminates by 2014 [the currently higher] copayment rates for Medicare psychiatric services. **_Pres. GEORGE W. BUSH's veto message (argument to vote No):** _

I support the primary objective of this legislation, to forestall reductions
in physician payments. Yet taking choices away from seniors to pay physicians
is wrong. This bill is objectionable, and I am vetoing it because:

    * It would harm beneficiaries by taking private health plan options away from them.
    * It would undermine the Medicare prescription drug program.
    * It is fiscally irresponsible, and it would imperil the long-term fiscal soundness of Medicare by using short-term budget gimmicks that do not solve the problem. In addition, H.R. 6331 would delay important reforms like the Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics, and Supplies competitive bidding program. Changing policy in mid-stream is also confusing to beneficiaries who are receiving services from quality suppliers at lower prices. In order to slow the growth in Medicare spending, competition within the program should be expanded, not diminished.

**_Proponent's argument to vote Yes:** _ Sen. PATTY MURRAY (D, WA): President
Bush vetoed a bill that would make vital improvements to the program that has
helped ensure that millions of seniors and the disabled can get the care they
need. This bill puts an emphasis on preventive care that will help our seniors
stay healthy, and it will help to keep costs down by enabling those patients
to get care before they get seriously ill. This bill will improve coverage for
low-income seniors who need expert help to afford basic care. It will help
make sure our seniors get mental health care. Reference: Medicare Improvements
for Patients and Providers Act; Bill HR.6331 ; vote number 2008-H491 on Jul
15, 2008

### Voted YES on giving mental health full equity with physical health.

**_CONGRESSIONAL SUMMARY:** _

    * Paul Wellstone Mental Health and Addiction Equity Act of 2008: Requires group health plans to apply the same treatment limits on mental health or substance-related disorder benefits as they do for medical and surgical benefits (parity requirement).
    * Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008: Prohibits a group health plan from adjusting premium or contribution amounts for a group on the basis of genetic information.

**_SUPPORTER'S ARGUMENT FOR VOTING YES:** _ Rep. PALLONE. This is a
comprehensive bill which will establish full mental health and addiction care
parity. The Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 authorized for 5 years partial
parity by mandating that the annual and lifetime dollar limit for mental
health treatment under group health plans offering mental health coverage be
no less than that for physical illnesses. This bill requires full parity and
also protects against discrimination by diagnosis.

**_OPPONENT'S ARGUMENT FOR VOTING NO:** _ Rep. DEAL of Georgia: I am a
supporter of the concept of mental health parity, but this bill before us
today is not the correct approach. This path will raise the price of health
insurance, and would cause some to lose their health insurance benefits and
some employers to terminate mental health benefits altogether.

The bill's focus is also overly broad. Our legislation should focus on serious
biologically-based mental disorders like schizophrenia and bipolar disorder,
not on jet lag and caffeine addiction, as this bill would include. There are
no criteria for judicial review, required notice and comment, or congressional
review of future decisions.

I would ask my colleagues to vote "no" today so that we can take up the Senate
bill and avoid a possible stalemate in a House-Senate conference on an issue
that should be signed into law this Congress.

**_LEGISLATIVE OUTCOME:** _ Bill passed House, 268-148 Reference: Mental
Health and Addiction Equity Act; Bill H.R.1424 ; vote number 08-HR1424 on Mar
5, 2008

### Voted YES on Veto override: Extend SCHIP to cover 6M more kids.

**_OnTheIssues Explanation:** _ This vote is a veto override of the SCHIP
extension (State Children's Health Insurance Program). The bill passed the
House 265-142 on 10/25/07, and was vetoed by Pres. Bush on 12/12/07.

**_CONGRESSIONAL SUMMARY:** _ This Act would enroll all 6 million uninsured
children who are eligible, but not enrolled, for coverage under existing
programs.

**_PRESIDENT'S VETO MESSAGE:** _ Our goal should be to move children who have
no health insurance to private coverage--not to move children who already have
private health insurance to government coverage. My Administration strongly
supports reauthorization of SCHIP. [But this bill, even with changes, does not
meet the requirements I outlined].

It would still shift SCHIP away from its original purpose by covering adults.
It would still include coverage of many individuals with incomes higher than
the median income. It would still result in government health care for
approximately 2 million children who already have private health care
coverage.

**_SUPPORTER'S ARGUMENT FOR VOTING YES:** _ Rep. DINGELL: This is not a
perfect bill, but it is an excellent bipartisan compromise. The bill protects
health insurance coverage for some 6 million children who now depend on SCHIP.
It provides health coverage for 3.9 million children who are eligible, yet
remain uninsured. Together, this is a total of better than 10 million young
Americans who, without this legislation, would not have health insurance.

The bill makes changes to accommodate the President's stated concerns.

    1. It terminates the coverage of childless adults in 1 year.
    2. It prohibits States from covering children in families with incomes above $51,000.
    3. It contains adequate enforcement to ensure that only US citizens are covered.
    4. It encourages securing health insurance provided through private employer. **_LEGISLATIVE OUTCOME:** _ Veto override failed, 260-152 (2/3rds required) Reference: SCHIP Extension; Bill Veto override on H.R.3963 ; vote number 08-HR3963 on Jan 23, 2008

### Voted YES on adding 2 to 4 million children to SCHIP eligibility.

Allows State Children's Health Insurance Programs (SCHIP), that require state
legislation to meet additional requirements imposed by this Act, additional
time to make required plan changes. Pres. Bush vetoed this bill on Dec. 12,
2007, as well as a version (HR976) from Feb. 2007.

**Proponents support voting YES because:**

Rep. DINGELL: This is not a perfect bill, but it is an excellent bipartisan
compromise. The bill provides health coverage for 3.9 million children who are
eligible, yet remain uninsured. It meets the concerns expressed in the
President's veto message [from HR976]:

    1. It terminates the coverage of childless adults.
    2. It targets bonus payments only to States that increase enrollments of the poorest uninsured children, and it prohibits States from covering families with incomes above $51,000.
    3. It contains adequate enforcement to ensure that only US citizens are covered. 

**Opponents recommend voting NO because:**

Rep. DEAL: This bill [fails to] fix the previous legislation that has been
vetoed:

    * On illegal immigration: Would the verification system prevent an illegal alien from fraudulently using another person's name to obtain SCHIP benefits? No. 
    * On adults in SCHIP: Up to 10% of the enrollees in SCHIP will be adults, not children, in the next 5 years, and money for poor children shouldn't go to cover adults. 
    * On crowd-out: The CBO still estimates there will be some 2 million people who will lose their private health insurance coverage and become enrolled in a government-run program. 

**Veto message from President Bush:**

Like its predecessor, HR976, this bill does not put poor children first and it
moves our country's health care system in the wrong direction. Ultimately, our
goal should be to move children who have no health insurance to private
coverage--not to move children who already have private health insurance to
government coverage. As a result, I cannot sign this legislation. Reference:
Children's Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act; Bill H.R. 3963 ; vote
number 2007-1009 on Oct 25, 2007

### Voted YES on requiring negotiated Rx prices for Medicare part D.

Would require negotiating with pharmaceutical manufacturers the prices that
may be charged to prescription drug plan sponsors for covered Medicare part D
drugs.

**Proponents support voting YES because:**

This legislation is an overdue step to improve part D drug benefits. The
bipartisan bill is simple and straightforward. It removes the prohibition from
negotiating discounts with pharmaceutical manufacturers, and requires the
Secretary of Health & Human Services to negotiate. This legislation will
deliver lower premiums to the seniors, lower prices at the pharmacy and
savings for all taxpayers.

It is equally important to understand that this legislation does not do
certain things. HR4 does not preclude private plans from getting additional
discounts on medicines they offer seniors and people with disabilities. HR4
does not establish a national formulary. HR4 does not require price controls.
HR4 does not hamstring research and development by pharmaceutical houses. HR4
does not require using the Department of Veterans Affairs' price schedule.

**Opponents support voting NO because:**

Does ideological purity trump sound public policy? It shouldn't, but,
unfortunately, it appears that ideology would profoundly change the Medicare
part D prescription drug program, a program that is working well, a program
that has arrived on time and under budget. The changes are not being proposed
because of any weakness or defect in the program, but because of ideological
opposition to market-based prices. Since the inception of the part D program,
America's seniors have had access to greater coverage at a lower cost than at
any time under Medicare.

Under the guise of negotiation, this bill proposes to enact draconian price
controls on pharmaceutical products. Competition has brought significant cost
savings to the program. The current system trusts the marketplace, with some
guidance, to be the most efficient arbiter of distribution. Reference:
Medicare Prescription Drug Price Negotiation Act; Bill HR 4 ("First 100
hours") ; vote number 2007-023 on Jan 12, 2007

### Voted NO on denying non-emergency treatment for lack of Medicare co-pay.

Vote to pass a resolution, agreeing to S. AMDT. 2691 that removes the
following provisions from S 1932:

    * Allows hospitals to refuse treatment to Medicaid patients when they are unable to pay their co-pay if the hospital deems the situation to be a non-emergency
    * Excludes payment to grandparents for foster care Reference: Reconciliation resolution on the FY06 budget; Bill H Res 653 on S. AMDT. 2691 ; vote number 2006-004 on Feb 1, 2006

### Voted NO on limiting medical malpractice lawsuits to $250,000 damages.

Vote to pass a bill that would limit the awards that plaintiffs and their
attorneys could be given in medical malpractice cases. The bill would limit
non-economic damages, including physical and emotional pain to $250,000. The
bill would also limit punitive damages to $250,000 or double economic damages,
whichever amount is greater. Punitive damages would be banned against makers
and distributors of medical products if the Food and Drug Administration
approved those products. The bill would call for all states to set damage caps
but would not block existing state statutory limits. The bill would cap
attorneys' contingency fees to 40% of the first $50,000 in damages; 33.3% of
the next $50,000; 25% of the next $500,000; and 15% of any amount in excess of
$600,000. Reference: Medical Malpractice Liability Limitation bill; Bill HR
4280 ; vote number 2004-166 on May 12, 2004

### Voted NO on limited prescription drug benefit for Medicare recipients.

Medicare Prescription Drug and Modernization Act of 2003: Vote to adopt the
conference report on the bill that would create a prescription drug benefit
for Medicare recipients. Starting in 2006, prescription coverage would be made
available through private insurers to seniors. Seniors would pay a monthly
premium of an estimated $35 in 2006. Individuals enrolled in the plan would
cover the first $250 of annual drug costs themselves, and 25 percent of all
drug costs up to $2,250. The government would offer a fallback prescription
drug plan in regions were no private plans had made a bid.Over a 10 year time
period medicare payments to managed care plans would increase by $14.2
billion. A pilot project would begin in 2010 in which Medicare would compete
with private insurers to provide coverage for doctors and hospitals costs in
six metropolitan areas for six years. The importation of drugs from Canada
would be approved only if HHS determines there is no safety risks and that
consumers would be saving money. Reference: Bill sponsored by Hastert, R-IL;
Bill HR.1 ; vote number 2003-669 on Nov 22, 2003

### Voted YES on allowing reimportation of prescription drugs.

Pharmaceutical Market Access Act of 2003: Vote to pass a bill that would call
for the Food and Drug Administration to begin a program that would permit the
importation of FDA-approved prescription drugs from Australia, Canada, the
European Union, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Lichtenstein, New Zealand, Norway,
Switzerland and South Africa. Reference: Bill sponsored by Gutknecht, R-MN;
Bill HR.2427 ; vote number 2003-445 on Jul 24, 2003

### Voted NO on small business associations for buying health insurance.

Vote to pass a bill that would permit the creation of association health plans
through which small companies could group together to buy insurance for their
employees. Association health plans that cover employees in several states
would be excused from many individual state insurance regulations but would be
regulated by the Labor Department. Reference: Small Business Health Fairness
Act; Bill HR 660 ; vote number 2003-296 on Jun 19, 2003

### Voted NO on capping damages & setting time limits in medical lawsuits.

Help Efficient, Accessible, Low Cost, Timely Healthcare (HEALTH) Act of 2003:
To improve patient access to health care services and provide improved medical
care by reducing the excessive burden the liability system places on the
health care delivery system. Limits the availability of punitive damages, and
sets a 3-year limit for suing. Reference: Bill sponsored by Greenwood, R-PA;
Bill HR 5 ; vote number 2003-64 on Mar 13, 2003

### Voted NO on allowing suing HMOs, but under federal rules & limited award.

Vote to adopt an amendment that would limit liability and damage awards when a
patient is harmed by a denial of health care. It would allow a patient to sue
a health maintenance organization in state court but federal, not state, law
would govern. Bill HR 2563 ; vote number 2001-329 on Aug 2, 2001

### Voted NO on subsidizing private insurance for Medicare Rx drug coverage.

HR 4680, the Medicare Rx 2000 Act, would institute a new program to provide
voluntary prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries through
subsidies to private plans. The program would cost an estimated $40 billion
over five years and would go into effect in fiscal 2003. Reference: Bill
sponsored by Thomas, R-CA; Bill HR 4680 ; vote number 2000-357 on Jun 28, 2000

### Voted YES on banning physician-assisted suicide.

Vote on HR 2260, the Pain Relief Promotion Act of 1999, would ban the use of
drugs for physician-assisted suicide. The bill would not allow doctors to give
lethal prescriptions to terminally ill patients, and instead promotes
"palliative care," or aggressive pain relief techniques. Reference: Bill
sponsored by Hyde, R-IL; Bill HR 2260 ; vote number 1999-544 on Oct 27, 1999

### Voted NO on establishing tax-exempt Medical Savings Accounts.

The bill allows all taxpayers to create a tax-exempt account for paying
medical expenses called a Medical Savings Account [MSA]. Also, the measure
would allow the full cost of health care premiums to be taken as a tax
deduction for the self-employed and taxpayers who are paying for their own
insurance. The bill would also allow the establishment of "HealthMarts,"
regional groups of insurers, health care providers and employers who could
work together to develop packages for uninsured employees. Another provision
of the bill would establish "association health plan," in which organizations
could combine resources to purchase health insurance at better rates than they
could separately. Reference: Bill sponsored by Talent, R-MO; Bill HR 2990 ;
vote number 1999-485 on Oct 6, 1999

### MEDS Plan: Cover senior Rx under Medicare.

Kucinich adopted the Progressive Caucus Position Paper:

#### Summary of the Medicare Extention of Drugs To Seniors Act (Meds)

MEDS establishes an 80/20 outpatient prescription drug benefit under a new
Medicare Part D that will be administered by the Health Care Financing
Administration. The plan will cost similar to figures for the Bush
prescription drug plan due to this plans emphasis on lowering the price of
pharmaceuticals.

#### Coverage:

    * First-dollar 80%/20% benefit (may charge beneficiary less for generics)
    * Catastrophic coverage begins at $2000 out-of-pocket.
    * No beneficiary would have to spend more than $2288 for prescription drugs (including premium)

#### Prescription Drug Prices:

    * (Reimportation) Beginning 2003, all FDA-approved prescription would be allowed for importation at world market prices after being tested for safety. Once fully implemented, Medicare could set fee schedules based on imported drug prices.
    * (Allen Bill) To eliminate price discrimination, manufacturers would charge Medicare and its beneficiaries the price equal to the lower of either the lowest price paid for the drug by other Federal Government agencies or the manufacturers best price for the drug.
    * (Reasonable Prices) Drugs developed with taxpayer funds would be subject to reasonable price agreements when patents are transferred to pharmaceutical companies.

#### Premiums and Low-income Assistance:

Premiums would be $24/month in the first year and indexed to a pharmaceutical
Sustainable Growth Rate, which will ensure that premiums or drug costs do not
increase arbitrarily.

The Government would subsidize low-income beneficiaries to the following
levels:

    * 100% of the premium and cost sharing for beneficiaries below 135% of poverty.
    * Partial subsidy on a sliding scale for those between 135% and 150%

#### Employer Incentive Program:

Employers providing drug coverage equal to or better than the Medicare
coverage receive an incentive payment to maintain such coverage. Source: CPC
Press Release, MEDS Plan 01-CPC3 on Jan 31, 2001

### Rated 100% by APHA, indicating a pro-public health record.

Kucinich scores 100% by APHA on health issues

The American Public Health Association (APHA) is the oldest and largest
organization of public health professionals in the world, representing more
than 50,000 members from over 50 occupations of public health. APHA is
concerned with a broad set of issues affecting personal and environmental
health, including federal and state funding for health programs, pollution
control, programs and policies related to chronic and infectious diseases, a
smoke-free society, and professional education in public health.

The following ratings are based on the votes the organization considered most
important; the numbers reflect the percentage of time the representative voted
the organization's preferred position. Source: APHA website 03n-APHA on Dec
31, 2003

### Increase funding for occupational & physical therapy.

Kucinich signed Medicare Access to Rehabilitation Services Act (MARS)

Medicare Access to Rehabilitation Services Act of 2011 - Amends title XVIII
(Medicare) of the Social Security Act to repeal the cap on outpatient physical
therapy, speech-language pathology, and occupational therapy services of the
type furnished by a physician or as an incident to physicians' services.

SEC. 2. OUTPATIENT THERAPY CAP REPEAL.

Section 1833 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395(l)) is amended by
striking subsection (g).

** _[Explanatory note from Wikipedia.com "Therapy Cap"]:

**_ In 1997 Congress established per-person Medicare spending limits, or
"therapy cap" for nonhospital outpatient therapy, but responding to concerns
that some people with Medicare need extensive services, it has since placed
temporary moratoriums on the caps. The therapy cap is a combined $1,810
Medicare cap for physical therapy and speech language pathology, and a
separate $1,810 cap for occupational therapy ($1870 for 2011). Medicare
patients requiring rehabilitation from disabilities, car accidents, hip
injuries, stroke, and other ailments would be limited to roughly two months
worth of treatments at an outpatient therapy clinic. Any patients that exceed
the cap, whether they are healed or not, would have to stop therapy, or pay
for the therapy services out of their own pocket.Several medical associations
have lobbied against therapy caps because the bill inadvertently restricted
disabled seniors, stroke patients, and other severe cases from receiving
therapy treatments. Source: HR.1546 &S829; 11-HR1546 on Apr 14, 2011

### Collect data on birth defects and present to the public.

Kucinich co-sponsored the Birth Defects Prevention Act

Directs the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to carry out programs
to:

    * collect and analyze, and make available data on the causes of birth defects and on the incidence and prevalence of such defects; 
    * operate regional centers for the conduct of applied epidemiological research on the prevention of such defects; 
    * provide information and education to the public on the prevention of such defects;
    * collect and analyze data by gender and by racial and ethnic group9/6/2004
    * collect such data from birth and death certificates, hospital records, and such other sources; and 
    * (3) encourage States to establish or improve programs for the collection and analysis of epidemiological data on birth defects and to make the data available. Corresponding House bill is H.R.1114. Became Public Law No: 105-168. Source: Bill sponsored by 35 Senators and 164 Reps 97-S419 on Mar 11, 1997

### Make health care a right, not a privilege.

Kucinich adopted the Progressive Caucus Position Paper:

The Progressive Caucus is united in its goal of making health care a right,
not a privilege. Every person should have access to affordable, comprehensive
and high-quality medical care. We must use our health care dollars efficiently
and ensure public accountability in all medical decisions. Based on this goal,
we support the following principles:

    1. All Americans, including the 44 million currently without health insurance, deserve to have the health care they need, regardless of ability to pay. 
    2. Medicare must remain solvent and available for the millions of seniors and individuals with disabilities who rely on the program. The Progressive Caucus supports expanding the program to cover prescription drugs and other needed products and services for beneficiaries. We support a Medicare buy-in for individuals age 55 and older. We support lowering out-of-pocket costs for seniors who currently pay, on average, 20% of their income for health care. 
    3. Proposals should be rejected to change traditional Medicare from a defined benefit to a defined contribution or voucher system. 
    4. Balanced Budget Act cuts that are negatively affecting patient access to hospitals, nursing homes, and home health agencies must be restored. 
    5. Medicaid must have the resources to continue to provide coverage and care for low-income individuals, including children in the CHIP program. 
    6. Individuals with disabilities should retain their health benefits when they return to work and to have access to rehabilitative and other needed services. 
    7. Funding and outreach and other programs serving low-income Americans should be expanded. Examples of such programs are the Childrens Health Insurance Program (CHIP); Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB), Specified Low-income Medicare Beneficiary (SLMB), and Qualified Individuals programs; transitional funds for Medicaid recipients who are also welfare-to-work recipients; and for HHS for mental health outreach for the elderly. Source: CPC Position Paper: Health Care 99-CPC2 on Nov 11, 1999

**

    * Click here for definitions & background information on Health Care. 
    * Click here for a summary of all issue stances of Dennis Kucinich. 
    * Click here for a Wikipedia profile of Dennis Kucinich. 
    * Click here for a Ballotpedia profile of Dennis Kucinich. 
    * Click here for VoteMatch responses by Dennis Kucinich. 
    * Click here for AmericansElect quiz answers by Dennis Kucinich. 
    * Click here for issue positions of other OH politicians. 
    * Click here for OH primary archives. 
    * Click here for OH secondary archives. | **_Other governors on Health Care:** _| **_Dennis Kucinich on other issues:**_  
\---|---  
**_OH Gubernatorial:** _  
Betty Sutton  
Connie Pillich  
Jim Renacci  
Joe Schiavoni  
John Kasich  
Jon Husted  
Mary Taylor  
Mike DeWine  
Nan Whaley  
Richard Cordray  
**_OH Senatorial:**_  
Jim Renacci  
Mike Gibbons  
P.G. Sittenfeld  
Rob Portman  
Sherrod Brown  
Ted Strickland

**_Gubernatorial Debates 2018:** _  
AK: Walker(i) vs.Chenault(R) vs. ~~Huggins~~ (R) vs.Begich(D) vs.Treadwell(D)  
AL: Kay Ivey(R) vs.Countryman(D) vs.Tommy Battle (R) vs. ~~George~~ (R) vs.
~~Carrington~~ (R)  
AR: Hutchinson(R) vs.Henderson(D) vs.West(L)  
AZ: Ducey(R) vs.David Garcia (D) vs.Farley(D)  
CA: Newsom(D) vs.Chiang(D) vs.Villaraigosa(D) vs.Delaine Eastin (D) vs.David
Hadley (R) vs.John Cox (R) vs.Zoltan Istvan (I) vs.Allen(R) vs.La Riva(P)  
CO: Johnston(D) vs.Mitchell(R) vs.Cary Kennedy (D) vs.Doug Robinson (R)
vs.Barlock(R) vs.Lynne(R) vs.Polis(D) vs.Coffman(R) vs. ~~George Brauchler~~
(R,A.G.) vs.Stapleton(R)  
CT: Malloy(D) vs.Lamont(D) vs.Srinivasan(R) vs.David Walker (R) vs.Lumaj(R)
vs.Visconti(R) vs.Lauretti(R) vs. ~~Drew~~ (D)  
FL: Gillum(D) vs.Graham(D) vs.Putnam(R)  
GA: Kemp(R) vs.Cagle(R) vs.Hill(R) vs.Abrams(D) vs.Levine(D)  
HI: Ige(D) vs.Hanabusa(D) vs.Carroll(R)  
IA: Kim_Reynolds(R) vs.Leopold(D) vs.Boulton(D) vs.McGuire(D) vs.Glasson(D)
vs.Hubbell(D)  
ID: Little(R) vs.Fulcher(R) vs.Labrador(R) vs.Ahlquist(R) vs.Minton(D)
vs.Jordan(D)  
IL: Rauner(R) vs.Kennedy(D) vs.Pawar(D) vs.Daniel Biss (D) vs.Pritzker(D)
vs.Ives(R)  
KS: Brewer(D) vs.Wink Hartman (R) vs.Colyer(C) vs.Kobach(R) vs.Orman(O)  
MA: Baker(R) vs.Gonzalez(D) vs.Setti Warren (D) vs.Bob Massie (R)  
MD: Hogan(R) vs.Alec Ross (D) vs.Cummings(D) vs.Madaleno(D) vs.Jealous(D)  
ME: Mayhew(R) vs.Mills(D) vs.Boyle(D) vs.Thibodeau(R) vs.Moody(D)  
MI: Whitmer(R) vs.El-Sayed(D) vs.Tim Walz (D) vs.Schuette(R) vs.Calley(R)  
MN: vs.Smith(D) vs.Coleman(D) vs.Murphy(D) vs.Otto(D) vs.Tina Liebling (DFL)
vs.Tim Walz (DFL) vs.Matt Dean (R) vs.Pawlenty(R) vs.Johnson(R)  
NE: Ricketts(R) vs.Krist(D)  
NH: Sununu(R) vs.Schwartz(R) vs.Steve Marchand (D)  
NM: Lujan-Grisham(D) vs.Pearce(R) vs.Cervantes(D) vs.Apodaca (D)  
NV: Fisher (R) vs.Sisolak(D) vs.Laxalt(R) vs.Schwartz(R)  
NY: Cuomo(D) vs.Nixon(D) vs.Sharpe(L) vs.DeFrancisco(R)  
OH: DeWine(R) vs.Husted(R,Lt.Gov.) vs.Kucinich(D) vs.Sutton(D,Lt.Gov)
vs.Taylor(R) vs.Jim Renacci (R) vs.Connie Pillich (D) vs.Schiavoni(D)
vs.Whaley(D) vs.Cordray(D)  
OK: Gary Richardson (R) vs.Johnson(D)  
OR: Brown(D) vs.Scott Inman(D) vs.Buehler(R)  
PA: Wolf(D) vs.Wagner(R) vs. ~~Barletta~~ (R)  
RI: Raimondo(D) vs.Fung(R) vs.Morgan(R)  
SC: McMaster(R) vs.McGill(R) vs.Pope(R) vs.Templeton(R) vs.Smith(D)  
SD: Noem(R) vs.Jackley(R) vs.Sutton(D)  
TN: Green(R) vs.Dean(D) vs.Black(R)  
TX: Abbott(R) vs.Glass(L) vs.White(D) vs.Valdez(D)  
VT: Scott(R) vs.Stern(D)  
WI: Walker(R) vs.Harlow(D) vs.Vinehout(D) vs.Evers(D) vs.Roys(D)  
WY: Throne(D) vs.Dahlin(R) vs.Gordon(R) | **_Newly-elected governors (first
seated in Jan. 2017):**_  
DE-D: Carney  
IN-R: Holcomb  
MO-R: Greitens  
NH-R: Sununu  
NC-D: Cooper  
ND-R: Burgum  
VT-R: Scott  
WV-D: Justice

**_Retiring 2017-18:** _  
AL-R: Robert Bentley(R)  
(term-limited 2018)  
CA-D: Jerry Brown  
(term-limited 2018)  
CO-D: John Hickenlooper  
(term-limited 2018)  
FL-R: Rick Scott  
(term-limited 2018)  
GA-R: Nathan Deal  
(term-limited 2018)  
IA-R: Terry Branstad  
(appointed ambassador, 2017)  
ID-R: Butch Otter  
(retiring 2018)  
KS-R: Sam Brownback  
(term-limited 2018)  
ME-R: Paul LePage  
(term-limited 2018)  
MI-R: Rick Snyder  
(term-limited 2018)  
MN-D: Mark Dayton  
(retiring 2018)  
NM-R: Susana Martinez  
(term-limited 2018)  
OH-R: John Kasich  
(term-limited 2018)  
OK-R: Mary Fallin  
(term-limited 2018)  
SC-R: Nikki Haley  
(appointed ambassador, 2017)  
SD-R: Dennis Daugaard  
(term-limited 2018)  
TN-R: Bill Haslam  
(term-limited 2018)  
WY-R: Matt Mead  
(term-limited 2018) | Abortion  
Budget/Economy  
Civil Rights  
Corporations  
Crime  
Drugs  
Education  
Energy/Oil  
Environment  
Families/Children  
Foreign Policy  
Free Trade  
Govt. Reform  
Gun Control  
Health Care  
Homeland Security  
Immigration  
Infrastructure/Technology  
Jobs  
Local Issues  
Principles/Values  
Social Security  
Tax Reform  
War/Iraq/Mideast  
Welfare/Poverty

Contact info:  
Mailing Address:  
Rayburn HOB 2445, Washington, DC 20515  
Official Website  
Phone number:  
(202) 225-5871  
Search for...

* * *

X

Page last updated: Jun 16, 2018

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

