











Search in ...

All DepartmentsAuto & TireBabyBeautyBooksCell PhonesClothingElectronicsFood

Gifts & RegistryHealthHomeHome ImprovementHousehold
EssentialsJewelryMoviesMusicOffice

Party & OccasionsPatio & GardenPetsPharmacyPhoto CenterSports &
OutdoorsToysVideo Games



Recent searchesClear All

Cancel

Grocery

Account

Stores

Cart



Back



#### Enter Location



Enter Zip Code or city, state.Error: Please enter a valid ZIP code or city and
state

Update Location

##

Good news — You can still get free 2-day shipping, free pickup, & more.

Continue ShoppingTry another ZIP code

Generated at Wed, 12 Jun 2019 01:51:26 GMT

Electrode, Comp-351027841, DC-prod-dfw3, ENV-prod-a, PROF-PROD, VER-19.1.2,
SHA-784dab9d39a7e10cdf5fb771889c286941b3dd43, CID-cbc492e4-e3e-16b4961fbc68bf,
Generated: Wed, 12 Jun 2019 01:51:26 GMT

Skip Header

![$4 prescriptions. Save big on 30-day generic medications & spend just $10 on

90-day prescriptions. No insurance

necessary.](//i5.walmartimages.com/dfw/4ff9c6c9-3dd6/k2-_f333ac46-0457-4e5c-b1a5-09edb5e5e48e.v1.jpg?odnWidth=912&odnHeight=500&odnBg=ffffff)

$4 Prescriptions

Save big on 30-day generic medications & spend just $10 on 90-day
prescriptions. No insurance necessary. Find your medication in the list below,
sorted by diagnosis.

    
        * # Pharmacy
    
    * ## Your Prescriptions
    
    * ## $4 Prescriptions
    
    * ## Pharmacy in the App
    
    * ## Pharmacy Services
    
    * ## Health & Insurance Resources
    
    * ## Other Health Services
    
    * ## Medication Aids
    
    1. Pharmacy
    2. /
    

# $4 Prescriptions

See More

Electrode, App-category-page, Comp-462783323, DC-prod-dfw2, ENV-prod-a, PROF-
PROD, VER-9.2.1, SHA-946848efc1790292a55b362886f25b0a8cdc0b0c, CID-

Email address

Please enter a valid email address.

Sign Up

Mobile apps

Walmart Services

    
        * Grocery Pickup & Delivery
    * MoneyCenter
    * Walmart Credit Card
    * Walmart Pay
    * Weekly Ad
    * Other Services
    

Get to Know Us

    
        * Our Company
    * Digital Museum
    * Our Suppliers
    * Sell on Walmart.com
    * Advertise With Us
    * Careers
    

Walmart.com

    
        * Walmart Labs
    * Our Ads
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy & Security
    * Calif. Privacy Rights
    * Tax Exempt Program
    

Customer Service

    
        * Help Center
    * Returns
    * Product Recalls
    * Accessibility
    * Contact Us
    * Store Pickup
    

In The Spotlight

    
        * Ellen's List
    * Electronics
    * Toys
    * Video Games
    * Home Products
    * Clothing
    
    * Walmart Services
    * Grocery Pickup & Delivery
    * Get to Know Us
    * Privacy & Security
    * CA Privacy Rights
    * Customer Service
    * Terms of Use
    

Shop Our Brands

    
        * ![Shop at Allswell dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Art dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Bare Necessities dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Bonobos dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Eloquii dot com]()
    * ![Shop at hayneedle dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Jet dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Mod Cloth dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Moosejaw dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Sams Club dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Shoes dot com]()
    * ![Shop at Vudu dot com]()
    * ![Shop Walmart dot com]()
    

© 2019 Walmart. All Rights Reserved. To ensure we are able to help you as best
we can, please include your reference number: TMTRNNF23A

Feedback



Back



Thank you for signing up!

You will receive an email shortly at: ****

Here at Walmart.com, we are committed to protecting your privacy. Your email
address will never be sold or distributed to a third party for any reason.
Please take a minute to review ourPrivacy Policy



Back



I have feedback on

Please choose onePlease choose oneWebsiteStoreTell us more

Cancel

Submit

Due to the high volume of feedback, we are unable to respond to individual
comments.  
If you need immediate assistance, please contact Customer Care.



Back



How was your experience with this page?

On a scale of 1-5

12345

Needs ImprovementLove it!

Please tell us how we can improve it

Cancel

Submit

Sorry, but we can't respond to individual comments.  
If you need immediate assistance, please contact Customer Care.



Back



Thank you

Your feedback helps us make Walmart shopping better for millions of customers.

OK

Generated at Wed, 12 Jun 2019 01:51:26 GMT

Electrode, Comp-351926403, DC-prod-dfw5, ENV-prod-a, PROF-PROD, VER-19.1.2,
SHA-784dab9d39a7e10cdf5fb771889c286941b3dd43, CID-d5968bf9-fce-16b4961fbc2ac2,
Generated: Wed, 12 Jun 2019 01:51:26 GMT

Electrode, Comp-462783323, DC-prod-dfw2, ENV-prod-a, PROF-PROD, VER-9.2.1,
SHA-946848efc1790292a55b362886f25b0a8cdc0b0c, CID-fe652d9e-8fa-16b4961fb9fca4,
Generated: Wed, 12 Jun 2019 01:51:26 GMT

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

