

![Choosing Wisely – Promoting conversations between providers and

patients](http://www.choosingwisely.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/choosing-

wisely-7@2x.jpg)

MENU

    
        * Our Mission
    * Clinician Lists
    * For Patients
    * Getting Started
    * Success Stories
    
    * News
    * Contact Us
    

**__Getting Started_ _Lists of Recommendations **Search Patient Resources
**Adult , Geriatric** Treatments to Relieve Chronic Pain

![](http://www.choosingwisely.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/ASA-Logo.jpg)

# Treatments to Relieve Chronic Pain

###

![PDF link](/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/pdf.png) DOWNLOAD PDF

Pain that won’t go away is more than frustrating. It can be harmful to your
health and well-being. It can keep you from getting a good night’s sleep,
eating right and exercising. It can affect your mood and work and can keep you
from spending time with your friends and family. If you’re one of 100 million
Americans with long-term pain, also called chronic pain, you know how
debilitating and frustrating it can be.

Every year, millions of prescriptions are written for pain medications — many
of them powerful opioids that can cause addiction and other side effects. But
there are many other treatments available for pain instead of opioids.

### Opioids

Opioids are strong pain medications. They can help if you have severe short-
term (acute) pain — like pain after surgery or for a broken bone. They can
also help you manage pain if you have an illness like cancer. If you have
cancer, you should speak to a doctor who specializes in pain medicine, such as
a physician anesthesiologist, about which opioid or alternative treatment is
best for you.

Opioids are powerful drugs, but they are usually not the best way to treat
long-term (chronic) pain, such as arthritis, low back pain, or frequent
headaches. If you take opioids for a long time to manage your chronic pain,
you may be at risk of addiction. Before taking opioids for chronic pain, you
should talk to your doctor about other options. Here’s why:

### Opioids have serious side effects and risks.

Over time, your body gets used to opioids and they may stop providing pain
relief as well. To get the same relief, you may need to take more and more.
Higher doses can cause serious side effects, including:

    
        * Breathing problems and a slow heart rate, which can be deadly
    * Confusion and mental disturbances, like moodiness or outbursts of temper
    * Constipation
    

### Opioids can be very addictive.

Up to one in four people who take opioids long-term become addicted. Worst of
all, in 2017, data showed that 115 Americans die from an overdose of opioid
painkillers every day, and hundreds more go to the emergency room.

### Other pain treatments may work better and have fewer risks than opioids.

Talk to your doctor about trying these treatments before opioids:

    
        * Over-the-counter medicines: 
      * Acetaminophen (Tylenol and generic)
      * Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, and generic)
      * Naproxen (Aleve and generic)
    * Non-drug treatments: 
      * Exercise, physical and/or massage therapy
      * Counseling
      * Acupuncture
      * “Cold” therapy, known as cryotherapy
    * Interventional therapies: 
      * Steroid injections
      * Radiofrequency ablation (using heat to target certain nerves)
      * Neuromodulation (nerve stimulation)
    * Other prescription drugs (ask about risks and side effects): 
      * Anti-seizure drugs
    

Most insurance companies and Medicare will cover these treatments, but you can
verify with your provider.

### What should you do if your doctor prescribes opioids?

Talk to your doctor about side effects, risks, and addiction — and make sure
that you watch for them too. Things to look out for include unusual moodiness
or outbursts of temper, cravings and unusual risk-taking. Take your medication
as prescribed by your doctor and make sure you store and dispose of your
opioids carefully:

    
        * Take your opioids exactly as your doctor prescribes and never share them with anyone else.
    * Store your medications in a place where children or others cannot access them.
    * Dispose of your expired, unwanted, and unused medications safely. The best way to do this is through local “take back” or “mail back” programs and medication drop boxes (located at police stations, Drug Enforcement Agency collection sites or pharmacies).
    

### Ask your doctor about naloxone

Naloxone, or Narcan®, is a rescue drug for opioid overdose that has saved
thousands of lives. It’s an injection or nasal spray that is used to reverse
the effects of an opioid overdose. Naloxone should be administered as soon as
possible by someone witnessing an overdose to quickly restore normal
breathing. Opioid overdoses are usually accidental but can happen to anyone.
If your doctor prescribes you opioids, ask if you should also get a
prescription for naloxone.

_

This report is for you to use when talking with your health care provider. It
is not a substitute for medical advice and treatment. Use of this report is at
your own risk.

© 2018 ABIM Foundation. Developed in cooperation with the American Society of
Anesthesiologists.

_

### Disponible en Español

Tratamientos para aliviar el dolor crónico

### Additional Resources

    
        * Advice on Managing Chronic Pain
    * Non-Opioid Treatment
    

Continue the Conversation

Download the Choosing Wisely App

![Available on the apple store](/wp-

content/themes/choosingw/library/images/applestore.png) ![Get it on google

play](/wp-content/themes/choosingw/library/images/googlestore.png)

![](http://www.choosingwisely.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/abim-

foundation@2x_grey.png) Choosing Wisely® is an initiative of  
the ABIM Foundation. © 2019. All rights reserved.

510 Walnut Street, Suite 1700  
Philadelphia, PA 19106  
Privacy Policy | Contact ABIM Foundation

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

