

![CNN.com](/.element/cnnm-3.0/img/logo/logo_cnn.svg) ![CNN

Business](/.element/cnnm-3.0/img/logo/logo_cnnbusiness.png)

    
        * Markets
    * Tech
    * Media
    * Success
    * Perspectives
    * Video
    
    * ### Markets
    
      * Premarkets
      * Dow 30
      * After-Hours
      * Market Movers
      * Fear & Greed
      * World Markets
      * Sector Performance
      * Investing
      * Markets Now
      * Before the Bell
      * Leading Indicator
      * Impact Investing
      * Economy
      * Energy
    * ### Tech
    
      * Innovate
      * Gadget
      * Mission: Ahead
      * Upstarts
      * Business Evolved
      * Work Transformed
      * Innovative Cities
    * ### Media
    
      * Reliable Sources
    * ### Success
    
      * Boss Files
      * Fresh Money
      * Cars
      * Homes
      * Wealth Coach
      * Biz + Leisure
    * ### Center Piece
    
    * ### Perspectives
    
    * ### Video
    
    * ### International
    
      * Switzerland
      * India
      * Davos
      * Passion to Portfolio
      * On: Germany
    * ### More
    
      * Newsletters
      * About Us
      * Accessibility and CC
    
    * #### U.S.
    
    * #### World
    
    * #### Politics
    
    * #### Business
    
    * #### Opinion
    
    * #### Health
    
    * #### Entertainment
    
    * #### Tech
    
    * #### Style
    
    * #### Travel
    
    * #### Sports
    
    * #### Video
    
    * #### Shop
    
    * #### VR
    
    * #### More...
    
    *     * Follow CNN Business
    *     *     * Your Money, Your America
    

# The Obamacare tax penalty isn't dead yet

by Emily Bazar, Kaiser Health News @CNNMoney March 3, 2018: 9:50 AM ET

![GOP tax bill includes repeal of Obamacare's individual

mandate](https://i2.cdn.turner.com/money/dam/assets/171101164819-obamacare-

website-nov-1-1024x576.jpg)

GOP tax bill includes repeal of Obamacare's individual mandate

## Rick, Patrick and Michael recently commented on Covered California's

Facebook page, urging others to ditch health insurance because:

_"No more fines or penalties!!! Trump took care of that!! Saved me 700 bucks
this year!!!"_

_"Trump removed the penalty for not having insurance."_

_"I'm pretty sure Trump abolished the illegal penalty."_

They're right — and wrong.

On Dec. 22, President Donald Trump did indeed sign a sweeping tax bill that
repeals the Affordable Care Act's tax penalty by zeroing out the fines.

Opponents of the tax penalty rejoiced, and many, like Rick, Patrick and
Michael, assumed it took effect immediately.

Not so. The penalty won't go away until 2019, and that means you still will
owe Uncle Sam if you didn't have health insurance — or an exemption from the
mandate — in 2017. The same holds true for this year.

"There's just mass confusion out there," reports Steven Stasoiski, a tax
accountant and insurance agent in Seal Beach, California.

Related: Tens of thousands of Medicaid recipients don't pay their premiums

Some of his clients decided to drop their health insurance this year without
consulting him first, thinking they wouldn't have to pay a penalty next year.
"When they file next season ... they're going to be surprised," he says.

One client, a family of four in Orange County, California, decided to go
without insurance this year, and will owe about $15,200 next year because of
it — roughly the same cost as a bronze-level health insurance plan that would
protect them from catastrophic health insurance bills, Stasoiski says.

Under Obamacare, most people must have health insurance or pay a tax penalty.
For 2017, the penalty is $695 per adult (up to a family maximum of $2,085), or
2.5% of household income, whichever is greater. The penalty for children is
half the adult rate ($347.50).

You can avoid the penalty if you qualify for one of the health law's several
exemptions. For instance, you may be exempt if you were uninsured for less
than three consecutive months of the previous year, if your income is low
enough that you're not required to file a federal tax return or if you belong
to a health care sharing ministry.

But if you don't fit into one of the exemption categories and you were
uninsured in 2017, or will be in 2018, you're probably out of luck, says
Alison Flores, a principal tax research analyst at the Tax Institute, the
research wing of H&R Block, based in Kansas City, Missouri.

"If you have a penalty and you're due a refund, that penalty reduces your
refund," she says. If you owe a penalty but aren't owed a refund, and then you
decide not to pay the penalty, the Internal Revenue Service may take it out of
a future refund, she says.

The IRS says that this year, for the first time, it will reject electronically
filed tax returns that don't address Obamacare tax penalty questions. If you
file a paper return and don't address those questions, your return could be
held up and a refund delayed, adds Michael Eisenberg, a certified public
accountant with Squar Milner in Encino, Calif.

Related: People with pre-existing conditions could face tough times

"They are saying, 'This is the law, and you have to comply with the law while
it's the law,'" he says. "They are going to enforce the penalties."

A quick note on the Obamacare-related 1095 tax forms, which will help you
prove to the IRS that you had health insurance last year.

Some of you who got insurance last year from employers, on the open market or
through government programs such as Medicare or Medi-Cal, may still be waiting
for your 1095-B and 1095-C forms. The IRS extended the deadline to March 2 for
those forms to be delivered to taxpayers.

But you don't need them in hand to complete your taxes, which are due on April
17 this year. "You should have other substantiation that you had health
insurance," such as W-2 forms, Medicare cards or explanations of benefits from
your insurance company, Flores says.

On the other hand, you must have a correct 1095-A to complete your taxes. If
you're a Covered California enrollee — or buy your insurance through any state
or federally run health insurance exchange — you should have received your
1095-A forms by Jan. 31.

Related: Trump officials unveil rule that could chip away at Obamacare

If you're still waiting for yours and you're a resident of the Golden State,
log on to your Covered California account and check your inbox. You should
find a copy of your 1095-A there, says agency spokesman James Scullary.

If that still doesn't help, or if your 1095-A form is incorrect, fill out a
dispute form, which you can find under the "Members" tab of the Covered
California website at www.coveredca.com.

As always, when it comes to Obamacare and taxes seek the aid of a tax
professional.

If you can't afford it, multiple programs offer free tax help, including the
Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program, run by the IRS and the AARP
Foundation Tax-Aide program.

_This story was produced by_ _Kaiser Health News_ _, which publishes
California Healthline, a service of the California Health Care Foundation._

CNNMoney (New York) First published March 3, 2018: 9:50 AM ET

# Personal Finance

### The Motley Fool __

Paid Partner

    
        * You Can Still Buy This "Millionaire Maker" Stock
    * Bitcoin Up 30,000X -- Here's Your Backdoor In
    * Motley Fool Issues Rare Triple-Buy Alert
    * This Stock Could Be Like Buying Amazon for $3.19
    

### LendingTree

Paid Partner

![](//i2.cdn.turner.com/money/.element/branding/8.0/section/investing/specials/before-

the-bell/right-rail-sign-up-with-logo_2X.png)

### CNNMoney Sponsors

    
        *     *     * ### SmartAsset
    

Paid Partner

    
        * These are your 3 financial advisors near you
    * This site finds and compares 3 financial advisors in your area
    * Check this off your list before retirement: talk to an advisor
    * Answer these questions to find the right financial advisor for you
    * Find CFPs in your area in 5 minutes
    

### NextAdvisor __

Paid Partner

    
        * An Insane Card Offering 0% Interest Until Nearly 2020
    * Transferring Your Balance to a 14-Month 0% APR is Ingenious
    * The Top 7 Balance Transfer Credit Cards On The Market Today
    * Get $300 Back With This Outrageous New Credit Card
    
    * ### U.S
    
      * Crime + Justice
      * Energy + Environment
      * Extreme Weather
      * Space + Science
    * ### World
    
      * Africa
      * Americas
      * Asia
      * Australia
      * Europe
      * Middle East
      * UK
    * ### Politics
    
      * 45
      * Congress
      * Supreme Court
      * 2018
      * Key Races
      * Primary Results
    * ### Business
    
      * Markets
      * Tech
      * Media
      * Success
      * Video
    * ### Opinion
    
      * Political Op-Eds
      * Social Commentary
    * ### Health
    
      * Food
      * Fitness
      * Wellness
      * Parenting
      * Vital Signs
    * ### Entertainment
    
      * Stars
      * Screen
      * Binge
      * Culture
      * Media
    * ### Tech
    
      * Innovate
      * Gadget
      * Mission: Ahead
      * Upstarts
      * Innovative Cities
    * ### Style
    
      * Arts
      * Design
      * Fashion
      * Architecture
      * Luxury
      * Autos
      * Video
    * ### Travel
    
      * Destinations
      * Food & Drink
      * Play
      * Stay
      * Videos
    * ### Sports
    
      * Pro Football
      * College Football
      * Basketball
      * Baseball
      * Soccer
      * Olympics
    * ### Video
    
      * Live TV
      * Digital Studios
      * CNN Films
      * HLNTV
      * Schedule
      * TV Shows A-Z
      * CNNVR
    * ### Shop
    
      * CNN Underscored
      * -Explore
      * -Wellness
      * -Gadgets
      * -Lifestyle
      * CNN Store
    * ### More...
    
      * Photos
      * Longform
      * Investigations
      * CNN Profiles
      * CNN Leadership
      * CNN Newsletters
      * Work for CNN
    

![](/.element/cnnm-3.0/img/logo/logo_cnn.svg)
![](/.element/cnnm-3.0/img/logo/logo_cnnbusiness.png)

Most stock quote data provided by BATS. Market indices are shown in real time,
except for the DJIA, which is delayed by two minutes. All times are ET.
Disclaimer. Morningstar: (C) 2019 Morningstar, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Factset: FactSet Research Systems Inc.2019. All rights reserved. Chicago
Mercantile Association: Certain market data is the property of Chicago
Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved. Dow Jones:
The Dow Jones branded indices are proprietary to and are calculated,
distributed and marketed by DJI Opco, a subsidiary of S&P; Dow Jones Indices
LLC and have been licensed for use to S&P; Opco, LLC and CNN. Standard &
Poor's and S&P; are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor's Financial
Services LLC and Dow Jones is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark
Holdings LLC. All content of the Dow Jones branded indices (C) S&P; Dow Jones
Indices LLC 2019 and/or its affiliates.

(C) 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights
Reserved.  
CNN Sans™ & (C) 2016 Cable News Network.

Newsletters Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Settings
Accessibiliy & CC AdChoices

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-D1yc5zQgjmqr5.gif)
![](//i.cdn.turner.com/money/video/bvp/images/1.gif)
![](//i.cdn.turner.com/money/images/1.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

