

Dr. Axe

Search for:

About Dr. Axe

Dr. Axe

Search for:

        
                  * Health
            * Allergies
            * Brain Health
            * Cancer
            * Children’s Health
            * Diabetes
            * Gut Health
            * Heart Health
            * Hormones
            * Mental Health
            * Skin Health
            * Symptoms
            * Treatments
            * Weight Loss
          * Nutrition
            * Fruit
            * Grains
            * Hemp
            * Herbs & Spices
            * Mushrooms
            * Probiotics
            * Protein
            * Supplements
            * Vegetables
            * Vitamins & Minerals
          * Diets
            * Fasting
            * Gluten-Free
            * Low-Carb
            * Ketogenic
            * Mediterranean Diet
            * Paleo
            * Plant-Based
            * Vegan
            * Vegetarian
          * Recipes
            * Gluten-Free
            * Ketogenic
            * Low-Carb
            * Paleo
            * Vegan
            * Vegetarian
          * Essential Oils
          * DIY Remedies
            * Body Care
            * Cleaning
            * Hair Care
            * Oral Health
            * Skin and Beauty
          * Fitness
            * Anatomy
            * Injury & Rehab
            * News & Tips
            * Running
            * Workouts
            * Yoga
          * Shop
            * Top Sellers
            * Supplements
            * Essential Oils
            * View All
        

* * *

About Dr. Axe

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook_** _Dr. Axe on Instagram ** __ Dr. Axe on Google
Plus_**_ Dr. Axe on Youtube **__ Dr. Axe on Pintrest_** _ Dr. Axe on RSS

Dr. Axe > Health > Pregnancy

__Fact Checked

×

This Dr. Axe content is medically reviewed or fact checked to ensure factually
accurate information.

With strict editorial sourcing guidelines, we only link to academic research
institutions, reputable media sites and, when research is available, medically
peer-reviewed studies. Note that the numbers in parentheses (1, 2, etc.) are
clickable links to these studies.

The information in our articles is NOT intended to replace a one-on-one
relationship with a qualified health care professional and is not intended as
medical advice.

×

This article is based on scientific evidence, written by experts and fact
checked by our trained editorial staff. Note that the numbers in parentheses
(1, 2, etc.) are clickable links to medically peer-reviewed studies.

Our team includes licensed nutritionists and dietitians, certified health
education specialists, as well as certified strength and conditioning
specialists, personal trainers and corrective exercise specialists. Our team
aims to be not only thorough with its research, but also objective and
unbiased.

The information in our articles is NOT intended to replace a one-on-one
relationship with a qualified health care professional and is not intended as
medical advice.

# Natural Birth Control Methods: Benefits & Effectiveness (Plus Which Really

Work?)

By Jillian Levy, CHHC

June 16, 2017

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook 880_** _Dr. Axe on Twitter 19 ** __ Dr. Axe on
Instagram_**_ Dr. Axe on Google Plus **__ Dr. Axe on Youtube_** _Dr. Axe on
Pintrest 1425 ** __ Share on Email_**_ Print Article

![Natural birth control - Dr. Axe](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/BCArticleMeme.jpg)

Wondering how to prevent pregnancy reliably and safely, without using **birth
control pills**? This article will cover some of the most time-tested natural
birth control methods that are also now backed up by science. In addition,
we're taking a look at some risks associated with the leading way to currently
prevent pregnancy: birth control pills.

* * *

### **What 's Wrong with Birth Control Pills?**

About 70 percent of all women at some point turn to non-permanent, non-
invasive hormonal methods of birth control — especially birth control pills.
(1) Still, the dangers of birth control pills include possible side effects
like: **cystic acne** , anxiety or moodiness, breast tenderness, weight gain,
or for some, difficulty getting pregnant after stopping the pill. It's so
surprise that many women are looking for natural birth control methods
instead. For women who wish to avoid unnecessary medical procedures, including
those who consider one day having a **natural child birth** , this is
especially true.

Although there's a lot of ongoing controversy regarding the pros and cons of
using birth control pills, and every woman reacts somewhat differently,
evidence suggests the effects of these hormonal medications can include both
serious and minor reactions. **Birth control side effects** are common and may
include: (2)

        
                  * Higher risk of breast cancer
          * Increased risk of blood clotting, heart attack and stroke
          * Migraines (including new cases or worsening of symptoms)
          * **Gallbladder symptoms** and disease
          * Increased blood pressure
          * Weight gain or changes in appetite
          * Mood changes, including mood swings, increased anxiety or **symptoms of depression**
          * **Nausea**, irregular bleeding or spotting between periods
          * Rarely, benign liver tumors
          * Breast tenderness or swelling
        

One of the risks of birth control pills (synthetic hormonal contraception) is
that these medications impede the normal functioning of a woman’s ovaries,
thereby interfering with their beneficial effects. Birth control pills fool a
woman's body into thinking she's already pregnant by continuously raising
levels of certain hormones, especially estrogen.

This can have a negative impact on healthy bone production and maintenance,
possibly contributing to significant bone loss among many other disorders.
Evidence suggests that women who are the greatest risk of developing these
problems are those who: older than 35, smoke, are overweight, have a family
history of disorders tied to hormonal complications, and who have other health
problems — like diabetes, high blood pressure, heart or vascular disease, or
blood cholesterol and triglyceride abnormalities.

In most cases, the lower the dose of synthetic hormones used, the fewer side
effects that occur. However, even if a woman experiences no obvious side
effects when taking the pill, synthetic hormones can still take a silent toll
on a woman's body that may show up many years later, including difficulty
becoming pregnant. This isn't always the case, and studies suggest that birth
control pills are not a significant **risk factor for infertility** , but many
women report missing signs of hormonal problems in their younger years due to
masking them by taking the pill, only to find out years down the road that
they had an untreated problem.

* * *

## **9 Natural Birth Control Methods that Work (When Used Correctly)**

There are many safe and effective forms of natural birth control (natural
contraceptives) to consider, including:

**1. Male condoms** : At around a 98 percent effectiveness rate when used
correctly, they are nearly as effective as taking the pill. However, sometimes
they are not used properly, which lowers their effectiveness (the same can be
said for female condoms). (3)

**2. Female condoms** : While these are not as familiar to most people, female
condoms are 95 percent effective and are less likely to tear than male
condoms. A female condom consists of a small pouch that fits inside the vagina
before sex.

**3. Natural family planning/fertility awareness** : This is a great method
for helping women track their natural cycles, identify times of fertility,
treat **PMS symptoms** and evaluate the effects of stress on
hormones/menstrual cycle. More details on how to use this method are described
below.

**4. Temperature method** : This is a way to pinpoint the day of ovulation so
that sex can be avoided for a few days before and after peak ovulation days.
The temperature method involves taking your basal body temperature (your
temperature upon first waking up in the morning) each morning with an accurate
"basal" thermometer. Then, you note the rise in temperature that occurs after
ovulation takes place. Ovulation causes a slight, but noticeable rise in body
temperature which can be tracked over time. When you measure your temperature
every morning, you can learn to evaluate data over several months to recognize
your own fertility pattern. This helps you figure out which days to avoid sex.
Temperature method is most reliable when combined with the mucus method; the
two methods combined can have a success rate as high as 98 percent. Alone, the
temperature method is about 75 percent effective. (4)

![Natural birth control methods - Dr. Axe](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/12/BirthControlGraphic-1.jpg)

**5. Diaphragms** : These must be fitted by a doctor and are about 88 to 94
percent effective at preventing pregnancy. (5) They are thin, soft rubber
rings that are inserted into the upper part of the vagina to cover the cervix
and act as a barrier to sperm. They last for about 2 years unused, and cost
about $70.

**6. Cervical cap** : This is a heavy rubber cap that fits tightly over the
cervix. It must be put into place by a doctor and can be left in place for 48
hours. These have a 85 to 91 percent effectiveness rate depending on how
carefully it's used. (6)

**7 Lady Comp:** Lady Comp is a type of fertility monitor that 's been used in
Europe for nearly 30 years. According to the official Lady Comp website, this
monitor is an "intelligent, non-invasive, natural method of contraception …
it's a next-generation fertility monitor that learns, analyses and indicates
ovulation, fertile and non-fertile days with 99.3 percent premium accuracy,
which is free of invasive hormones and side effects." There are several
monitors available depending on your budget and needs. Most tell you whether
you're fertile by displaying a red light on your "fertile days" and a green
light during your infertile phase, allowing you to predict your peak-ovulation
days.

**8. Mucus method** : This involves tracking changes in the amount and texture
of vaginal discharge, which reflect rising levels of estrogen in the body. For
the first few days after your period, there is often no discharge, but there
will be a cloudy, tacky mucus as estrogen starts to rise. When the discharge
starts to increase in volume and becomes clear and stringy, ovulation is near.
A return to the tacky, cloudy mucus or no discharge means that ovulation has
passed. This method can work very well (about 90 percent effectively) when
used by women with regular cycles, however it's not a good match for those who
have **irregular periods** , frequent vaginal infections or irregular mucus,
who have recently given birth, or who have taken emergency contraceptives
recently (like Plan B). (7)

**9. Calendar method** : This is a term for practicing abstention from sex
during the week the woman is ovulating. This technique works best when a
woman’s menstrual cycle is very regular. The calendar method doesn’t work very
well for couples who use it by itself (about a 75 percent success rate), but
it can be effective when combined with the temperature and mucus methods (more
on this type of "rhythm method" is described below).

* * *

### **How Natural Birth Control Methods Work: Tracking Fertility Days**

Most women have an "average" cycle of about 28 days. Hormones in a woman's
body cause an egg to be released from the ovary, which is known as ovulation.
The egg travels through the fallopian tube towards the uterus and is only
available to be fertilized for 12 to 24 hours during the fertile window. If
sperm penetrates the egg, the fertilized egg will attach to the lining of the
uterus, and that is the **start of pregnancy**.

The _Your Fertility_ website states that: "The likelihood of actually becoming
pregnant is dramatically increased if you have intercourse in the three days
leading up to and including ovulation. If a woman has sex on any of these
three days, she has a 27 to 33 percent chance of becoming pregnant."

Other days surrounding the peak fertility days, the chance of conception drops
to about 10 to 16 percent. The number of days in a woman's cycle before
ovulation will typically range from 13 to 20 days (starting from the first day
of per period).

There are about six days in a woman's "fertile window." (Refresher: "Fertile
window" refers to the days during a woman's cycle when she can get pregnant.)
This window reflects the lifespan of sperm (5 days) and the lifespan of the
ovum (24 hours). The natural birth control methods above help pinpoint these
days. Sometimes, these methods use an extended fertility window to err on the
safe side when it comes to preventing pregnancy, such as making the window 8
to 9 days instead of 6. (8)

**In order to use many of these natural birth control methods, such as the
calendar method, here are directions and guidelines to get you started:**

**1. Start by keeping track of your cycles for about 3-6 months.** The more
time you give yourself to record data for your cycles, the more accurate these
methods will be (many experts recommend preparing for 6 to 12 months of your
cycle).

Using a calendar, write down the number of days in each menstrual cycle —
counting from the first day of your period to the first day of your next
period. Ovulation happens about two weeks before the next expected period
starts. If your cycle is on average 28 days long, and day one is when you
first start bleeding, day 14 is around your most fertile day. If ovulation
typically happens on day 14, your most fertile days are days 12, 13, and 14.

**2. Once you have an idea of your regular cycle, take note of _your shortest
menstrual cycle_ on record. ** Subtract 18 from the total number of days in
your shortest cycle. This number should be the first fertile day in your
cycle. If your cycle is about 28 days long, subtract 18 from 28 to get 10.
This means the 10th day after you begin bleeding (when your cycle starts) is
_potentially_ the most fertile day of the month, and the days surrounding this
day are also potentially fertile. To be very careful about not getting
pregnant, you may have to avoid sex for a longer period of time if your cycles
vary in length (no sex for about 7 to 9 days per month).

**3. Now do the same for your _longest menstrual cycle_**. Subtract 11 from
the total number of days in your longest cycle. If the longest cycle was 30
days, it would look like this: 30-11= 19. This means 19 days after you start
bleeding should be the last fertile day of your cycle. If you 're hoping to
get pregnant, you should plan to have sex during nearly all of your most
fertile days. If you're hoping to avoid pregnancy, avoid sex during your
entire extended fertile window for best protection. For best results, try to
keep tracking your cycle and updating your data every month to help you
pinpoint your fertile window.

* * *

### **Natural Ways to Prevent Pregnancy that Are NOT Reliable**

The fertility awareness method (FAM) and natural family planning (NFP) are two
popular and effective forms of natural contraception that are often
misunderstood and said to be unreliable. The misconceptions surrounding their
effectiveness mostly stem from people associating FAM or NFP with the
sometimes-inaccurate "rhythm method."

**What is the rhythm method?**

The rhythm method is also called the calendar method or the calendar rhythm
method. **This is basically the method described above for tracking fertility
days.** Like other natural birth control methods, the rhythm method relies on
avoiding conception by limiting sexual intercourse to the times of a woman's
menstrual cycle when ovulation is least likely to occur.

The rhythm method was used by couples for many years prior to the development
of FAM and NFP to help couples try and track fertility cycles in order to
prevent pregnancy — but it didn't utilize the same scientific principles or
measurements that newer and improved fertility methods use (like temperature
changes, mucus and so on). Therefore, many feel it does not do justice to the
nature and practice of FAM or NFP (also called by other names like the Sympto-
Thermal Method, the Ovulation Method, and the Billings Method. (9) FAM and NFP
combine the calendar/rhythm method, the basal body temperature method and the
cervical mucus method, so they do more than simply rely on one type of
measurement.

Overall, evidence suggests that calendar/rhythm methods work about 75 to 87
percent of the time, but that's not a risk some couples are willing to take.
(10) In other words, in the first year of typical use, an estimated 13 out of
100 women practicing the rhythm method alone for birth control will get
pregnant.

**Other concerns with natural birth control being reliable (stress, irregular
periods and inconsistency) :**

Some couples, and doctors, also feel that FAM or NFP are difficult, time-
consuming techniques that most women are not willing to learn and practice
properly. This has contributed to their mixed (sometimes negative) reputation
for not always working well.

The key to using these natural birth control methods is to learn how to
_accurately and diligently_ track fertility. If a woman’s cycle is irregular,
this may be more difficult to do. Overall, these methods take preparation and
willingness to wait and learn. They are both based on a woman learning her
signs of fertility. The main difference between them is that NFP practitioners
choose, often due to religious reasons, to abstain from having sex during the
woman’s fertile days. On the other hand, it 's common for FAM practitioner to
use barrier methods of contraception (such as condoms) during fertile days.

It's important to note that certain factors can impact hormone levels and make
it harder to determine your ovulation cycle naturally. For example, your
normal basal body temperature can be thrown off due to being sick, fatigued
and/or suffering from an ongoing **lack of sleep**. Because these can change
your body temperature, they make methods such as the temperature method
unreliable when used alone. To prevent "accidents," it's a better idea to
combine several natural birth control methods together for best results, such
as the mucus method and temperature method. Programs including Lady Comp help
do this for you by giving you temperature information and questions/prompts to
look for.

* * *

### **Precautions Regarding Natural Birth Control Methods**

Keep in mind that natural birth control methods don't usually work 100 percent
of the time, so remember there's always a risk for conception if you choose to
have sex. If you want to use natural methods for birth control, consult your
healthcare provider first if any of the following situations apply to you,
since these can affect your cycle and fertility:

        
                  * You recently had your very first period.
          * You gave birth within the past several months.
          * You recently stopped taking birth control pills or other hormonal contraceptives.
          * You're currently breastfeeding (this usually means you cannot get pregnant).
          * You have irregular menstrual cycles, or sometimes miss periods for extended periods of time (called amenorrhea).
          * You're approaching menopause or in peri-menopause.
        

* * *

### **Final Thoughts on Natural Birth Control Methods**

        
                  * More than 100 million women worldwide use birth control pills, however, there are dangers associated with birth control pills due to unnaturally altering a woman's estrogen levels. Levels are often raised far too high, causing symptoms of "estrogen dominance."
          * Risks associated with birth control pills may include: moodiness or depression, breast tenderness, nutrient deficiencies and possibly a higher risk for certain types of cancers.
          * I recommend utilizing safer, natural birth control methods that can also effectively help prevent pregnancy. These include Natural Family Planning (NFP, also called FAM), condoms or diaphragms, the temperature method or the mucus method.
        

#### **Read Next: How Endocrine Disruptors Destroy Your Body + The Dirty Dozen

to Avoid**

* * *

![](https://draxe.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/eo-opt-in.jpg)

![Josh Axe](/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/hero-josh-axe.png)

## Get FREE Access!

Dr. Josh Axe is on a mission to provide you and your family with the highest
quality nutrition tips and healthy recipes in the world...Sign up to get VIP
access to his eBooks and valuable weekly health tips for FREE!

![](/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/icon-book.png)

**Free eBook** to boost  
metabolism  & healing

![](/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/icon-recipes.png)

**30 Gluten-Free Recipes**  
& detox juicing guide

![](/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/icon-guide.png)

**Shopping Guide & **  
premium newsletter

Your Best Email *

Ad

![](https://draxe.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/KetoDietBook-Ad_300x250.jpg)

### Popular Posts

        
                  * All Time 
          * This Week
        

1![Secret Detox Drink Recipe \(A Natural Detox Drink

Recipe\)](https://draxe.com/wp-content/uploads/wordpress-popular-

posts/5309-featured-150x100.jpg)Secret Detox Drink Recipe (A Natural Detox
Drink Recipe)

* * *

2![Top 12 Natural Home Remedies for UTI](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/wordpress-popular-posts/58244-featured-150x100.jpg)Top 12
Natural Home Remedies for UTI

* * *

3![Salt Water Flush Recipe](https://draxe.com/wp-content/uploads/wordpress-

popular-posts/44003-featured-150x100.jpg)Salt Water Flush Recipe

* * *

4![16 Soothing Strep Throat Home Remedies](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/wordpress-popular-posts/64636-featured-150x100.jpg)16 Soothing
Strep Throat Home Remedies

* * *

5![Homemade Colon Cleanse with 3 Juices](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/wordpress-popular-posts/44044-featured-150x100.jpg)Homemade
Colon Cleanse with 3 Juices

* * *

1![Secret Detox Drink Recipe \(A Natural Detox Drink

Recipe\)](https://draxe.com/wp-content/uploads/wordpress-popular-

posts/5309-featured-150x100.jpg)Secret Detox Drink Recipe (A Natural Detox
Drink Recipe)

* * *

2![Top 12 Natural Home Remedies for UTI](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/wordpress-popular-posts/58244-featured-150x100.jpg)Top 12
Natural Home Remedies for UTI

* * *

3![16 Soothing Strep Throat Home Remedies](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/wordpress-popular-posts/64636-featured-150x100.jpg)16 Soothing
Strep Throat Home Remedies

* * *

4![Salt Water Flush Recipe](https://draxe.com/wp-content/uploads/wordpress-

popular-posts/44003-featured-150x100.jpg)Salt Water Flush Recipe

* * *

5![Homemade Colon Cleanse with 3 Juices](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/wordpress-popular-posts/44044-featured-150x100.jpg)Homemade
Colon Cleanse with 3 Juices

* * *

![Leaky Gut Webinar Advertisement](https://draxe.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/07/hlg-opt-in-side.jpg)

## More Health

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook 2467_** _Dr. Axe on Twitter 15 ** __ Dr. Axe on
Instagram_**_ Dr. Axe on Google Plus **__ Dr. Axe on Youtube_** _Dr. Axe on
Pintrest 1221 ** __ Share on Email_**_ Print Article 3.7K

### Hyperthyroidism Symptoms and Causes (Plus, What to Do About It)

Do you know the difference between hyperthyroidism vs hypothyroidism?
Hyperthyroidism occurs when the ...

Read More

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook 22_** _Dr. Axe on Twitter 22 ** __ Dr. Axe on
Instagram_**_ Dr. Axe on Google Plus **__ Dr. Axe on Youtube_** _Dr. Axe on
Pintrest 22 ** __ Share on Email_**_ Print Article 66

### 6 Sun Poisoning Natural Remedies (Plus, How It's Different from Sunburn)

Unfortunately, most people have experienced a sunburn at some point in their
...

Read More

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook 22_** _Dr. Axe on Twitter 22 ** __ Dr. Axe on
Instagram_**_ Dr. Axe on Google Plus **__ Dr. Axe on Youtube_** _Dr. Axe on
Pintrest 22 ** __ Share on Email_**_ Print Article 66

### The Best Probiotics for Dogs (+ 5 Benefits)

Probiotics are the "good" types of bacteria that play a role in ...

Read More

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook 22_** _Dr. Axe on Twitter 2 ** __ Dr. Axe on
Instagram_**_ Dr. Axe on Google Plus **__ Dr. Axe on Youtube_** _Dr. Axe on
Pintrest 22 ** __ Share on Email_**_ Print Article 46

### PFAS Contamination: Is This 'Forever Chemical' in Your Water?

Turns out America's drinking water woes expand far beyond lead. A class ...

Read More

View All

### Most Popular Health

        
                  * All Time 
          * This Week
        

1What Causes Cancer? Here Are 11 Unexpected Things

* * *

2The Best Sunscreens of 2019 (and Toxic Ones to Avoid)

* * *

3Poop: What's Normal, What's NOT + 7 Steps to Healthy Pooping

* * *

4Bad News for Your Brain: Artificially Sweetened Drinks Increase Risk of
Stroke and Dementia

* * *

5What Juuling Does to Your Body (It's Not Pretty)

* * *

1How to Stop Diarrhea: Causes, Risk Factors and Home Remedies

* * *

29 Candida Symptoms and 3 Steps to Treat Them

* * *

3Detox Your Liver: Try My 6-Step Liver Cleanse

* * *

4How to Get Rid of Herpes Symptoms Naturally

* * *

57 Steps to Balance Hormones Naturally

* * *

Let's Be Friends

____ Dr. Axe on Facebook 2.8M  
Likes

____ Dr. Axe on Instagram 460K  
Followers

____ Dr. Axe on Youtube 1.7M  
Subscribers

____ Dr. Axe on Pinterest 442.6K  
Followers

### Follow us:

**__ Dr. Axe on Facebook_** _Dr. Axe on Instagram ** __ Dr. Axe on Google
Plus_**_ Dr. Axe on Youtube **__ Dr. Axe on Pintrest_** _ Dr. Axe on RSS

### Inside Dr. Axe

        
                  * About Us
          * Contact
          * Media Inquiries
          * Upcoming Events
          * Stores We Love
          * Program Login
        

### Article Topics

        
                  * Bone Broth
          * Collagen
          * Essential Oils
          * Leaky Gut
          * Keto Diet
          * Omega 3s
          * Probiotics
        

* * *

#### Medical Disclaimer

This content is strictly the opinion of Dr. Josh Axe and is for informational
and educational purposes only. It is not intended to provide medical advice or
to take the place of medical advice or treatment from a personal physician.
All readers/viewers of this content are advised to consult their doctors or
qualified health professionals regarding specific health questions. Neither
Dr. Axe nor the publisher of this content takes responsibility for possible
health consequences of any person or persons reading or following the
information in this educational content. All viewers of this content,
especially those taking prescription or over-the-counter medications, should
consult their physicians before beginning any nutrition, supplement or
lifestyle program.

        
                  * Privacy Policy
          * Terms of Use
          * Affiliate Disclosure
          * DMCA Policy
          * Careers
        

(C) 2019 Dr. Axe. All Rights Reserved.

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/950638439/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

