

Skip to main content

    
        * sign up for newsletters
    * Home
    * News
      * Senate
      * House
      * Campaign
      * Administration
      * Business
      * Regulation
      * Media
      * Briefing Room
      * State Watch
      * Latino
      * Polls
      * 12:30 Report
      * Politics 101
      * Floor Action
      * In The Know
      * Sunday Talk Shows
    * Policy
      * Defense
      * Energy & Environment
      * Finance
      * Healthcare
      * Technology
      * Transportation
      * International
      * Cybersecurity
      * National Security
    * Regulation
      * Defense
      * Energy & Environment
      * Finance
      * Healthcare
      * Technology
      * Transportation
      * International
      * Cybersecurity
      * National Security
    * Opinion
      * Contributors
      * Columnists
      * Become a contributor
      * Congress Blog
    * Hill.TV
    * Video
      * Campaign
      * Defense
      * Energy & Environment
      * Finance
      * Healthcare
      * Technology
      * Transportation
      * International
      * Cybersecurity
      * National Security
      * Sunday Shows
      * Events
      * Lawmaker Interviews
    * Podcasts
      * HillCast
      * HistoryCast
    * Events
      * Upcoming Events
      * Past Events
      * About
    * People
    * Campaign
    

Follow Us

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn

TheHill.com

(C) 1996-2019 News Communication

    
        * Terms & Conditions
    * Privacy Policy
    

## Top menu

    
        * News
    
      * Senate
      * House
      * Administration
      * Campaign
      * Business
      * Regulation
      * Media
      * Briefing Room
      * State Watch
      * Latino
      * Polls
      * 12:30 Report
      * Politics 101
      * Floor Action
      * In The Know
      * Sunday Talk Shows
    
    * Policy
    
      * Defense
      * Energy & Environment
      * Finance
      * Healthcare
      * Technology
      * Transportation
      * International
      * Cybersecurity
      * National Security
    
    * Opinion
    
      * Columnists
      * Congress Blog
    

All Contributors

    
          * \- Campaign
      * \- Civil Rights
      * \- Criminal Justice
      * \- Education
      * \- Energy & Environment
      * \- Finance
      * \- Healthcare
      * \- Immigration
      * \- International
      * \- Judiciary
      * \- Technology
      * \- White House
      * \- Become A Contributor
    
    * Events
    
      * Upcoming Events
      * About
    
    * Jobs
    * HILL.TV
    

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn

## Search form

Search

## TRENDING:

    
        * Donald Trump
    * Impeachment
    * John Dean
    * Justin Amash
    

## SPONSORED:

    
        * Iran: The Untold Story
    

![TheHill.com](/sites/all/themes/thehill/images/redesign/thehill-logo-big.png)

# Tort reform key to cutting soaring healthcare costs

By Rep. Lamar Smith (R-TX) -- 03/19/10 06:03 PM EDT

The views expressed by contributors are their own and not the view of The Hill

View Latest Opinions >>

There are many reasons that most Americans strongly oppose the Washington
health care takeovers being considered by Congress.

While families and businesses are struggling against skyrocketing health care
costs, the Democrats’ plan would increase premiums by 10-13% for families
buying coverage on their own. And though the next generation will be forced to
address a $12 trillion national debt, the President has proposed spending
another $2.5 trillion on new entitlement programs.

Meanwhile, the process by which Obamacare is being jammed through Congress is
Washington at its worst--backroom negotiations, special pork-barrel deals, and
procedural tricks in both houses of Congress.

ADVERTISEMENT

But there is another reason to oppose Obamacare; the bill being debated in the
House includes special payoffs for trial lawyers that will encourage wasteful
litigation against doctors and increase the overall costs of health care for
patients.

Frivolous medical malpractice lawsuits already cost Americans billions of
dollars annually.

According to the Harvard School of Public Health, 40% of medical malpractice
suits filed in the U.S. are “without merit.” These predatory suits amount to
legalized extortion and require doctors to purchase malpractice insurance at
great expense. A Department of Health and Human Services study found that
unlimited excessive damages add between $70 billion and $126 billion annually
to health-care costs.

Doctors are so worried about frivolous lawsuits that they order unnecessary —
and expensive — tests and procedures. The Massachusetts Medical Society found
that 83% of its doctors practice this sort of defensive medicine. The costs of
litigation and defensive medicine are passed on to the patient in the price of
health care.

That’s why some states, including my home state of Texas, have enacted
lawsuit-abuse reform to limit the amount of excessive damages that can be
awarded. The result? More than 14,000 doctors have returned to Texas or set up
new practices in the state. That means Texans pay less to have better health
care and more options.

Based in part on the state-level success of tort reform, the Congressional
Budget Office estimates that lawsuit-abuse reform would save federal taxpayers
$54 billion over the next decade.

Despite clear and convincing evidence that lawsuit-abuse reform works,
Democrats refuse to include meaningful reforms in their proposals.

Instead, they’ve incorporated provisions that would make lawsuit abuse even
worse!

The House bill contains grant money for states to adopt alternatives to
litigation, such as health courts. Alternatives to litigation can be useful
when they are fair to both sides. But the version contained in Obamacare is
radically tilted in favor of plaintiffs’ lawyers.

To be eligible for federal grant money, a state’s alternative process must
allow the plaintiff (trial lawyer) to opt out “at any time.” So even if a
trial lawyer brings a claim before the new forum and loses, they are still
free to “opt out” and file in court to take their chances with a jury. While
trial lawyers will get two bites at the apple, doctors will be bound by the
results of either ruling and have no right to opt out. It is no wonder that
the trial lawyers’ top lobbyist in Washington declared this opt-out provision
a “stunning victory.”

ADVERTISEMENT

The bill also creates a new federal bureaucracy that will encourage lawsuits
against doctors and spur more defensive medicine. The bill attempts to control
costs by creating a “Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute” to research
the costs and benefits of various courses of medical treatment and make
recommendations on care for specific diagnoses.

Any doctor who deviates from the dictates of the bill’s new bureaucracy will
risk having that deviation used against them in court.

For example, doctors who recommend an extra measure of care that the
government considers "inefficient" will put themselves at risk of a lawsuit.

Trial lawyers will not hesitate to use any deviation from federal guidelines
to accuse doctors of failing to follow professional standards. Inevitably, the
trial bar will serve as enforcers of the dictates of Obamacare against
doctors.

Obamacare will put doctors at new risk for lawsuits, driving up health care
costs and undermining the successful lawsuit-abuse reforms of Texas and other
states. Lawsuit-abuse reform works. We can’t have real health care reform
without it.  
_  
Rep. Lamar Smith (R-TX) is the Ranking Republican on the House Judiciary
Committee._

View the discussion thread.

## Most Popular

## Video

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/screen_shot_2019-06-11_at_3.50.29_pm.jpg?itok=OfwPLIMs)

With costs weighed in, Americans less likely to back expanded role of
government in health care

What America's Thinking

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/screen_shot_2019-06-10_at_12.57.10_pm.jpg?itok=XMud_jrK)

Poll: Voters evenly split on using tariffs to bring about immigration changes

What America's Thinking

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/screen_shot_2019-06-07_at_1.10.31_pm.jpg?itok=iufB-

gfV)

Poll: 56 percent say Supreme Court should consider Roe v. Wade settled law

What America's Thinking

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/bidenjoe_051819gn31_lead.jpg?itok=vY1YZZZp)

Nevada Democrat defends Biden over Hyde Amendment reversal: 'Like any
politician, the vice president has evolved'

Rising

## More From The Web

Don't miss a brief. Sign up for our daily email.

Your Email

![TheHill.com](/sites/all/themes/thehill/images/redesign/thehill-logo-

footer.png)

## News

    
        * Senate
    * House
    * Campaign
    * Administration
    * Regulation
    * Media
    * Briefing Room
    * Latino
    * Polls
    * 12:30 Report
    * Floor Action
    * In The Know
    * Sunday Talk Shows
    * More
    

## Policy

    
        * Defense
    * Energy & Environment
    * Finance
    * Healthcare
    * Technology
    * International
    * Transportation
    * Cybersecurity
    * National Security
    * More
    

## Video

    
        * Latest
    * Defense
    * Energy & Environment
    * Finance
    * Healthcare
    * Technology
    * Transportation
    * International
    * Cybersecurity
    * National Security
    * Sunday Shows
    * Events
    * More
    

## Opinion

    
        * Brent Budowsky
    * Columnists
    * Congress Blog
    * Contributors
    * More
    

## TheHill.com

    
        * Privacy Policy
    * Terms & Conditions
    * Contact
    * Subscriptions
    * Advertise
    

## Resources

    
        * The Hill Apps
    * People
    * RSS
    

## Contributors

    
        * Become a Contributor
    

## Other Areas

    
        * Special Reports
    * Galleries
    * Classifieds
    * Jobs
    

The Hill 1625 K Street, NW Suite 900 Washington DC 20006 | 202-628-8500 tel |
202-628-8503 fax

The contents of this site are (C)2019 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp., a
subsidiary of News Communications, Inc.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=10314615&c3=&c4=https://thehill.com/opinion/op-

ed/87901-tort-reform-key-to-cutting-soaring-healthcare-

costs&c5=&c6=&c15=&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-51dZx4IkAE4Zk.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

