

The Balance

Universal Health Care in Different Countries, Pros and Cons of Each

Menu Search

Go

Go

    
        * Investing
      * Basics 
      * Stocks 
      * Real Estate 
      * Value Investing 
      * View All 
    * Credit & Debt
      * Building Credit 
      * Credit Card Basics 
      * Reducing Debt 
      * Reports & Scores 
      * View All 
    * Retirement Planning
      * Basics 
      * 401(k) Plans 
      * IRAs 
      * Social Security 
      * View All 
    * Banking & Loans
      * Basics 
      * Best Savings Account Rates 
      * Getting a Loan 
      * Online Banking 
      * View All
    

visit our other sites

Hot Topics

    
        * Financial Crisis
    * Obamacare
    * Subprime Crisis
    

US Economy Hot Topics

# Universal Health Care in Different Countries, Pros and Cons of Each

## Why America Is the Only Rich Country Without Universal Health Care

    
        * Share 
    * Pin 
    * Email
    

![](https://www.thebalance.com/thmb/lpzUcjvx6olHuO87tY1AaCRcgoA=/950x0/ProConUniversalHealthCare_4156211_final_2-5b9d7ce04bff4f8dab98a4b87deca55e.png)

Image by Tim Liedtke © The Balance 2019

By Kimberly Amadeo

Updated May 14, 2019

Universal health care is a system that provides quality medical services to
all citizens. The federal government offers it to everyone regardless of their
ability to pay.

Despite some similarities, Obamacare is not universal health care. Some
Americans advocate for a type of universal health care sometimes called
“Medicare for All.” It became popular with progressive Democrats in the 2018
midterm elections.

The sheer cost of providing quality health care makes universal health care a
large expense for governments. Most universal health care is funded by general
income taxes or payroll taxes. Some countries mandate that everyone buy health
insurance. While Obamacare had a mandate, it had too many exceptions to be
truly universal. A few countries rely on prepayment. Most universal health
care systems are funded by more than one of these funding methods.

### Types of Plans

In most countries, the government pays for health care provided by private
companies. These include the systems in Australia, Canada, France, Germany,
Singapore, and Switzerland. U.S. examples are Medicare, Medicaid, and TRICARE.
The United States also provides subsidies to health insurance companies
through Obamacare.

When the government both pays for and provides the services, that is
socialized medicine. The United Kingdom has this. The United States has it
with the Department of Veterans Affairs and the armed forces.

Countries often combine universal health coverage with other systems to
introduce competition. These include pay as you go, prepay, and private
insurance models. These options can lower costs, expand choice, or improve
care.

When governments pay for health care, they work to ensure doctors and
hospitals provide quality care at a reasonable cost. They must collect and
analyze data. They can also use their purchasing power to influence health
care providers.

The demand for universal health care began in 1948, the year the World Health
Organization declared health care a basic human right.

### Advantages

Universal health care **lowershealth care costs** for an economy. The
government controls the price of medication and medical services through
negotiation and regulation.

It **eliminates the administrative costs** of dealing with different private
health insurers. Doctors only deal with one government agency. U.S. doctors
must deal with many private insurance companies, Medicare, and Medicaid. It
standardizes billing procedures and coverage rules. Companies don 't have to
hire staff to deal with different health insurance company rules.

It forces hospitals and doctors to provide the **same standard of service** at
a low cost. In a competitive environment like the United States, health care
providers focus on new technology. They offer expensive services and pay
doctors more. They try to compete by targeting the wealthy. They charge more
to get a higher profit. It leads to higher costs.

Universal health care creates a **healthier workforce**. Studies show that
preventive care reduces the need for expensive emergency room usage. Before
Obamacare, 46% of emergency room patients went because they had no other place
to go. They used the emergency room as their primary care physician. This
health care inequality is a big reason for the rising cost of medical care.

Early childhood care **prevents future social costs**. These include crime,
welfare dependency, and health issues. Health education teaches families how
to make healthy lifestyle choices, preventing chronic diseases.

Governments can impose regulations and taxes to **guide the population**
toward healthier choices. Regulations make unhealthy choices, such as drugs,
illegal. Sin taxes, such as those on cigarettes and alcohol, make them more
expensive.

### Disadvantages

Universal health care forces healthy people to **pay for others '** medical
care. Chronic diseases, like diabetes and heart disease, make up 85% of health
care costs. These diseases can often be prevented with lifestyle choices. The
sickest 5% of the population consumes 50% of total health care costs. The
healthiest 50% consume only 3% of the nation's health care costs.

With free universal health care, **people may not be as careful** with their
health. They don 't have the financial incentive to do so. Without a copay,
people might overuse emergency rooms and doctors.

Most universal health systems report **long wait times** for elective
procedures. The government focuses on providing basic and emergency health
care.

Governments limit payment amounts to keep costs low. Doctors have **less
incentive to provide quality care** if they aren 't well paid. They might
spend less time per patient to keep their costs down. They have less funding
for new life-saving technologies.

Health care costs **overwhelm government budgets**. For example, some Canadian
provinces spend 40% of their budget on health care. That reduces funding for
other programs like education and infrastructure.

To cut costs, the **government may limit services** with a low probability of
success. It may not cover drugs for rare conditions. It may prefer palliative
care over expensive end-of-life care. On the other hand, the U.S. medical
system does a heroic job of saving lives, but at a cost. Care for patients in
the last six years of life makes up one-fourth of the Medicare budget. In
their last month of life, half go to the emergency room. One-third wind up in
the intensive care unit and one-fifth undergo surgery.

### Developed Countries With Universal Health Care

Out of the 33 developed countries, 32 have universal health care. They adopt
one of the following three models.

In a single-payer system, the government taxes its citizens to pay for health
care. Twelve of the 32 countries have this system. The United Kingdom is an
example of single-payer socialized medicine. Services are government-owned and
service providers are government employees. Other countries use a combination
of government and private service providers.

Six countries enforce an insurance mandate. It requires everyone to buy
insurance, either through their employer or the government. Germany is the
best example of this system.

The nine remaining countries use a two-tier approach. The government taxes its
citizens to pay for basic government health services. Citizens can also opt
for better services with supplemental private insurance. France is the best
example.

### Summary of Seven Countries' Universal Health Plans

**Australia:** Australia adopted a two-tier system. The government pays two-
thirds, and the private sector pays one-third. The public universal system is
called Medicare. Everyone receives coverage. That includes visiting students,
people seeking asylum, and those with temporary visas. People must pay
deductibles before government payments kick in. Half of the residents have
paid for private health insurance to receive a higher quality of care. Those
who buy private insurance before they reach 30 receive a lifetime discount.

Government regulations protect seniors, the poor, children, and rural
residents.

In 2016, health care cost 9.6% of Australia's gross domestic product. The per
capita cost was US$4,798. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development disclosed that 22.4% of patients reported a wait time of more than
four weeks to see a specialist. On the other hand, only 7.8% of patients
skipped medications because the cost was too high. In 2015, the Australian
life expectancy was 84.5 years.

**Canada:** Canada has a single-payer system. The government pays for services
provided by a private delivery system. The government pays for 70% of care.
Private supplemental insurance pays for vision, dental care, and prescription
drugs. Hospitals are publicly funded. They provide free care to all residents
regardless of the ability to pay. The government keeps hospitals on a fixed
budget to control costs. It reimburses doctors at a fee-for-service rate. It
negotiates bulk prices for prescription medicine.

In 2016, health care cost 10.6% of Canada’s GDP. The cost per person was
US$4,752, and 10.5% of patients skipped prescriptions because of cost. A
whopping 56.3% of patients waited more than four weeks to see a specialist. As
a result, many patients who can afford it go to the United States for care. In
2015, the life expectancy was 82.2 years. Canada has high survival rates for
cancer and low hospital admission rates for asthma and diabetes.

**France:** France has an excellent two-tier system. Its mandatory health
insurance system covers 75% of health care spending. That includes hospitals,
doctors, drugs, and mental health. Doctors are paid less than in other
countries, but their education and insurance is free. The French government
also pays for homeopathy, house calls, and child care. Of that, payroll taxes
fund 40%, income taxes cover 30%, and the rest is from tobacco and alcohol
taxes. For-profit corporations own one-third of hospitals.

Patients give care consistent high ratings.

In 2016, health care cost 11% of GDP. That was US$4,600 per person. In 2013,
49.3% of patients reported a wait time of more than four weeks to see a
specialist. But only 7.8% of patients skipped prescriptions because of cost.
In 2015, the life expectancy was 85.5 years.

**Germany:** Germany has mandatory health insurance sold by 130 private
nonprofits. It covers hospitalization, outpatient, prescription drugs, mental
health, eye care, and hospice. There are copays for hospitalization,
prescriptions, and medical aids. There is additional mandatory long-term care
insurance. Funding comes from payroll taxes. The government pays for most of
the health care. It limits the amount of the payments and the number of people
each doctor can treat. People can buy more coverage.

In 2016, health care cost 11.3% of GDP. That averaged US$5,550 per person.
Only 3.2% of patients skipped prescriptions because of cost. Also, 11.9% of
patients reported a wait time of more than four weeks to see a specialist. But
most Germans can get next-day or same-day appointments with general
practitioners. In 2015, the life expectancy was 83.1 years.

**Singapore:** Singapore 's two-tier system is one of the best in the world.
Two-thirds is private and one-third public spending. It provides five classes
of hospital care. The government manages hospitals that provide low-cost or
free care. It sets regulations that control the cost of the entire health care
system. People can buy higher levels of deluxe care for a fee. Workers pay 20%
of their salary to three mandated savings accounts. The employer pays another
16% into the account. One account is for housing, insurance, or education
investment.

The second account is for retirement savings. The third is for health care.
The Medisave account collects 7% to 9.5% of income, earns interest, and is
capped at the $43,500 income. More than 90% of the population enrolls in
Medishield, a catastrophic insurance program. The Medifund pays for health
costs after the Medisave and Medishield accounts are exhausted. Eldershield
pays for nursing home care. Once an employee turns 40, a portion of income is
automatically deposited into the account.

In 2009, Singapore spent 4.9% of its GDP on health care. That's US$2,000 per
person. In 2015, life expectancy was 83.1 years.

**Switzerland:** The country has mandatory health insurance that covers all
residents. Quality of care is one of the best in the world. Coverage is
provided by competing private insurance companies. People can buy voluntary
insurance to access better hospitals, doctors, and amenities. The government
pays for 60% of the country 's health care. Dental care is not covered. Vision
is only covered for children. The government subsidizes premiums for low-
income families, about 30% of the total. There is a 10% coinsurance cost for
services and 20% for drugs.

These out-of-pocket costs are waived for maternity care, preventive care, and
child hospitalization. The government sets prices.

In 2016, health care spending was 12.4% of GDP. It was US $7,919 per person.
There were 11.6% of patients who skipped prescriptions because of cost. Also,
20.2% of patients reported a wait time of more than four weeks to see a
specialist. In 2015, life expectancy was 83.4 years.

**United Kingdom:** The United Kingdom has single-payer socialized medicine.
The National Health Service runs hospitals and pays doctors as employees. The
government pays 80% of costs through general taxes. It pays for all medical
care, including dental, hospice care, and some long-term care and eye care.
There are some copays for drugs. All residents receive free care. Visitors
receive care for emergencies and infectious diseases. Private insurance for
elective medical procedures is available.

In 2016, health care costs were 9.7% of GDP. The cost was US$4,193 per person.
Only 2.3% of patients skipped prescriptions because of cost. But 29.9% of
patients reported a wait time of more than four weeks to see a specialist. To
keep prices low, some expensive and uncommon drugs aren't available. Hospitals
can be crowded with long wait times. In 2018, the flu outbreak extended wait
times to 12 hours. But most measures of health, like infant mortality rates,
are better than average. In 2015, life expectancy was 81.2 years.

### Comparison to the United States

The United States has a mixture of government-run and private insurance. The
government pays most of the cost, but also subsidizes private health insurance
through Obamacare. One-third of the costs is for administration, not patient
care. Health care service providers are private. Sixty percent of citizens get
private insurance from their employers. Fifteen percent receive Medicare for
those 65 and older. The federal government also funds Medicaid for low-income
families and the Children's Health Insurance Program for children.

It pays for veterans, Congress, and federal employees. Despite all these,
there are 28 million Americans who have no coverage. They either are exempt
from the Obamacare mandate or can't afford insurance.

In 2016, health care cost 18% of GDP. That was a staggering US$9,892 per
person. Exactly 18% of patients skipped prescriptions because of cost. But
only 4.9% of patients reported a wait time of more than four weeks to see a
specialist. In 2015, life expectancy was 79.3 years. The third leading cause
of death was a medical error. The quality of care is low. It ranks 28th
according to the United Nations.

Why does the United States have such high costs and such low quality? Most
patients don't pay for their medical services. As a result, they can't price-
shop doctors and hospital procedures. There is no competitive reason for
providers to offer lower costs. The government can negotiate lower prices for
those covered by Medicare and Medicaid. But competing health insurance
companies don't have the same leverage.

Insurance and drug companies want to maintain the status-quo. They don't want
the government restricting prices. They lobby to prevent universal health
care. But 60% of Americans want Medicare for all. California, Ohio, Colorado,
Vermont, and New York are moving toward universal health care in their states.

### Universal Health Care Comparison Chart

Country | Type | % of GDP | Per Capita | Wait 4+ wks | Infant Mortality Rate
(2017)  
\---|---|---|---|---|---  
Australia | 2-tier | 9.6% | $4,798 | 22% | 3.0  
Canada | Single | 10.6% | $4,752 | 56.3% | 4.5  
France | 2-tier | 11.0% | $4,600 | 49.3% | 3.5  
Germany | Mandate | 11.3% | $5,550 | 11.9% | 3.1  
Singapore | 2-tier | 4.9% | $2,000 | | 2.2  
Switzerland | Mandate | 12.4% | $7,919 | 20.2% | 3.7  
United Kingdom | Single | 9.7% | $4,193 | 29.9% | 3.7  
United States | Private | 18.0% | $9,892 | 4.9% | 5.7

### Brief History of Universal Health Care in America

In 1993, President Bill Clinton pushed for universal health care to lower the
Medicare budget. First Lady Hillary Clinton led the initiative. Hillarycare
used a managed competition strategy to achieve its purpose. The government
would control the costs of doctor bills and insurance premiums. Health
insurance companies would compete to provide the best and lowest cost
packages. The plan encountered too much resistance from doctors, hospitals,
and insurance companies to pass Congress.

In the 2008 presidential campaign, Senator Barack Obama outlined a universal
plan. Obama's health care reform plan offered a publicly-run program similar
to that enjoyed by Congress. People could choose it or buy private insurance
on an exchange. No one could be denied health insurance because of a pre-
existing condition. The federal government would expand Medicaid funding and
add subsidies.

In 2009, President Obama proposed the Health Care for America Plan. It
provided Medicare for all who wanted it. Monthly premiums were $70 for an
individual, $140 for a couple, $130 for a single-parent family, and $200 for
all other families.

Employers could continue offering their plan if it was as good as the national
plan. If they elected the national plan, they would pay a 6% payroll tax. The
federal government could have bargained for lower prices and reduce
inefficiencies. That would have lowered health care costs by 1.5% per year. It
would have reduced visits to the emergency room by the uninsured.

Too many people were afraid of universal health care. In 2010, Congress passed
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. More than half or 57% of
Americans incorrectly think the ACA is universal health care. It attempted to
enforce mandatory health insurance, similar to Germany's plan. But it allowed
too many exemptions. It also allowed states to decide whether they would
expand Medicaid. As a result, 13 million people still went without insurance.
Trump's tax plan removes the mandate in 2019.

2020 presidential candidate Bernie Sanders proposes a Medicare-for-all
universal health plan. The government-run program would enroll all Americans.
They would have no deductibles, copayments, or out-of-pocket expenses. Sanders
would raise taxes to pay for it. The country would transition from Medicare,
Medicaid, and all insurance to the new program over four years. The Veterans
Affairs and Indian Health Services would remain.

The plan would cover hospital visits, primary care, medical devices, lab
services, maternity care, and prescription drugs. It would also cover vision
and dental benefits as well as long-term care. Obamacare dropped long-term
care because it was too expensive.

The plan would cut administrative costs associated with the variety of
insurance plans available today. The New England Journal of Medicine estimates
that U.S. administrative costs are double that of Canada. A 2011 study
estimates U.S. doctors spend four times as much as Canada dealing with
insurance companies.

### The Bottom Line

Although more than half Americans support the idea of universal health care,
U.S. health care is not as inclusive as in Germany, Switzerland, France,
Singapore, and the United Kingdom. Obamacare is the closest to universality
the United States has ever implemented, but it falls short because of its many
exemptions.

For universal health care to work, everyone, including healthy people, must
pay premiums or additional taxes to pay for health care. This funds the
security health blanket for all citizens. Ideally, with a health care system
under government regulation, everyone will have access to quality treatments
at low costs. Such a system would provide very affordable preventative care
and implement strict control of pricing and quality of drugs and medical
services.

Article Table of Contents Skip to section

Expand

    
        * Types of Plans
    
    * Advantages
    
    * Disadvantages
    
    * Countries With Universal Health Care
    
    * Summary of Seven Countries' Plans
    
    * Comparison to the United States
    
    * Universal Health Care Comparison Chart
    
    * Brief History of Universal Health Care
    
    * The Bottom Line
    

Continue Reading

+

    
        * ![emergency room professionals](//:0)
    

#### See for Yourself If Obamacare Increased Health Care Costs

    
        * ![family-with-wheelchair](//:0)
    

#### What You Will and Won't Lose If Obamacare Is Replaced

    
        * ![Happy healthy people getting medical services with single-payer health insurance](//:0)
    

#### Understanding Single-Payer Health Insurance or "Medicare for All"

    
        * ![healthcare costs lead to bankruptcies](//:0)
    

#### Awful Truths About the Cost of Health Care in America

    
        * ![Man paying for health care](//:0)
    

#### How Health Care Inequality Increases Costs for Everyone

    
        * ![African American medical professional holding baby](//:0)
    

#### How Does Health Insurance Work?

    
        * ![](//:0)
    

#### 4 Reasons Why We Need Healthcare Reform

    
        * ![The Truth About Obamacare](//:0)
    

#### 14 Obamacare Myths: What's the Truth Behind Them?

    
        * ![Baby getting temperature taken under armpit](//:0)
    

#### How the Affordable Health Care Act Affects You

    
        * ![Obamacare explained](//:0)
    

#### Obamacare: Simple Enough to Explain to Your Kids

    
        * ![Child with doctor](//:0)
    

#### Preventive Care: How It Lowers Healthcare Costs in America

    
        * ![senior man paying doctor in foreign currency](//:0)
    

#### 4 Ways Expats Can Cover Healthcare Costs When Medicare Isn't an Option

    
        * ![Obama Healthcare Reform](//:0)
    

#### How Insurance Companies Changed Obama's Healthcare Reform Plan

    
        * ![Bill and Hillary Clinton](//:0)
    

#### Why Did Hillarycare Really Fail? How It Affects You Today.

    
        * ![obamacare](//:0)
    

#### How to Make Obamacare Work for You

    
        * ![Happy female doctor and nurse discussing with male patient in clinic](//:0)
    

#### What You Really Need to Know About Obamacare

Our Best Money Tips, Delivered

Email Address

Sign up

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Facebook Pinterest Twitter Flipboard Linkedin

    
        * Investing
    * Credit & Debt
    * Retirement Planning
    * Banking & Loans
    * About Us
    * Advertise
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Careers
    * Contact
    * Editorial Guidelines
    

Also from The Balance Team

The Balance Small Business

The Balance Careers

The Balance is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

    
        * Lifewire
    * ThoughtCo
    * TripSavvy
    * The Spruce
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

