

Homepage

## Accessibility links

    
        * Skip to content
    * Accessibility Help
    

BBC Account

Notifications

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Sport
    * Weather
    * iPlayer
    * Sounds
    * CBBC
    * CBeebies
    * Food
    * Bitesize
    * Arts
    * Taster
    * Local
    * TV
    * Radio
    * Three
    * Menu
    

Search

Search the BBCSearch the BBC

News

## BBC News Navigation

Sections

    
        * Home
    * Video
    * World
    * Asia
    * UK selected
    * Business
    * Tech
    * Science
    * Stories
    * Entertainment & Arts
    * Health
    * World News TV
    * In Pictures
    * Reality Check
    * Newsbeat
    * Special Reports
    * Explainers
    * The Reporters
    * Have Your Say
    

UK selected

    
        * England
    * N. Ireland
    * Scotland
    * Wales
    * Politics
    

UK

UK

# Reality Check: Does UK spend half as much on health as US?

By Reality Check team BBC News

    
        * 6 February 2018
    
    * Share this with Facebook
    * Share this with Messenger
    * Share this with Twitter
    * Share this with Email
    * Share this with Facebook
    * Share this with WhatsApp
    * Share this with Messenger
    * Share this with Twitter
    * Share
    

Share this with

These are external links and will open in a new window

    
          * Email
    

Share this with Email

    
          * Facebook
    

Share this with Facebook

    
          * Messenger
    

Share this with Messenger

    
          * Messenger
    

Share this with Messenger

    
          * Twitter
    

Share this with Twitter

    
          * Pinterest
    

Share this with Pinterest

    
          * WhatsApp
    

Share this with WhatsApp

    
          * LinkedIn
    

Share this with LinkedIn

Copy this link

https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-42950587

Read more about sharing.

These are external links and will open in a new window

Close share panel

Related Topics

    
        * Reality Check
    

![Simon Stevens saying: Healthcare for everybody delivered at half the cost of

the US healthcare system is something that people in this country are deeply

and rightly committed

to.](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/news/320/cpsprodpb/ECEA/production/_99905606_stevens_nhs_quote.png)

**The claim:** The NHS costs half as much as the US health system, and cares
for the whole population.

**Reality Check verdict:** If you look at every penny spent on health by
anyone in the country, then the UK spends about half as much on health as the
US does. But if you compare the amount spent on the NHS with the amount spent
by the US government on public healthcare, the difference is much smaller.

US President Donald Trump has caused a stir by tweeting his criticisms of the
UK's universal healthcare, describing it as a system that is "going broke and
not working".

NHS England boss Simon Stevens responded that "healthcare for everybody
delivered at half the cost of the US healthcare system is something that
people in this country are deeply and rightly committed to".

In the UK, healthcare is universal, while in the States there are 28 million
people who are not covered by public or private insurance.

But does the NHS really cost half as much?

If you look at all healthcare spending, including treatment funded privately
by individuals, the US spent 17.2% of its GDP on healthcare in 2016, compared
with 9.7% in the UK.

In pounds per head, that's £2,892 on healthcare for every person in the UK and
£7,617 per person in the US.

So as a proportion of the value of the goods and services produced by all
sectors of the economy the UK spends a bit more than half what the US spends,
and in spending per head it's a bit less than half.

The difficulty is, when it comes to comparing healthcare in different
countries, you're never exactly comparing like for like.

    
        * Rally in London calls for action on NHS 'crisis'
    * 10 charts that show why the NHS is in trouble
    

Almost all health systems are a mixture of public and private - it's the ratio
that varies.

In the UK, the public health system can be accessed by all permanent
residents, is mostly free at the point of use and is almost entirely paid for
through taxation.

Americans are far more likely to rely on private insurance to fund their
healthcare since accessing public healthcare is dependent on your income.

Many European countries, meanwhile, have a social insurance system where
insurance contributions are mandatory. This doesn't fall under general
taxation but is not dissimilar from paying National Insurance in the UK and
means everyone can access healthcare.

Image Copyright @realDonaldTrump @realDonaldTrump

Report

![Twitter post by @realDonaldTrump: The Democrats are pushing for Universal

HealthCare while thousands of people are marching in the UK because their U

system is going broke and not working. Dems want to greatly raise taxes for

really bad and non-personal medical care. No

thanks!](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/news/1024/socialembed/https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/960486144818450432~/news/uk-42950587)
Image Copyright @realDonaldTrump @realDonaldTrump

Report

But even if you look only at public money spent on health, the US government's
spending on healthcare still outstrips UK government spending, both in terms
of the proportion of its GDP (the way we normally measure the size of a
country's economy) and in terms of how much it spends per head.

Almost half of US health spending still comes from public money including
general taxation - although it's the only country in the G7 to pay publicly
for less than 50% of all healthcare that's provided.

What this doesn't tell you, though, is how effective a healthcare system is,
and this seems to be what Mr Stevens was getting at.

## Life expectancy

The UK government spends less on health and provides a universal service where
every permanent resident can access care.

In the US, even after major changes to the system, there are 28 million people
who don't have any private or public insurance.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) says life
expectancy in the United States is slightly lower than average, despite very
high levels of health spending.

In many cases, the more a country spends on healthcare per person, the longer
its citizens' life expectancy.

## Gun crime and opioids

But while the US spends more per person than the UK on healthcare, in 2014,
average life expectancy at birth in the USA was 78.8, compared with 81.4 in
the UK according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS).

"Japan spent the fifth most per person on healthcare and had the highest life
expectancy, while Italy spent the least per person and had the second highest
life expectancy," the ONS's statisticians point out.

Life expectancy is a helpful, although not perfect indicator of the quality of
a nation's healthcare.

It is affected by other complicated social factors, such as diet and the
prevalence of smoking.

Americans consume more tobacco per head than Britons and are more likely to be
overweight or obese.

Opioid deaths and gun crime also affect average American life expectancy.

## Safety, affordability and efficiency

In the summer, US think tank the Commonwealth Fund ranked the NHS the number
one health system in a comparison of 11 countries for safety, affordability
and efficiency. It did less well when it came to cancer survival

The US was ranked last out of the 11 countries.

The American health system came off badly in comparison when it came to infant
mortality, life expectancy, and preventable deaths, but did relatively better
on cancer, heart attack and stroke survival.

Meanwhile, the UK's cancer survival rates have historically been below the
European average, although they are improving for certain cancers.

The UK has fewer doctors, nurses and hospital beds than the OECD average.

Read more from Reality Check

Send us your questions

Follow us on Twitter

## Related Topics

    
        * Healthcare in the US
    * Reality Check
    * Donald Trump
    * NHS
    

## Share this story About sharing

    
        * Email
    * Facebook
    * Messenger
    * Messenger
    * Twitter
    * Pinterest
    * WhatsApp
    * LinkedIn
    

## More on this story

    
        * President Trump: NHS 'going broke and not working'
    

5 February 2018

## Related Internet links

    
        * NHS England
    
    * OECD health statistics
    

The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites

## Top Stories

**Protesters surround government buildings in HK**

The government has said it will push for a bill allowing extradition to China
despite growing anger.

12 June 2019

**Why they're taking to the streets in Hong Kong**

12 June 2019

**Trump accidentally reveals Mexico migrant plan**

12 June 2019

## Features

### 'I saw the damage': Chernobyl workers assess TV series

Video

### Why they're taking to the streets in Hong Kong

Video

### How we wrapped the Reichstag

### Sci-fi shoulders wow African fashionistas

Video

### 'Why being stateless ends my dreams'

### The man who saved millions from starvation

### Why talking to strangers could be good for you

### What's the right age to quit maths?

### BBC Capital: How to tell if you’re close to burnout

## Elsewhere on the BBC

### Lyrics quiz

Have you been getting these songs wrong?

Full article Lyrics quiz

### Feeling hot

What happens to your body in extreme heat?

Full article Feeling hot

Why you can trust BBC News

## BBC News Navigation

UK Sections

    
        * England
    * N. Ireland
    * Scotland
    * Wales
    * Politics
    * Home
    * Video
    * World
    
      * World Home
      * Africa
      * Australia
      * Europe
      * Latin America
      * Middle East
      * US & Canada
    
    * Asia
    
      * Asia Home
      * China
      * India
    
    * UK selected
    
      * UK Home
      * England
      * N. Ireland
      * Scotland
      * Wales
      * Politics
    
    * Business
    
      * Business Home
      * Market Data
      * Global Trade
      * Companies
      * Entrepreneurship
      * Technology of Business
      * Connected World
      * Global Education
      * Economy
    
    * Tech
    * Science
    * Stories
    * Entertainment & Arts
    * Health
    * World News TV
    * In Pictures
    * Reality Check
    * Newsbeat
    * Special Reports
    * Explainers
    * The Reporters
    * Have Your Say
    

## BBC News Services

    
        * On your mobile
    * On your connected tv
    * Get news alerts
    * Contact BBC News
    

## Explore the BBC

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Sport
    * Weather
    * iPlayer
    * Sounds
    * CBBC
    * CBeebies
    * Food
    * Bitesize
    * Arts
    * Taster
    * Local
    * TV
    * Radio
    * Three
    
    * Terms of Use
    * About the BBC
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookies
    * Accessibility Help
    * Parental Guidance
    * Contact the BBC
    * Get Personalised Newsletters
    

_Copyright (C) 2019 BBC._ The BBC is not responsible for the content of
external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

![](//ssc.api.bbc.com/?c1=2&c2=19293874&ns_site=bbc&name=)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

