

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

    
        *     *     *     * Log In or Sign Up
    * Log In
    * Sign Up
    
    * Recode 
    * Explainers 
    * The Highlight 
    * Future Perfect 
    * The Goods 
    * Politics & Policy 
    * Culture 
    * Science & Health 
    * World 
    * Identities 
    * Energy & Environment 
    * Technology 
    * Business & Finance 
    * First Person 
    * Video 
    * Podcasts 
    * More
    
    * Recode 
    * Explainers 
    * The Highlight 
    * Future Perfect 
    * The Goods 
    * Politics & Policy 
    * Culture 
    * Science & Health 
    * World 
    * Identities 
    * Energy & Environment 
    * Technology 
    * Business & Finance 
    * First Person 
    * Video 
    * Podcasts
    

✕

# The case for single-payer, explained in 3 charts

New York has a single-payer plan, and the numbers add up this time.

By Dylan Scott@dylanlscott Aug 3, 2018, 1:40pm EDT

Share Tweet Share

**Share** The case for single-payer, explained in 3 charts

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

I hope you aren’t sick of single-payer projections yet. RAND has a fascinating
**new one** , looking at a New York plan for universal coverage.

First, the specifics of the New York Health Act:

    
        * Every resident would be covered by the New York Health program.
    * Cost-sharing would be effectively eliminated for all residents, and almost all services would be covered — with the exception of long-term care.
    * The state’s single-payer program would be paid for through a combination of existing federal and state health care funding, plus new payroll taxes and a progressive tax on non-payroll income like stock dividends.
    

The RAND study’s big-picture findings read like a state-level version of
George Mason University’s analysis of **Bernie Sanders’s Medicare for All
bill** :

    
        * Federal funding would be about the same because of the way the program is structured, but New York state’s health care spending would increase fivefold over 10 years, versus the projected status quo.
    * However, overall health care spending in New York would go down slightly, about 2 percent, even as more services and more people are covered.
    

But RAND gets a little more granular and helps to answer some of the questions
about winners and losers that will likely define the single-payer debate,
should we ever have one in Washington.

A couple of charts explain as well as I can what single-payer in New York
might look like in 2031.

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/7rRX8StDpHa9Y5xCb6LVcDCi9vg=/0x0:1022x661/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:1022x661\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/11919225/voxcare_9_3_1_.png) RAND

As you can see, New York would be spending a modest amount less on health care
after 10 years under single-payer than it would under the status quo,
according to the RAND projections. $15 billion isn’t really that much in the
grand scheme of things, as crazy as that sounds.

However, that same spending will cover more people and more services, _and_
more of it will be spent on health care. RAND finds that New York would be
spending $23 billion _less_ on administration and $9 billion _more_ on health
care services under this single-payer plan.

Here’s another good chart:

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/YLEpORHDF7iBEjekhf8uGD_14nw=/0x0:963x672/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:963x672\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/11919227/voxcare_9_3_2.png) RAND

One thing sticks out most to me: New Yorkers would be spending half as much
money out of their own pockets when they go to the doctor or get a
prescription under single-payer than they would under the current system: $23
billion versus $52 billion.

The other thing this chart helpfully illustrates: New tax payments would
almost perfectly replace the premiums that people and their employers pay
right now for private health insurance. It’s not quite an exact match, but
it’s very close: $195 billion for premiums versus $210 billion in new taxes.

Then there is the question of _who_ is paying for this new system. RAND’s
conclusion is pretty simple: “We find that payments for health care would be
more progressive under the NYHA [New York Health Act] than under the status
quo.”

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/5z6jKpbwtC2YzRuCt1LB7BXO4H0=/0x0:830x661/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:830x661\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/11919229/voxcare_9_3_3.png) RAND

Basically everyone making under 1,000 percent or less of the federal poverty
level — about $120,000 for an individual or $250,000 for a family of four in
2018 — would pay the same or less if you look at everything from their out-of-
pocket spending to taxes they pay that fund health care.

A family making 139 percent of the poverty level (the Medicaid expansion
cutoff) would see their spending drop from $2,700 to $1,300 under single-
payer. Families who make 500 percent of the poverty level would have their
spending cut from $10,000 to $6,400 on average.

Wealthier families might spend a lot more, though. The families making more
than 2,000 percent of the poverty level would see their spending (a lot of
this is taxes) increase from $141,700 on average in 2022 under the status quo
to about $218,000 under the New York Health Act.

That is a genuine trade-off. Single-payer proponents’ support turns on the
idea that health care is a human right, even for the less fortunate. So this
might be a trade-off they are willing to make.

In fact, in total, if you look at the RAND research, it outlines what you
could imagine as the pillars of the argument for single-payer health care:

    
        * We would spend less money overall, while spending more on actual health care and covering more people and services.
    * Any new taxes would be effectively replacing the premiums you and your employer already pay.
    * Yes, some higher-income people would pay more, but the working and middle classes would save money.
    

This comes with caveats, as any projection does. It assumes single-payer would
be able to substantially cut payments to providers without reducing access to
care. It assumes New York Health won’t cover long-term care, which is very
important as our population gets older and very expensive.

But I think between the RAND and the George Mason studies this week has shown
that there is at least a case to be made for single-payer. The question will
be whether its supporters can artfully make it — and whether the people find
it persuasive.

vox-mark

### VoxCare

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

_This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and
turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to_ _ **get VoxCare in your
inbox** __ ****__along with more health care stats and news._

## Next Up In Politics & Policy

    
        * Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for representation
    * How the US women’s team World Cup 13-0 win became about pay equity
    * Alabama’s law forcing sex offenders to get chemically castrated, explained
    * Watch Jon Stewart blast Congress on behalf of 9/11 first responders
    * The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress
    * Pete Buttigieg just gave his first foreign policy speech. He offered 5 clear proposals.
    

### Most Read

    
        1. The House just voted to hold AG William Barr in contempt of Congress Democrats escalate their fight with the Trump administration.
    2. Trump is reportedly in denial about his campaign’s bleak internal polling This is fine.
    3. Mary Meeker’s most important trends on the internet  Here are all the slides, plus analysis.
    4. Processed foods are a much bigger health problem than we thought They’ve been linked to disease and overeating. Could our microbiome explain why?
    5. Elaine Chao and Mitch McConnell’s potential conflict of interest, explained Chao oversaw grant money that could benefit her husband politically. Is it an ethics violation?
    

vox-mark

### Future Perfect

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 36. The sidebar size is long.

## The Latest

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63990044/Paula_Kerger_and_Yamiche_Alcindor_1.0.0.jpg)

## Apple’s attempts to limit data sharing on kids’ apps is negatively

impacting PBS

By Emily Stewart

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989647/GettyImages_1147791146.165114.0.jpg)

## Vox Sentences: Maine moves to expand abortion access

By Catherine Kim

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989585/Anthony_Noto_2.0.0.jpg)

## Why SoFi would be interested in buying naming rights to the LA football

stadium

By Theodore Schleifer

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989470/Rajiv_Shah_1.0.0.jpg)

## Rockefeller Foundation’s Rajiv Shah explains how tech can actually help

save the world

By Rani Molla

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989472/1144683170.jpg.0.jpg)

## Activists see NBC’s Democratic debate moderators as a win for

representation

By Li Zhou

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63989385/BlackLivesMatterFresnoLawsuit.0.jpg)

## Support for Black Lives Matter cost church its polling place designation,

lawsuit claims

By P.R. Lockhart

Chorus

    
        * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * GDPR Commitment
    * Communications Preferences
    * Contact
    * Send Us a Tip
    * Masthead
    * About Us
    * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines
    

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

