

# Brain death

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For the EP by Nuclear Assault, see Brain Death (EP).

"Brain-dead" redirects here. For other uses, see Brain Dead.

## Brain death

**Brain death** is the complete loss of brain function (including involuntary
activity necessary to sustain life).[1][2][3][4] It differs from persistent
vegetative state, in which the person is alive and some autonomic functions
remain.[5] It is also distinct from an ordinary coma, whether induced
medically or caused by injury and/or illness, even if it is very deep, as long
as some brain and bodily activity and function remains; and it is also not the
same as the condition known as locked-in syndrome. A differential diagnosis
can medically distinguish these differing conditions.

Brain death is used as an indicator of legal death in many jurisdictions, but
it is defined inconsistently and often confused by the lay public.[6] Various
parts of the brain may keep functioning when others do not anymore, and the
term "brain death" has been used to refer to various combinations. For
example, although one major medical dictionary[7] considers "brain death" to
be synonymous with "cerebral death" (death of the cerebrum), the US National
Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) system defines brain death
as including the brainstem. The distinctions are medically significant
because, for example, in someone with a dead cerebrum but a living brainstem,
the heartbeat and ventilation can continue unaided, whereas in whole-brain
death (which includes brainstem death), only life support equipment would keep
those functions going. Patients classified as brain-dead can have their organs
surgically removed for organ donation.

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Legal history
          * 2 Medical criteria
          * 3 Organ donation
          * 4 See also
          * 5 References
          * 6 External links
        

## Legal history[edit]

Traditionally, both the legal and medical communities determined death through
the permanent end of certain bodily functions in clinical death, especially
respiration and heartbeat. With the increasing ability of the medical
community to resuscitate people with no respiration, heartbeat, or other
external signs of life, the need for another definition of death occurred,
raising questions of legal death. This gained greater urgency with the
widespread use of life support equipment, as well as rising capabilities and
demand for organ transplantation.

Since the 1960s, laws on determining death have, therefore, been implemented
in all countries with active organ transplantation programs. The first
European country to adopt brain death as a legal definition (or indicator) of
death was Finland in 1971. In the United States, Kansas had enacted a similar
law earlier.[8]

An _ad hoc_ committee at Harvard Medical School published a pivotal 1968
report to define irreversible coma.[9][10] The Harvard criteria gradually
gained consensus toward what is now known as brain death. In the wake of the
1976 Karen Ann Quinlan case, state legislatures in the United States moved to
accept brain death as an acceptable indication of death. In 1981 a
Presidential commission issued a landmark report – _Defining Death: Medical,
Legal, and Ethical Issues in the Determination of Death_ [11] – that rejected
the "higher brain" approach to death in favor of a "whole brain" definition.
This report was the basis for the Uniform Determination of Death Act, which
has been enacted in 39 states of the United States.[12] The Uniform
Determination of Death Act in the United States attempts to standardize
criteria. Today, both the legal and medical communities in the US use "brain
death" as a legal definition of death, allowing a person to be declared
legally dead even if life support equipment keeps the body's metabolic
processes working.[13]

In the UK, the Royal College of Physicians reported in 1995, abandoning the
1979 claim that the tests published in 1976 sufficed for the diagnosis of
brain death and suggesting a new definition of death based on the irreversible
loss of brain stem function alone.[14] This new definition, the irreversible
loss of the capacity for consciousness and for spontaneous breathing, and the
essentially unchanged 1976 tests held to establish that state, have been
adopted as a basis of death certification for organ transplant purposes in
subsequent Codes of Practice.[15][16] The Australia and New Zealand Intensive
Care Society (ANZICS) states that the "determination of brain death requires
that there is unresponsive coma, the absence of brain-stem reflexes and the
absence of respiratory centre function, in the clinical setting in which these
findings are irreversible. In particular, there must be definite clinical or
neuro-imaging evidence of acute brain pathology (e.g. traumatic brain injury,
intracranial haemorrhage, hypoxic encephalopathy) consistent with the
irreversible loss of neurological function."[17]

## Medical criteria[edit]

Natural movements also known as the Lazarus sign or Lazarus reflex can occur
on a brain-dead person whose organs have been kept functioning by life
support. The living cells that can cause these movements are not living cells
from the brain or brain stem; these cells come from the spinal cord. Sometimes
these body movements can cause false hope for family members.

A brain-dead individual has no clinical evidence of brain function upon
physical examination. This includes no response to pain and no cranial nerve
reflexes. Reflexes include pupillary response (fixed pupils), oculocephalic
reflex, corneal reflex, no response to the caloric reflex test, and no
spontaneous respirations.

Brain death can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from other medical
states such as barbiturate overdose, alcohol intoxication, sedative overdose,
hypothermia, hypoglycemia, coma, and chronic vegetative states. Some comatose
patients can recover to pre-coma or near pre-coma level of functioning, and
some patients with severe irreversible neurological dysfunction will
nonetheless retain some lower brain functions, such as spontaneous
respiration, despite the losses of both cortex and brain stem functionality.
Such is the case with anencephaly.

Brain electrical activity can stop completely, or drop to such a low level as
to be undetectable with most equipment. An EEG will therefore be flat, though
this is sometimes also observed during deep anesthesia or cardiac arrest.[18]
Although in the United States a flat EEG test is not required to certify
death, it is considered to have confirmatory value. In the UK it is not
considered to be of value because any continuing activity it might reveal in
parts of the brain above the brain stem is held to be irrelevant to the
diagnosis of death on the Code of Practice criteria.[19]

The diagnosis of brain death is often required to be highly rigorous, in order
to be certain that the condition is irreversible. Legal criteria vary, but in
general require neurological examinations by two independent physicians. The
exams must show complete and irreversible absence of brain function (brain
stem function in UK),[20] and may include two isoelectric (flat-line) EEGs 24
hours apart (less in other countries where it is accepted that if the cause of
the dysfunction is a clear physical trauma there is no need to wait that long
to establish irreversibility). The patient should have a normal temperature
and be free of drugs that can suppress brain activity if the diagnosis is to
be made on EEG criteria.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a5/Radionuclide_Cerebral_Blood_Flow_Scan.png/220px-

Radionuclide_Cerebral_Blood_Flow_Scan.png)

Radionuclide scan: No intracranial blood flow. The "hot-nose" sign is shown.

Also, a radionuclide cerebral blood flow scan that shows complete absence of
intracranial blood flow must be considered with other exams – temporary
swelling of the brain, particularly within the first 72 hours, can lead to a
false positive test on a patient that may recover with more time.[21]

CT angiography is neither required nor sufficient test to make the
diagnosis.[22]

Confirmatory testing is only needed under the age of 1.[2] For children and
adults, testing is optional. Other situations possibly requiring confirmatory
testing include severe facial trauma where determination of brainstem reflexes
will be difficult, pre-existing pupillary abnormalities, and patients with
severe sleep apnea and/or pulmonary disease.[2] Confirmatory tests include:
cerebral angiography, electroencephalography, transcranial Doppler
ultrasonography, and cerebral scintigraphy (technetium Tc 99m exametazime).
Cerebral angiography is considered the most sensitive confirmatory test in the
determination of brain death.[2]

## Organ donation[edit]

Main article: Organ donation

While the diagnosis of brain death has become accepted as a basis for the
certification of death for legal purposes, it is a very different state from
biological death - the state universally recognized and understood as
death.[23] The continuing function of vital organs in the bodies of those
diagnosed brain dead, if mechanical ventilation and other life-support
measures are continued, provides optimal opportunities for their
transplantation.

When mechanical ventilation is used to support the body of a brain dead organ
donor pending a transplant into an organ recipient, the donor's date of death
is listed as the date that brain death was diagnosed.[24]

In some countries (for instance, Spain,[25] Finland, Poland, Wales, Portugal,
and France), everyone is automatically an organ donor after diagnosis of death
on legally accepted criteria, although some jurisdictions (such as Singapore,
Spain, Wales, France, Czech Republic and Portugal) allow opting out of the
system. Elsewhere, consent from family members or next-of-kin may be required
for organ donation. In New Zealand, Australia, the United Kingdom (excluding
Wales) and most states in the United States, drivers are asked upon
application if they wish to be registered as an organ donor.[26]

In the United States, if the patient is at or near death, the hospital must
notify a transplant organization of the person's details and maintain the
patient while the patient is being evaluated for suitability as a donor.[27]
The patient is kept on ventilator support until the organs have been
surgically removed. If the patient has indicated in an advance health care
directive that they do not wish to receive mechanical ventilation or has
specified a do not resuscitate order and the patient has also indicated that
they wish to donate their organs, some vital organs such as the heart and
lungs may not be able to be recovered.[28]

## See also[edit]

        
                  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/WHO_Rod.svg/12px-WHO_Rod.svg.png)Medicine portal
        
          * Brainstem death
          * Clinical death
          * Death
          * Persistent vegetative state
          * Information-theoretic death
          * Consciousness after death
        

## References[edit]

        
                  1. **^** "Brain death". _Encyclopedia of Death and Dying_. Retrieved  25 March 2014.
          2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Young, G Bryan. "Diagnosis of brain death". _UpToDate_. Retrieved  25 March 2014.
          3. **^** Goila, A.; Pawar, M. (2009). "The diagnosis of brain death". _Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine_. **13** (1): 7–11. doi:10.4103/0972-5229.53108. PMC 2772257. PMID 19881172.
          4. **^** Machado, C. (2010). "Diagnosis of brain death". _Neurology International_. **2** (1): 2. doi:10.4081/ni.2010.e2. PMC 3093212. PMID 21577338.
          5. **^** PVS, The Multi-Society Task Force on (26 May 1994). "Medical Aspects of the Persistent Vegetative State". _New England Journal of Medicine_. **330** (21): 1499–1508. doi:10.1056/nejm199405263302107. PMID 7818633.
          6. **^** Jones, A (2018). "CHEST". _Chest_. **154** (2): 286–292. doi:10.1016/j.chest.2018.01.021. PMID 29382473. Retrieved  2018-12-27.
          7. **^** Elsevier, _Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary_, Elsevier.
          8. **^** (Randell T. (2004). "Medical and legal considerations of brain death". _Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica_. **48** (2): 139–144. doi:10.1111/j.0001-5172.2004.00304.x. PMID 14995934.
          9. **^** "A definition of irreversible coma: report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Harvard Medical School to Examine the Definition of Brain Death". _JAMA_. **205** (6): 337–40. 1968. doi:10.1001/jama.1968.03140320031009. PMID 5694976.
          10. **^** _Life-sustaining technologies and the elderly_. DIANE Publishing. 1987. ISBN 9781428922815 - via Google Books.
          11. **^** "Defining death: a report on the medical, legal and ethical issues in the determination of death". July 1981. hdl:1805/707.
          12. **^** "Legislative Fact Sheet – Determination of Death Act". Uniform Law Commission. Retrieved  8 May 2012.
          13. **^** "Uniform Determination of Death Act" (PDF). National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. Retrieved 26 March 2014.
          14. **^** Criteria for the diagnosis of brain stem death. J Roy Coll Physns of London 1995;29:381-2
          15. **^** A Code of Practice for the Diagnosis and Confirmation of Death. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. 70 Wimpole Street, London, 2008
          16. **^** American Academy of Neurology. (2000, January 13).Spontaneous Movements Often Occur After Brain Death.Science Daily.
          17. **^** http://www.anzics.com.au/Downloads/ANZICS%20Statement%20on%20%20Death%20and%20Organ%20Donation%20Edition%203.2.pdf
          18. **^** Karasawa, H; et al. (Jan 2001). "Intracranial electroencephalographic changes in deep anesthesia". _Clin Neurophysiol_. **112** (1): 25–30. doi:10.1016/s1388-2457(00)00510-1. PMID 11137657.
          19. **^** A Code of Practice for the Diagnosis of Death. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges, 70 Wimpole Street, London, 2008
          20. **^** Waters, C. E.; French, G.; Burt, M. (2004). "Difficulty in brainstem death testing in the presence of high spinal cord injury". _British Journal of Anaesthesia_. **92** (5): 760–4. doi:10.1093/bja/aeh117. PMID 15113764.
          21. **^** "Brain Dead - NeuroLogica Blog". _theness.com_. 2008-04-08.
          22. **^** Taylor, T; Dineen, RA; Gardiner, DC; Buss, CH; Howatson, A; Pace, NL (Mar 31, 2014). "Computed tomography (CT) angiography for confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of brain death". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_. **3** (3): CD009694. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD009694.pub2. PMID 24683063.
          23. **^** Truog RD, Miller FG. The meaning of brain death. JAMA Internal Medicine 2014, Publ online June 9, 2014 : http://archinte.jamanetwork.com
          24. **^** "Understanding Brain Death". " What is the legal time of death for a brain dead patient? The legal time of death is the date and time that doctors determine that all brain activity has ceased. This is the time that is noted on the patient’s death certificate."
          25. **^** Organización Nacional de Transplantes – Consentimiento familiar y donación
          26. **^** "National Donate Life America Donor Designation State Report Card 2013" (PDF). pp. 6 & 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-03-22. "2012 State Comparisons"
          27. **^** "State and Federal Law on Organ Procurement". Archived from the original on 2014-03-06. " Unless the individual expressed contrary intent, a hospital must take measures to ensure the medical suitability of an individual at or near death while a procurement organization examines the patient for suitability as a donor."
          28. **^** "Frequently Asked Questions About Donation". " DNR will be honored. You can still be a tissue donor."
        

## External links[edit]

Classification|

D

        
                  *  **ICD-9-CM** : 348.82
          *  **MeSH** : D001926
          *  **DiseasesDB** : 1572
        

---|--- 
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Disorders of consciousness

* * *

General|

        
                  * Minimally conscious state
          * Persistent vegetative state
        

Related|

        
                  * Locked-in syndrome
          * Chronic coma
          * Brain stem death
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Death

* * *

In medicine|

Cell death

        
                Necrosis
        
        Avascular necrosis
        Coagulative necrosis
        Liquefactive necrosis
        Gangrenous necrosis
        Caseous necrosis
        Fat necrosis
        Fibrinoid necrosis
        Temporal lobe necrosis
        Programmed cell death
        
        AICD
        Anoikis
        Apoptosis
        Autophagy
        Intrinsic apoptosis
        Necroptosis
        Paraptosis
        Parthanatos
        Phenoptosis
        Pseudoapoptosis
        Pyroptosis
        Autolysis
        Autoschizis
        Eschar
        Immunogenic cell death
        Ischemic cell death
        Pyknosis
        Karyorrhexis
        Karyolysis
        Mitotic catastrophe
        Suicide gene
          * Abortion
          * Accidental death
          * Autopsy
          * Brain death
            * Brainstem death
          * Clinical death
            * DOA
          * Death by natural causes
          * Death rattle
          * Dysthanasia
          * End-of-life care
          * Euthanasia
          * Lazarus sign
          * Lazarus syndrome
          * Medical definition of death
          * Organ donation
          * Terminal illness
          * Unnatural death
        

Lists|

        
                  * Causes of death by rate
          * Expressions related to death
          * Natural disasters
          * People by cause of death
          * Premature obituaries
          * Preventable causes of death
          * Notable deaths by year
          * Unusual deaths
          * TV actors who died during production
        

Mortality|

        
                  * Birthday effect
          * Child mortality
          * Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality
          * Holiday effect
          * Immortality
            * Biological
            * Digital
          * Infant mortality
          * Karōshi
          * Maternal death
          * Maternal mortality in fiction
          * _Memento mori_
          * Micromort
          * Mortality displacement
          * Mortality rate
            * RAMR
          * Mortality salience
          * Perinatal mortality
        

After death|

| Body|

Stages

        
                Pallor mortis
        Algor mortis
        Rigor mortis
        Livor mortis
        Putrefaction
        Decomposition
        Skeletonization
        Fossilization
        

Preservation

        
                Cryopreservation
        
        Cryonics
        Neuropreservation
        Embalming
        Maceration
        Mummification
        Plastination
        Prosection
        Taxidermy
        

Disposal

        
                Burial
        
        Bed burial
        Burial at sea
        Chariot burial
        Jar burial
        Natural burial
        Premature burial
        Secondary burial
        Ship burial
        Sky burial
        Space burial
        Cannibalism
        Cremation
        Dismemberment
        Excarnation
        Promession
        Resomation
        
        Beating heart cadaver
        Body donation
        Cadaveric spasm
        Coffin birth
        Death erection
        Dissection
        Gibbeting
        Postmortem caloricity
        Post-mortem interval
        

---|---  
Other aspects|

        
                Afterlife
        Cemetery
        Consciousness
        Customs
        Death mask
        Eternal oblivion
        Examination
        Funeral
        Grief
        Intermediate state
        Internet
        Mourning
        Obituary
        Resurrection
        Taboo on the dead
        Vigil
        

Paranormal|

        
                  * Ghosts
          * Near-death experience
          * Near-death studies
          * Necromancy
          * Out-of-body experience
          * Reincarnation research
          * Séance
        

Legal|

        
                  * Abortion law
          * Administration
          * Capital punishment
          * Cause of death
          * Civil death
          * Coroner
          * Death-qualified jury
          * Death certificate
          * Declared death _in absentia_
          * Death row
          * Dying declaration
          * Faked death
          * Inquest
          * Legal death
          * Murder
          * Prohibition of death
          * Right to die
          * Suspicious death
          * Trust law
          * Will
        

Fields|

        
                  * Forensic pathology
          * Funeral director
          * Mortuary science
          * Necrobiology
          * Post-mortem chemistry
          * Post-mortem photography
          * Taphonomy
            * Biostratinomy
          * Thanatology
        

Other|

        
                  * Apparent death
          * Dark tourism
          * Darwin Awards
          * Dead pool
          * Death and culture
          * Death anniversary
          * Death anxiety
          * Death deity
            * Personification of death
            * Dying-and-rising god
            * Psychopomp
          * Death camp
          * Death drive
          * Death education
          * Death from laughter
          * Death hoax
          * Death knell
          * Death march
          * Death messenger
          * Death notification
          * Death panel
          * Death poem
          * Death pose
          * Death-positive movement
          * Death squad
          * Death threat
          * Death trajectory
          * Dignified death
          * Extinction
          * Fan death
          * Festival of the Dead
          * Fascination with death
          * Hierarchy of death
          * Homicide
          * Last rites
          * Martyr
          * Megadeath
          * Museum of Death
          * Necronym
          * Necrophilia
          * Necrophobia
          * The Order of the Good Death
          * Predation
          * Sacrifice
            * human
            * animal
          * Spiritual death
          * Suicide
            * Assisted suicide
          * Thanatosensitivity
          * Undead
          * Voodoo death
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
          * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
          * ![WikiProject](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/People_icon.svg/16px-People_icon.svg.png) WikiProject
          * ![Outline](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Global_thinking.svg/10px-Global_thinking.svg.png) Outline
        

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

        
                  * GND: 4025035-0
          * NDL: 00864339
        

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brain_death&oldid=896548991"

Categories:

        
                  * Medical aspects of death
          * Anatomical pathology
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Articles which use infobox templates with no data rows
          * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
          * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * العربية
          * Беларуская
          * Български
          * Català
          * Dansk
          * Deutsch
          * Ελληνικά
          * Español
          * Esperanto
          * فارسی
          * Français
          * Frysk
          * Gaeilge
          * 한국어
          * Հայերեն
          * हिन्दी
          * Bahasa Indonesia
          * Italiano
          * עברית
          * Latviešu
          * മലയാളം
          * Bahasa Melayu
          * Nederlands
          * 日本語
          * Norsk
          * پښتو
          * Polski
          * Português
          * Русский
          * Simple English
          * Српски / srpski
          * Suomi
          * Svenska
          * ไทย
          * Türkçe
          * Українська
          * Tiếng Việt
          * 文言
          * ייִדיש
          * Zazaki
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 11 May 2019, at 07:43 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

