

![PK SVG](https://www.peoplekeep.com/hs-fs/hubfs/salesforce-template/sales-

get-started/PK%20SVG.png?width=263&name=PK%20SVG.png)

    
        * Why PeopleKeep
      * Case studies
      * Use cases
    * How it works
      * Pricing
      * Demo
      * Who qualifies?
      * Assessment
    * Referrals
    * Resources
      * Blog
      * Support
      * HRA
      * QSEHRA
      * QSEHRA eligible expenses
      * Benefit designer
    * Log in
    

![GET

STARTED](/hs/cta/cta/default/149308/08be7150-38da-487d-824d-56e51b22479a.png)

Log In

Select your product

![Log in to

PeopleKeep](/hs/cta/cta/default/149308/0fb4460d-f79a-42ff-9d4a-8301ff833eac.png)

![Log in to Zane

Benefits](/hs/cta/cta/default/149308/6ef2ee73-8a23-46ae-b4db-85aca17f1d9a.png)

## Small Business Employee Benefits and HR Blog

Browse topics

# What Percent of Health Insurance is Paid by Employers?

Christina Merhar

November 8, 2018

![](https://www.peoplekeep.com/hs-

fs/hub/149308/file-2640934885.jpg?width=2716&name=file-2640934885.jpg)

When evaluating a new or existing health insurance program, your company’s
contribution strategy is an important consideration. In simple terms, how much
will individual employees pitch in for coverage, and what percent of health
insurance is paid by employers?

With company-provided health insurance, the employer must contribute a minimum
percentage and employees pay the remaining amount, usually through a payroll
deduction. So, just what percent do employers pay?

Across the country, Kaiser Family Foundation found the average percent of
health insurance paid by employers is 82 percent for single coverage and 71
percent for family coverage. Let’s dive into these stats a little deeper.

![The Small Business's Guide to Health Benefits in 2019. Get Your Free

Copy.](/hs/cta/cta/default/149308/892bdd94-cb9f-4535-acf8-6ca4f97f5217.png)

## Employers Pay 82 Percent of Health Insurance for Single Coverage

In 2018, the average company-provided health insurance policy totaled $6,896 a
year for single coverage. On average, employers paid 82 percent of the
premium, or $5,655 a year. Employees paid the remaining 18 percent, or $1,241
a year.

For family coverage, the average policy totaled $19,616 a year with employers
contributing, on average, 71 percent, or $13,927. Employees paid the remaining
29 percent or $5,689 a year.

## Small Employers Contribute Significantly Less to Family Coverage

For small employers, however, the data tells a different story. According to
the 2018 KFF/HRET survey, small employers (defined as employers with 3–199
employees) tend to contribute significantly less for family coverage.

For smaller employers:

    
        * The average policy for single coverage totaled $6,896 a year.
    * The average percent paid by employers for single coverage was 82 percent, or $5,655 a year.
    * The average policy for family coverage totaled $18,739 a year.
    * The average percent paid by employers for family coverage was 62 percent, or $11,618 a year.
    

## Average Health Insurance Contribution Paid By Employers, By Employer Size

|

**Small Employers**

|

**Large Employers**

|

**All Employers**

\---|---|---|---  
**Single Coverage** |

82%  
_$5,655/year_

|

82%  
_$5,655/year_

|

82%  
_$5,655/year_

**Family Coverage** |

62%  
_$11,618/year_

|

71%  
_$13,927/year_

|

67%  
_$12,773/year_

Source - KFF/HRET

Why are small employers contributing less to family coverage? One speculation
is cost.

Health insurance is expensive with costs increasing annually for 90 percent of
companies. In an effort to sustain coverage and manage costs, increasing
employee cost-sharing for family coverage is a common approach.

## Alternative Contribution Strategies

As small employers grapple with health insurance contribution strategies and
tight budgets, they often turn to alternative contribution strategies.

For example, instead of purchasing and paying for a company-provided health
insurance policy, small employers are providing a health reimbursement
arrangement (HRA)—an arrangement in which employers provide an allowance
toward employees’ individually-purchased health insurance premiums. Because
these arrangements allow employers to define their own contribution (up to
federal limits), small businesses often find them a more affordable option.

Using a compliant HRA, smaller employers offer tax-free health benefits
without having to deal with costs, participation requirements, or minimum
contribution percentages associated with company-provided insurance.

## Conclusion

When looking at what percent of health insurance is paid by employers, we see
that there are differences between small and large employers. Across the
nation, employers are contributing, on average, 82 percent for single coverage
and 71 percent for family coverage. Small employers tend to pay about the same
toward single coverage and significantly less (62 percent) of family coverage.
Because of the high costs and contribution requirements of traditional
company-provided health insurance policies, many small employers are taking a
second look at individual health insurance and a reimbursement strategy.

_Do you have questions about health insurance contribution strategies or small
business health insurance? Leave a question below. We’ll help answer._

Wondering how much to give to your employees for benefits?

See what percent of employee health insurance employers provided in 2017.

![GET THE

REPORT](/hs/cta/cta/default/149308/d553712b-0bef-4294-bd60-91eacfe026ee.png)

![meeting_wide-1](https://www.peoplekeep.com/hubfs/meeting_wide-1.png)
![CTA_purp_R](https://www.peoplekeep.com/hubfs/CTA_purp_R.png)

### Subscribe to our blog

### Topics :

    
        * employer sponsored health benefits
    * small employer health insurance
    * healthcare costs
    

#### Company

    
        * Our story
    * Join the movement
    * Press
    * Careers
    * Privacy policy
    

#### Why PeopleKeep

    
        * Case studies
    * Use cases
    

#### How it works

    
        * Pricing
    * Demo
    

#### Resources

    
        * Blog
    * Support
    * HRA
    * QSEHRA
    * QSEHRA eligible expenses
    

![PeopleKeep](https://www.peoplekeep.com/hubfs/Assets%20%5BAug-17%5D/PK%20logo%20gray.svg)

383 West Vine St.  
Suite 300  
Salt Lake City, UT 84123

![CONTACT

SALES](/hs/cta/cta/default/149308/0fc864c1-e6b9-4008-babc-27867ecea7ed.png)

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Disclaimer: The information provided on this website is general in nature and
does not apply to any specific U.S. state except where noted. Health insurance
regulations differ in each state. See a licensed agent for detailed
information on your state. PeopleKeep, Inc., does not sell health insurance.

© 2019 PeopleKeep, Inc.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

