

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Infant

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

very young offspring of a human

This article is about the very young child. For other uses, see Infant
(disambiguation).

"Baby", "Newborn", and "Babyhood" redirect here. For other uses, see Baby
(disambiguation), Newborn (disambiguation), and Babyhood (disambiguation).

## Part of a series on

Human growth  
and development  
![Views of a Foetus in the Womb

detail.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2a/Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg/100px-

Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg)  
Stages  
* Zygote * Embryo * Fetus 
        
                  * Infant
          * Toddler
        
          * Child
          * Preadolescent
          * Adolescent
        
          * Young adult
          * Middle adult
          * Old adult
        

Biological milestones  
* Fertilization * Pregnancy * Childbirth * Walking * Language acquisition * Puberty * Menopause * Ageing * Death  
Development and psychology  
* Pre- and perinatal * Infant and child * Adolescent * Youth * Young adult * Adult * Maturity 

Developmental stage theories

        
                  * Attachment
          * Ecological
          * Psychosocial
          * Psychosexual development
          * Moral
          * Cognitive
          * Cultural-historical
          * Evolutionary  
          * ![Psi2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6c/Psi2.svg/16px-Psi2.svg.png) Psychology portal
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

An **infant** (from the Latin word _infans_ , meaning "unable to speak" or
"speechless") is the more formal or specialised synonym for " **baby** ", the
very young offspring of a human. The term may also be used to refer to
juveniles of other organisms.

A **newborn** is, in colloquial use, an infant who is only hours, days, or up
to one month old. In medical contexts, newborn or **neonate** (from Latin,
_neonatus_ , newborn) refers to an infant in the first 28 days after birth;[1]
the term applies to premature, full term, and postmature infants; before
birth, the term "fetus" is used. The term "infant" is typically applied to
young children under one year of age; however, definitions may vary and may
include children up to two years of age. When a human child learns to walk,
the term "toddler" may be used instead.

In British English, an infant school is for children aged between four and
seven. As a legal term, "infancy" continues from birth until age 18.[2]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Physical characteristics of newborn
            * 1.1 Length
            * 1.2 Weight
            * 1.3 Head
            * 1.4 Hair
            * 1.5 Skin
            * 1.6 Genitals
            * 1.7 Umbilical cord
          * 2 Care and feeding
          * 3 Response to sounds
          * 4 Benefits of touch
          * 5 Diseases
          * 6 Mortality
          * 7 Emotional development
          * 8 Babyhood
          * 9 Plane travel
          * 10 Gallery
          * 11 Common care issues
          * 12 References
          * 13 Further reading
          * 14 External links
        

## Physical characteristics of newborn

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/Being_a_twin_means_you_always_have_a_pillow_or_blanket_handy.jpg/300px-

Being_a_twin_means_you_always_have_a_pillow_or_blanket_handy.jpg)

Eight-month-old twin sisters

![File:Serowe Baby-

May2009.webm](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ac/Serowe_Baby-

May2009.webm/220px-seek%3D1-Serowe_Baby-May2009.webm.jpg)Play media

(video) A very young baby moves around in a crib, 2009

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e1/Baby_Face.JPG/220px-

Baby_Face.JPG)

Eight month-old infant; as a common feature eyes are usually large in relation
to the face.

![Crying newborn

baby](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c0/Human-Male-White-

Newborn-Baby-Crying.jpg/220px-Human-Male-White-Newborn-Baby-Crying.jpg)

A crying newborn, a few days after birth

A newborn's shoulders and hips are wide, the abdomen protrudes slightly, and
the arms and legs are relatively long with respect to the rest of their body.
The Apgar score is a measure of a newborn's transition from the uterus during
the first minutes after birth.

### Length

In first world nations, the average total body length of newborns are
35.6–50.8 cm (14.0–20.0 in), although premature newborns may be much smaller.

Ways to measure a baby's length is to lay him down and stretch a measuring
tape from the top of his head to the bottom of his heel. Measure the
circumference of your baby's head also.

### Weight

In developed countries, the average birth weight of a full-term newborn is
approximately 3.4 kg (7 1⁄2 lb), and is typically in the range of 2.7–4.6 kg
(6.0–10.1 lb).

Over the first 5–7 days following birth, the body weight of a term neonate
decreases by 3–7%,[3] and is largely a result of the resorption and urination
of the fluid that initially fills the lungs, in addition to a delay of often a
few days before breastfeeding becomes effective. After the first week, healthy
term neonates should gain 10–20 grams/day.[3]

### Head

A newborn's head is very large in proportion to the body, and the cranium is
enormous relative to his or her face. While the adult human skull is about one
seventh of the total body length, the newborn's is about ¼. Normal head
circumference for a full-term infant is 33–36 cm at birth.[4] At birth, many
regions of the newborn's skull have not yet been converted to bone, leaving
"soft spots" known as fontanels. The two largest are the diamond-shaped
anterior fontanel, located at the top front portion of the head, and the
smaller triangular-shaped posterior fontanel, which lies at the back of the
head. Later in the child's life, these bones will fuse together in a natural
process. A protein called noggin is responsible for the delay in an infant's
skull fusion.[5]

![Newborn on yellow blanket being attended to by a

nurse](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ed/Umbilical-

newborn.jpg/220px-Umbilical-newborn.jpg)

A newborn baby in Indonesia, with umbilical cord ready to be clamped

During labour and birth, the infant's skull changes shape to fit through the
birth canal, sometimes causing the child to be born with a misshapen or
elongated head. It will usually return to normal on its own within a few days
or weeks. Special exercises sometimes advised by physicians may assist the
process.

### Hair

Some newborns have a fine, downy body hair called lanugo. It may be
particularly noticeable on the back, shoulders, forehead, ears and face of
premature infants. Lanugo disappears within a few weeks. Infants may be born
with full heads of hair; others, particularly caucasian infants, may have very
fine hair or may even be bald. Amongst fair-skinned parents, this fine hair
may be blonde, even if the parents are not. Infants hair color and texture
change. Red can give way to blond. Curly can go straight and baby's thick,
dark hair could make its reappearance a lot sparser and lighter. The scalp may
also be temporarily bruised or swollen, especially in hairless newborns, and
the area around the eyes may be puffy.

### Skin

Immediately after birth, a newborn's skin is often grayish to dusky blue in
color. As soon as the newborn begins to breathe, usually within a minute or
two, the skin's color reaches its normal tone. Newborns are wet, covered in
streaks of blood, and coated with a white substance known as vernix caseosa,
which is hypothesised to act as an antibacterial barrier. The newborn may also
have Mongolian spots, various other birthmarks, or peeling skin, particularly
on the wrists, hands, ankles, and feet.

### Genitals

A newborn's genitals are enlarged and reddened, with male infants having an
unusually large scrotum. The breasts may also be enlarged, even in male
infants. This is caused by naturally occurring maternal hormones and is a
temporary condition. Females (and even males) may actually discharge milk from
their nipples (sometimes called witch's milk), or a bloody or milky-like
substance from the vagina. In either case, this is considered normal and will
disappear with time.

### Umbilical cord

The umbilical cord of a newborn is bluish-white in color. After birth, the
umbilical cord is normally cut, leaving a 1–2 inch stub. The umbilical stub
will dry out, shrivel, darken, and spontaneously fall off within about 3
weeks. This will later become a belly-button after it heals. Occasionally,
hospitals may apply triple dye to the umbilical stub to prevent infection,
which may temporarily color the stub and surrounding skin purple.

The umbilical cord contains three vessels: two arteries and one vein. The two
arteries carry blood from the baby to the placenta while one vein carries
blood back to the baby.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/38/HumanNewborn.JPG/220px-

HumanNewborn.JPG)

A newborn infant, seconds after delivery. Amniotic fluid glistens on the
child's skin.

Main article: Adaptation to extrauterine life

## Care and feeding

Further information: Newborn care and safety

Further information: Infant bathing

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/97/Breastfeeding01.jpg/170px-

Breastfeeding01.jpg)

A baby breastfeeding

Infants cry as a form of basic instinctive communication.[6] A crying infant
may be trying to express a variety of feelings including hunger, discomfort,
overstimulation, boredom, wanting something, or loneliness.

Breastfeeding is the recommended method of feeding by all major infant health
organizations.[7] If breastfeeding is not possible or desired, bottle feeding
is done with expressed breast-milk or with infant formula. Infants are born
with a sucking reflex allowing them to extract the milk from the nipples of
the breasts or the nipple of the baby bottle, as well as an instinctive
behavior known as _rooting_ with which they seek out the nipple. Sometimes a
wet nurse is hired to feed the infant, although this is rare, especially in
developed countries.

Adequate food consumption at an early age is vital for an infant’s
development. The foundations of optimum health, growth, and neurodevelopment
across the lifespan are established in the first 1000 days of life.[8] From
birth to four months, infants should consume breast milk or an unmodified milk
substitute. As an infant’s diet matures, finger foods may be introduced as
well as fruit, vegetables and small amounts of meat.[9]

As infants grow, food supplements are added. Many parents choose commercial,
ready-made baby foods to supplement breast milk or formula for the child,
while others adapt their usual meals for the dietary needs of their child.
Whole cow's milk can be used at one year, but lower-fat milk is not
recommended until the child is 2 to 3 years old. Weaning is the process
through which breast milk is eliminated from the infant's diet through the
introduction of solid foods in exchange for milk.[10] Until they are toilet-
trained, infants in industrialized countries wear diapers. The transition from
diapers to training pants is an important transition in the development of an
infant/baby to that of a toddler. Children need more sleep than adults—up to
18 hours for newborn babies, with a declining rate as the child ages. Until
babies learn to walk, they are carried in the arms, held in slings or baby
carriers, or transported in baby carriages or strollers. Most industrialized
countries have laws requiring child safety seats for babies in motor vehicles.

## Response to sounds

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/81/Baby_standing_in_bed_-_1983.jpg/220px-

Baby_standing_in_bed_-_1983.jpg)

Baby standing in bed - 1983

Infants respond to the sound of snake hissing, angry voices of adults, the
crackling sound of a fire, thunder, and the cries of other infants. They have
a drop in heart rate, their eyes blinking, increased turning toward the
speakers or parent, all of these indicating that they were paying more
attention. This is believed by some[ _who?_ ] to be evolutionary response to
danger. Babies' ability to accurately locate sounds is refined during their
first year.[11]

## Benefits of touch

Studies have shown that infants who have been the recipients of positive touch
experience more benefits as they develop emotionally and socially. Experiments
have been done with infants up to four months of age using both positive touch
(stroking or cuddling) and negative touch (poking, pinching or tickling). The
infants who received the positive touch cried less often and also vocalized
and smiled more than the infants who were touched negatively. Infants who were
the recipients of negative touching have been linked with emotional and
behavioral problems later in life. A lower amount of physical violence in
adults has been discovered in cultures with greater levels of positive
physical touching.[12]

## Diseases

Further information: Neonatology

The infant is undergoing many adaptations to extrauterine life, and its
physiological systems, such as the immune system, are far from fully
developed. Potential diseases of concern during the neonatal period include:

        
                  * Neonatal jaundice
          * Infant respiratory distress syndrome
          * Neonatal lupus erythematosus
          * Neonatal conjunctivitis
          * Neonatal tetanus
          * Neonatal sepsis
          * Neonatal bowel obstruction
          * Benign neonatal seizures
          * Neonatal diabetes mellitus
          * Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
          * Neonatal herpes simplex
          * Neonatal hemochromatosis
          * Neonatal meningitis
          * Neonatal hepatitis
          * Neonatal hypoglycemia
        

## Mortality

Main article: Infant mortality

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/45/Babyimmunization.jpg)

An infant being immunized in Bangladesh

Infant mortality is the death of an infant in the first year of life, often
expressed as the number of deaths per 1000 live births (infant mortality
rate). Major causes of infant mortality include dehydration, infection,
congenital malformation and SIDS.[13]

This epidemiological indicator is recognized as a very important measure of
the level of health care in a country because it is directly linked with the
health status of infants, children, and pregnant women as well as access to
medical care, socioeconomic conditions, and public health practices.[14][15]

There is a positive relationship between national wealth and good health. The
rich and industrialized countries of the world, prominently Canada, the United
Kingdom, the United States, and Japan, spend a large proportion of their
wealthy budget on the health care system. As, a result, their health care
systems are very sophisticated, with many physicians, nurses, and other health
care experts servicing the population. Thus, infant mortality is low. On the
other hand, a country such as Mexico, which spends disproportionately less of
its budget on healthcare, suffers from high mortality rates. This is because
the general population is likely to be less healthy.[16] In the U.S., infant
mortality rates are especially high in minority groups. For instance, non-
Hispanic black women have an infant mortality rate of 13.63 per 1000 live
births whereas in non-Hispanic white women it was much lower at a rate of 5.76
per 1000 live births.[17] The average infant mortality rate in the U.S. is 6.8
per 1000 live births. [18]

## Emotional development

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Blake_Infant_Joy_Copy_AA_25.jpg/200px-

Blake_Infant_Joy_Copy_AA_25.jpg)

A mother wishes joy towards her child in William Blake's poem "Infant Joy".
This copy, Copy AA, was printed and painted in 1826, is currently held by the
Fitzwilliam Museum.[19]

Attachment theory is primarily an evolutionary and ethological theory whereby
the infant or child _seeks proximity_ to a _specified attachment figure_ in
situations of alarm or distress for the purpose of survival.[20] The forming
of attachments is considered to be the foundation of the infant/child's
capacity to form and conduct relationships throughout life. Attachment is not
the same as love or affection although they often go together. Attachment and
attachment behaviors tend to develop between the age of 6 months and 3 years.
Infants become attached to adults who are sensitive and responsive in social
interactions with the infant, and who remain as consistent caregivers for some
time. Parental responses lead to the development of patterns of attachment,
which in turn lead to 'internal working models' which will guide the
individual's feelings, thoughts, and expectations in later relationships.[21]
There are a number of attachment 'styles' namely 'secure', 'anxious-
ambivalent', 'anxious-avoidant', (all 'organized') and 'disorganized', some of
which are more problematic than others. A lack of attachment or a seriously
disrupted capacity for attachment could potentially amount to serious
disorders.[22]

Infants develop distinct relationships to their mothers, fathers, siblings,
and non-familial caregivers.[23] Beside the dyadic attachment relationships
also a good quality of the triadic relationships (mother – father – infant) is
important for infant mental health development.[24][25]

## Babyhood

Babyhood is a critical period in personality development when the foundations
of adult personality are laid.[26] In contrast toddler is used to denote a
baby that has achieved relative independence, in moving about, and
feeding.[27]

## Plane travel

Many airlines refuse boarding for all babies aged under 7 days (for domestic
flights) or 14 days for international flights. Asiana Airlines allows babies
to board international flights at 7 days of age. Garuda Indonesia disallows
all babies under the age of 14 days to board any flights.

Delta Air Lines allows infants to travel when they are less than 7 days old
when they present a physician travel approval letter. Skywest will not allow
an infant less than 8 days old on board.[28]

## Gallery

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/Baby_%28126372492%29.jpg/120px-Baby_%28126372492%29.jpg)
        

an East Asian baby

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ca/Baby_playing_with_yellow_paint._Work_by_Dutch_artist_Peter_Klashorst_entitled_%22Experimental%22.jpg/80px-Baby_playing_with_yellow_paint._Work_by_Dutch_artist_Peter_Klashorst_entitled_%22Experimental%22.jpg)
        

an African baby

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3d/Black_African_Baby_With_Pale_Appareance_At_Birth.jpg/120px-Black_African_Baby_With_Pale_Appareance_At_Birth.jpg)
        

An African baby born to two African parents, with an unusually light skin

        
                  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3d/Cuties.jpg/90px-Cuties.jpg)
        

An Indian baby

## Common care issues

        
                  * Baby colic
          * Bassinet/crib
          * Cradle cap
          * Day care
          * Diaper rash
          * Infant massage
          * Immunization
          * Pacifier
          * Paternal bond
          * Swaddling
          * Teething
        

## References

        
                  1. **^** "Neonate". _Merriam-Webster online dictionary_. Merriam-Webster. Archived from the original on 2007-03-11. Retrieved  2007-03-27.
          2. **^** "Infancy". _Law.com Legal Dictionary_. Law.com. Archived from the original on 2015-09-05. Retrieved  2015-09-30.
          3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Neonatology Considerations for the Pediatric Surgeon_ at eMedicine
          4. **^** Wallace, Donna K.; Cartwright, Cathy C. (2007). _Nursing Care of the Pediatric Neurosurgery Patient_. Berlin: Springer. p. 40. ISBN 978-3-540-29703-1.
          5. **^** Warren SM, Brunet LJ, Harland RM, Economides AN, Longaker MT (2003-04-10). "The BMP antagonist noggin regulates cranial suture fusion". _Nature_. **422** (6932): 625–9. doi:10.1038/nature01545. PMID 12687003.
          6. **^** Chicot, Dr Rebecca (2015-12-03). _The Calm and Happy Toddler: Gentle Solutions to Tantrums, Night Waking, Potty Training and More_. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4735-2759-1.
          7. **^** Gartner LM, Morton J, Lawrence RA, Naylor AJ, O'Hare D, Schanler RJ, Eidelman AI (February 2005). "Breastfeeding and the Use of Human Milk". _Pediatrics_. **115** (2): 496–506. doi:10.1542/peds.2004-2491. PMID 15687461.
          8. **^** Innocenti, UNICEF Office of Research-. "The first 1,000 days of life: The brain's window of opportunity". _UNICEF-IRC_. Retrieved  2019-03-28.
          9. **^** Wells, Dilys (January 1995). "Infant Feeding". _Nutrition & Food Science_. **95** (2): 42–44. doi:10.1108/00346659510078312.
          10. **^** Marriott and Foote, L.D. and K.D. (2003). _Weaning of infants. (Review)_. 88.6. Academic OneFile. ISBN 978-1-4129-0475-9.
          11. **^** Erlich, Nicole; Lipp, Ottmar V.; Slaughter, Virginia (2013). "Of hissing snakes and angry voices: human infants are differentially responsive to evolutionary fear-relevant sounds". _Developmental Science_. **16** (6): 894–904. doi:10.1111/desc.12091. PMID 24118715. Lay summary - _Science News_ (September 9, 2013).
          12. **^** Field, T. (2002). "Infants' Need for Touch". _Human Development_. **45** (2): 100–103. doi:10.1159/000048156.
          13. **^** Garrett, Eilidh (2007). _Infant Mortality: A Continuing Social Problem_. Ashgate Pub Co. ISBN 978-0-7546-4593-1.[ _page needed_]
          14. **^** Hertz E, Hebert JR, Landon J (July 1994). "Social and environmental factors and life expectancy, infant mortality, and maternal mortality rates: results of a cross-national comparison". _Soc Sci Med_. **39** (1): 105–14. doi:10.1016/0277-9536(94)90170-8. PMID 8066481.
          15. **^** Etchegoyen G, Paganini JM (April 2007). "The relationship between socioeconomic factors and maternal and infant health programs in 13 Argentine provinces" (PDF). _Rev Panam Salud Publica_ (in Spanish). **21** (4): 223–30. doi:10.1590/S1020-49892007000300005. PMID 17612466. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-04-21.
          16. **^** Brym, Robert (2007). _Sociology: Your Compass for a New World_. Wadsworth/Cengage Learning. p. 546. ISBN 978-0-495-09912-3.
          17. **^** Kuehn, B. M. (2008). "Infant Mortality". _JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association_. **300** (20): 2359. doi:10.1001/jama.2008.642.
          18. **^** Infant Mortality Rate (Deaths per 1,000 Live Births), Linked Files, 2006–2008 Archived 2012-06-12 at the Wayback Machine. statehealthfacts.org
          19. **^** Morris Eaves, Robert N. Essick, and Joseph Viscomi (eds.). "Songs of Innocence and of Experience, copy AA, object 25 (Bentley 25, Erdman 25, Keynes 25) "Infant Joy"". William Blake Archive. Archived from the original on January 17, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2014.CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
          20. **^** Tronick, Edward Z.; Morelli, Gilda A.; Ivey, Paula K. (1992). "The Efe forager infant and toddler's pattern of social relationships: Multiple and simultaneous". _Developmental Psychology_. **28** (4): 568–577. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.28.4.568. "Until recently, scientific accounts ... of the infant's early social experiences converged on the view that the infant progresses from a primary relationship with one individual... to relationships with a growing number of people... This is an epigenetic, hierarchical view of social development. We have labeled this dominant view the continuous care and contact model (CCC...). The CCC model developed from the writings of Spitz..., Bowlby..., and Provence and Lipton... on institutionalized children and is represented in the psychological views of Bowlby...[and others]. Common to the different conceptual frameworks is the belief that parenting practices and the infant's capacity for social engagement are biologically based and conform to a prototypical form. Supporters of the CCC model generally recognize that the infant and caregiver are able to adjust to a range of conditions, but they consider the adjustments observed to reflect biological variation. However, more extreme views (e.g., maternal bonding) consider certain variants as non adaptive and as compromising the child's psychological development. Bowlby's concept of monotropism is an exemplar of the CCC perspective...".
          21. **^** Bretherton, I. and Munholland, K., A. Internal Working Models in Attachment Relationships: A Construct Revisited. _Handbook of Attachment:Theory, Research and Clinical Applications_ 1999 eds Cassidy, J. and Shaver, P., R. Guilford press ISBN 1-57230-087-6 [ _page needed_]
          22. **^** "Child Maltreatment: Theory and Research on the Causes and Consequences of Child Abuse and Neglect". Retrieved  21 December 2018.
          23. **^** Klitzing K von, Simoni H, Amsler F, Burgin D: The role of the father in early family interactions. Inf Mental Health J 1999; 20: 222–37.
          24. **^** Klitzing K von, Simoni H, Bürgin D: Infant development and early triadic family relationships. In J Psychoanal 1999; 80: 71–89.
          25. **^** Klitzing K von, Burgin D: Parental capacities for triadic relationships during pregnancy: Early predictors of children's behavioral and representational functioning at preschool age. Infant Mental Health J 2005; 26: 19–39.
          26. **^** _Human Growth Development and Learning_ 2004 Ed. p. 50. ISBN 971-23-3911-4 2004 "... is mainly through prespeech forms of crying, babbling, gesturing, and emotional expressions. In babyhood, understanding comes from a combination of sensory exploration, motor manipulation, and, toward the end of babyhood, from questions to answers. Babyhood is regarded as a critical period in personality development because it is the time when the foundations of adult personality are laid."
          27. **^** Developmental Psychology. p. 121 ISBN 971-23-2463-X 1998 "However, Hurlock (1982) cites that infancy, compared to babyhood, is characterized by extreme helplessness. The word baby may likewise suggest a helpless individual; hence, the word toddler has been increasingly used to denote a baby that has achieved enough control of his body to permit relative independence, such as' moving about, feeding himself, etc. Characteristics of Babyhood The most important characteristics of babyhood are listed below: 1. It is the true foundation age .."
          28. **^** Infant Age Restrictions Archived 2016-03-26 at the Wayback Machine. Delta Airlines. Retrieved on 2013-04-27.
        

## Further reading

        
                  * Simkin, Penny; Whalley, Janet; Keppler, Ann (1991). _Pregnancy, Childbirth and the Newborn: The Complete Guide_ (Revised ed.). Meadowbook Press. ISBN 978-0-88166-177-4.
        

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Babies**_  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/Wikibooks-logo-en-

noslogan.svg/40px-Wikibooks-logo-en-noslogan.svg.png) | Wikibooks has a book
on the topic of: _**Baby care and evolution**_  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Babies**_.  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Wiktionary-logo-

en-v2.svg/40px-Wiktionary-logo-en-v2.svg.png) | Look up _**infant**_ in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
---|---  
* American Academy of Pediatrics * The impact of buggy orientation on parent-infant interaction and infant stress * The World Health Report 2005 – Make Every Mother and Child * Infant eyesight – University of Illinois Preceded by  
Fetus | **Stages of human development**  
Infancy | Succeeded by  
Toddlerhood  
---|---|--- 
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Infants and their care

* * *

Main Article|

        
                  * Infant
        

|

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/00/Babies_and_their_care.png/100px-

Babies_and_their_care.png)

Health|

        
                  * Baby food
          * Birth weight
          * Breast pump
          * Breastfeeding
          * Breastfeeding and medications
          * Bottle feeding
          * Colic
          * Immunizations
          * Cradle cap
          * Cross eyed
          * Failure to thrive
          * Immunization
          * Infant and toddler safety
          * Infant bathing
          * Infant food safety
          * Infant formula
          * Infant massage
          * Infant food safety
          * Infant nutrition
          * Infant respiratory distress syndrome
          * Infant sleep training
          * Neo-natal intensive care unit
          * Oral rehydration therapy/Pedialyte
          * Newborn care and safety
          * Pediatrician
          * Preterm birth
          * Shaken baby syndrome
          * Soy formula
          * Sudden infant death syndrome
        

Development|

        
                  * Attachment parenting
          * Baby-led weaning
          * Baby talk
          * Babbling
          * Childbirth
          * Congential disorder
          * Crawling
          * Infant visual development
          * Diaper rash
          * Gestational age
          * Infant cognitive development
          * Kangaroo care
          * Mother
          * Nursery Rhyme
          * Object permanence
          * Parent
          * Parenting
          * Peekaboo
          * Play
          * Prenatal development
          * Prenatal development table
          * Teething
          * Types of crying
          * Walking
          * Weaning
        

Socialization and Culture|

        
                  * Attachment
          * Babysitting
          * Child abuse
          * Child custody
          * Child's rights
          * UN Child rights
          * Circumcision
          * Daycare
          * Foster care
          * Grandparent visitation
          * Infant swimming
          * Milk bank
          * Nanny
          * Wet nurse
        

Infant care and equipment|

        
                  * Baby bouncer
          * Baby gate
          * Baby monitor/Hidden camera
          * Baby powder
          * Baby shampoo
          * Baby toy
          * Baby walker
          * Bib
          * baby swing
          * Baby transport
          * Bassinet
          * Child safety seat/Car seat safety
          * Cloth diaper
          * Cradle board
          * Diaper
          * Diaper bag
          * Baby wipes
          * Haberman Feeder
          * Highchair
          * Infant bed _(American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot')_
          * Infant carrier
          * Infant clothing
          * Pacifier
          * Playpen
          * Stroller
          * Supplemental nursing system
          * Swaddling
          * Swim diaper
          * Baby teether
          * Travel cot
        

Other topics|

        
                  * Baby shower
          * Babywearing
          * Child neglect
          * Closed adoption
          * Cry room
          * Infant ear piercing
          * Open adoption
          * Prenatal cocaine exposure
          * Neonatal withdrawal syndrome
          * Parental child abduction
          * Parental rights
          * Parenting plan
          * Paternity fraud
          * Paternity
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Development of the human body

* * *

Before birth|

        
                  * Development
          * Embryo
          * Fetus
          * Gestational age
        

Birth and after|

        
                  * Birth
          * Child development
            * stages
            * Puberty
          * Adult development
          * Ageing
          * Senescence
          * Death
        

Phases|

        
                  * Infant
          * Toddler
          * Early childhood
          * Childhood
            * Child
          * Preadolescence
          * Adolescence
          * Adulthood
          * Middle age
          * Old age
        

Social and legal|

        
                  * Minor
          * Age of majority
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Infant&oldid=899962347"

Categories:

        
                  * Infancy
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2015
          * CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)
          * Webarchive template wayback links
          * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
          * Articles with short description
          * Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism
          * All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases
          * Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2018
          * Commons category link is on Wikidata
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * View source
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
          * Wikiquote
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Afrikaans
          * العربية
          * Asturianu
          * Avañe'ẽ
          * Aymar aru
          * Azərbaycanca
          * تۆرکجه
          * বাংলা
          * Bân-lâm-gú
          * Беларуская
          * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
          * Български
          * Boarisch
          * Brezhoneg
          * Català
          * Čeština
          * ChiShona
          * Cymraeg
          * Dansk
          * Deitsch
          * Deutsch
          * Eesti
          * Ελληνικά
          * Español
          * Esperanto
          * Euskara
          * فارسی
          * Français
          * Frysk
          * Gàidhlig
          * 贛語
          * 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
          * 한국어
          * Հայերեն
          * हिन्दी
          * Hrvatski
          * Bahasa Indonesia
          * ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
          * עברית
          * Jawa
          * ಕನ್ನಡ
          * Kreyòl ayisyen
          * Кыргызча
          * Latina
          * Latviešu
          * Lëtzebuergesch
          * Lumbaart
          * Magyar
          * मराठी
          * Bahasa Melayu
          * Nāhuatl
          * Nederlands
          * नेपाली
          * नेपाल भाषा
          * 日本語
          * Norsk
          * Norsk nynorsk
          * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
          * Polski
          * Română
          * Runa Simi
          * Русский
          * Shqip
          * Sicilianu
          * සිංහල
          * Simple English
          * Slovenščina
          * Soomaaliga
          * کوردی
          * Српски / srpski
          * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
          * Basa Sunda
          * Suomi
          * Svenska
          * Tagalog
          * தமிழ்
          * తెలుగు
          * ไทย
          * Türkçe
          * Українська
          * اردو
          * Tiếng Việt
          * Winaray
          * ייִדיש
          * 粵語
          * Zazaki
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 14:55 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

