

Skip to main content

![Home](https://mises-media.s3.amazonaws.com/logo_v3.png)

Toggle navigation

    
        * Blog
    * Mises Wire
    * Library
    * Media
    * Video
    * Learn Online
    * Events
    * Store
    * Subscribe
    

#### Follow Mises Institute

Follow @mises

Google CSE GO Box

GO

You must enable JavaScript to view the search results.

![DONATE TODAY!](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/Donate%20Button_20170320_1.png)

![DONATE TODAY!](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/Donate%20Button_20170320_1.png)

# Mises Wire

GET NEWS AND ARTICLES IN YOUR INBOXPrint

A

A

Home | Wire | How US States Compare to Foreign Countries in Size and GDP

## How US States Compare to Foreign Countries in Size and GDP

    
        * ![9227242988_1966979fe7_b.jpg](https://mises-media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/slideshow/s3/9227242988_1966979fe7_b.jpg?itok=Z4zAIz1Z)
    

0 Views

Tags Global EconomyU.S. Economy

02/17/2016Ryan McMaken

The Individual member states of the EU are fortunate in that they have (so
far) managed to retain their specific and separate identities to a point.
While Europeans from larger countries like the UK, France, and Germany no
doubt like to discount the necessity or importance of countries like Greece or
Portugal, those countries at least each continue to function as states among
equals, to a certain extent.

It is not so for the member states of the United States, where individual
states have been all but totally subsumed into the whole that is the "United
States."

We see this rhetorical aggregation all the time when people refer to EU member
states as individual countries while steadfastly referring to "the United
States" as a single entity in which it is assumed that the people, economies,
and demographics are more or less equal throughout.

Yes, the US states are more culturally and politically unified than the EU
member states, but as we've seen in terms of crime, poverty, income, and
health, the local realities can differ significantly from state to state.

Aggregation has negative repercussions for public policy, of course, since it
leads to national responses to what may be regional issues, or issues driven
by even just a handful of metropolitan areas, as in the case of homicide in
the US.

The other downside of this is that the aggregation of American states has led
to a habit of treating smaller and medium-sized states as if they are
insignificant.

In an international context, however, we find that the population sizes of
many US states make them comparable to numerous foreign countries. Even more
significant is the GDP of each state, which thanks to the high level of worker
productivity in American states, places even smaller US states among medium-
sized countries internationally. And, naturally, the larger states, such as
Florida and New York, are among the largest economies in the world.

**States Compared to Foreign Countries**

As an exercise in gaining perspective as to just how large some individual
American states are, I've taken a look at how individual US states compare in
terms of their population sizes and their total economies, in terms of GDP.

First, let's look at population size:

![](https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-MBqYeyygdJc/VsKyBzKjEyI/AAAAAAAAJi8/9bVQTq2WhcQ/s640/pop_states.JPG)

Source: (International population estimates, and US state population
estimates.)

If we begin by looking at the big states, we immediately get a sense of just
how large the US's population is, as a whole. The population in California is
larger than that of all Canada. And Texas is larger than Australia. Illinois
is larger than Belgium, Colorado is larger than Norway, and Alabama is larger
than New Zealand.

If just the West Coast and Rocky Mountain states broke off and formed their
own country, the country would have 70 million people, and thus be larger than
France, or larger than Canada, Australia, and New Zealand combined.

If the northeastern US broke off to form a country of New Jersey, New York,
and New England, it would have nearly 40 million people and be larger than
Canada, Australia, Poland, and nearly as large as Argentina and Spain.

The real significance of American states, however, lies in their total
productivity in terms of GDP. Many individual states are among the most
productive places in the world.

For example, it is often noted that if California were an independent county,
it would be the 7th largest economy on earth. That is true. California would
be right behind France and ahead of Brazil were it its own country.

But many other American states outpace much of the world as well. New York's
economy is larger than South Korea's. Texas's economy is nearly as large as
Canada's, and is larger than the economies of Mexico, Spain, the Netherlands,
Indonesia, and many others. The economy of Colorado is larger than the
economies of Singapore, Israel, Hong Kong, Finland, Egypt, Chile, and Ireland.

![](https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-JzbOSViBfE4/VsKZCdlhJ2I/AAAAAAAAJis/4lgErx-

SrX4/s640/states_gdp.JPG)

Source: (International GDP and GSP by state.)

It is also worth noting that many of these states are producing large GDPs
with much smaller populations that countries with comparable overall GDPs.
This is because, thanks to the prevalence of highly productive capital in the
US, American workers are far more productive than the workers in most other
countries.

For example, although Mexico has nearly four times as many people as Texas,
its economy is still smaller than Texas's. Although Kansas has only a third as
many people as Hungary, Kansas's economy is larger. In other words, the _per
capita_ GDP of American states tends to be sizable.

If we use a similar mapping method to look at per capita GDP, it looks like
this:

![](https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-Vx0aTtOvxJE/VsO-

Lr843AI/AAAAAAAAJj8/y-4ZUFfljEY/s640/percap.JPG)

Source: (International _per cap_ GDP, and US per cap GDP by state.)

And what would "national" GDP look like if we broke the US into smaller
nations? The economies would still be huge.

Our new hypothetical state composed of the West Coast and the Rocky Mountain
region would be the fourth largest economy in the world and have a total GDP
that falls between Japan (the third largest economy) and Germany, and well
above the UK, France, Italy and Russia.

Similarly, if the northeast US (New York, New Jersey, and New England) were
its own country, it would have a GDP about equal to the United Kingdom, which
is itself the fifth largest economy in the world.

**Implications for Public Policy**

There are numerous implications here for public policy. First of all, the
usual lack of international context often blinds us to the fact that
individual states could easily fund their own individual welfare states
without the need of a federal-level redistribution programs. This is
significant because the justification for the New Deal, and for national
welfare programs today, relies partially on an argument among policymakers
that it is necessary for the federal government to redistribute wealth from
the wealthier states to the poorer states. While I'm not in favor of welfare
states, I'd be in favor of immediate _decentralization_ of the American
welfare state.

Even the poorest American states have the GDP necessary to fund welfare states
similar to those in Southern and Eastern Europe. We're constantly being told
how great and humane those are, so let's let cut the poorer states loose to do
it on their own. The wealthier states, of course, can afford gold-plated
Cadillac-level welfare states such as those we're told exist in Northern
Europe.

And, of course, there are implications here for global geopolitics as well. If
even the 11 Western states could form the fourth-largest economy in the world
all by themselves, that reminds us that even pieces of the US would dwarf
other global powers in terms of GDP, and thus military capability. That is,
our hypothetical economy of the Western states would be twice the size of
Russia's economy (about 4 tril compared to 1.8 tril).

Ryan McMaken (@ryanmcmaken) is a senior editor at the Mises Institute. Send
him your article submissions for _Mises Wire_ and _The Austrian_ , but read
article guidelines first. Ryan has degrees in economics and political science
from the University of Colorado, and was the economist for the Colorado
Division of Housing from 2009 to 2014. He is the author of _Commie Cowboys:
The Bourgeoisie and the Nation-State in the Western Genre._

Contact Ryan McMakenTwitter

###### Note: The views expressed on Mises.org are not necessarily those of

the Mises Institute.

Image source:

www.flickr.com/photos/29311691@N05/9227242988/sizes/l

###### When commenting, please post a concise, civil, and informative

comment. Full comment policy here

### Add Comment

View the discussion thread.

![Shield icon](/sites/all/themes/bootsass/images/icons/shield-bg.png)
![wire](/sites/all/themes/bootsass/images/icons/icon-wire.png)

### What is Mises Wire?

_Mises Wire_ offers contemporary news and opinion through the lens of Austrian
economics and libertarian political economy.

Submitting articles to _Mises Wire_

Reprints, Permissions & Copyrights

The views expressed on _Mises Wire_ and mises.org are not necessarily those of
the Mises Institute.

Most Popular Wire Articles

##### Do We Consent to Government by Refusing to Emigrate?

**Carl Watner**

John Locke was ridiculed for suggesting that people "consent" to their
government by not emigrating. Hume suggested this theory could be used to
claim consent for even the most outrageous tyrants.

##### Brazil's Left Wants to Crack Down on Free Speech

**Matheus Fialho Vieira**

Brazilian authorities here are discontented with our rising skepticism of the
state â€” and they are willing to silence the dissidents.

##### Fewer than Half of Violent Crimes Are Solved in America

**Ryan McMaken**

Fewer than half the homicides in the US end with a conviction in court. The
rate for other violent crimes is even worse. Meanwhile, 80 percent of arrests
are for petty offenses.

##### The Next British Prime Minister: Is There a Least-Worst Candidate?

**George Pickering**

Tory MPs vying for the Prime Ministership mostly all vote alike on taxes and
foreign policy. So only the issue of Brexit separates the bad from the very
bad candidates.

##### Decentralize the Drug War â€” On the Way to Abolishing It

**JosÃ© NiÃ±o**

On May 17, 2019, the City of Denver...

Meet the Writer

![headshot_cropped.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/sidebar_vertical/s3/static-

page/img/headshot_cropped.png?itok=NuGyIrv-)

#### Ryan McMaken

Ryan McMaken (@ryanmcmaken) is a senior editor at the Mises Institute. Send
him your...

##### Ryan McMaken: Are We Getting Poorer?

Ryan McMaken and Jeff Deist discuss what makes people rich, and how economists
should measure wealth.

##### Ryan McMaken: The Brexit Earthquake

Ryan McMaken and Jeff Deist discuss what the shocking Brexit vote really
means.

![Mises Institute Press Page](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/PressPage%20FlexBlock.jpg)

![The Human Action Podcast](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/Human%20Action%20Podcast_357x180_20190214.png)

Meet Our Wire Contributors

![anderson_0.jpg](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/sidebar_horizontal/s3/static-

page/img/anderson_0.jpg?itok=A4i-ZB5y)

#### William L. Anderson

William L. Anderson is a professor of economics at Frostburg State University
in Frostburg, Maryland.

More

![Man, Economy, and State, with Power and Market by Murray N.

Rothbard](https://mises-media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/block_teaser/s3/static-

page/img/Man%2C%20Economy%2C%20and%20State%2C%20with%20Power%20and%20Market_Rothbard.jpg?itok=xTi88fyX)

Books

#### Man, Economy, and State, with Power and Market

Rothbard provides a sweeping presentation of Austrian economic theory.

Browse Books

![The Bob Murphy Show](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/block_teaser/s3/static-

page/img/BobMurphyPodcast_750x516.png?itok=zlG8v2AP)

Library

#### 4\. A Conversation With Jeff Deist

In this episode, Bob talks to Mises Institute president Jeff Deist.

Browse Library

![Daniel Lacalle on Mises Weekends](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/block_teaser/s3/static-

page/img/20181012_Lacalle_node_750x516.jpg?itok=spbJjtvS)

Mises Weekends

#### Daniel Lacalle on the Biggest Bubble of All

Daniel Lacalle and Jeff Deist discuss why all of us have a stake in seeing
central bank balance sheets shrink.

Browse Mises Weekends

![The Economics of the Great Depression](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/block_teaser/s3/static-

page/img/GreatDepression_Murphy_academy_20160706_750x516.jpg?itok=UEPnQeab)

Courses

#### The Economics of the Great Depression

In this five-lecture course, Dr. Robert Murphy analyzes the Great Depression
from an Austrian perspective.

Browse Courses

## Topics

    
        * Big Government
    * Biographies
    * Book Reviews
    * Booms and Busts
    * Bureaucracy and Regulation
    * Corporate Welfare
    * Cronyism and Corporatism
    * Decentralization and Secession
    * Education
    * Financial Markets
    * Free Markets
    * From the Archives
    * Global Economy
    * Health
    * Immigration
    * Labor and Wages
    * Legal System
    * Media and Culture
    * Money and Banks
    * Poverty
    * Protectionism and Free Trade
    * Socialism
    * Strategy
    * Swiss Watch
    * Taxes and Spending
    * The Entrepreneur
    * The Environment
    * The Fed
    * The Police State
    * U.S. Economy
    * U.S. History
    * War and Foreign Policy
    * World History
    

## Austrian School

    
        * Austrian Economics Overview
    * Business Cycles
    * Calculation and Knowledge
    * Capital and Interest Theory
    * Entrepreneurship
    * Fiscal Theory
    * Gold Standard
    * History of the Austrian School of Economics
    * Interventionism
    * Monetary Theory
    * Money and Banking
    * Money Supply
    * Monopoly and Competition
    * Other Schools of Thought
    * Philosophy and Methodology
    * Political Theory
    * Praxeology
    * Prices
    * Private Property
    * Production Theory
    * Subjectivism
    * Value and Exchange
    

## Browse Library

    
        * Who is Ludwig von Mises?
    * What is the Austrian School of Economics?
    * Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics
    * The Austrian
    * Mises Wire
    * Mises Weekends
    * Mises View
    * Journals & Publications
    * Homeschool Resources
    * Resources for the Economist
    * Resources for Students
    

## About the Mises Institute

    
        * Fellowships & Independent Research
    * What is the Mises Institute?
    * Become a Member
    * Mises Events
    * Press Room
    * Mises Publications
    * Online Learning
    * Mises Bookstore
    * Faculty & Staff
    * Finances and Board
    * Subscribe to Email Lists
    * Support Mises
    * Privacy Statement
    * Contact Us
    

## Contact Us

Mises Institute

518 West Magnolia Avenue  
Auburn, Alabama 36832-4501

PHONE 334.321.2100 | FAX 334.321.2119

Email Us

Tu ne cede malis,  
sed contra audentior ito

GET NEWS AND ARTICLES IN YOUR INBOX

## Stay Connected

![facebook.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/facebook.png?itok=ASRCMXQr)

![menu_icon_775.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/menu_icon_775.png?itok=1K7gxlnp)

![instagram.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/instagram.png?itok=HhW2b5GY)

![itunes.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/itunes.png?itok=sEPoy-

Qo)

![menu_icon_777.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/menu_icon_777.png?itok=4axdrEa7)

![snapchat_v3.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/snapchat_v3.png?itok=O5Sz5Whu)

![icon_mises-rss.png](https://mises-

media.s3.amazonaws.com/styles/footer_icon_32x32/s3/socialmedia/icon/icon_mises-

rss.png?itok=yLoqMX9o)

**Website powered by Mises Institute donors**

![](https://mises-media.s3.amazonaws.com/4starBanner_234x65.png)

Mises Institute is a tax-exempt 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.
Contributions are tax-deductible to the full extent the law allows. Tax ID#
52-1263436

![Clicky](//in.getclicky.com/100939425ns.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

