

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

        
                  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4181515/img/28977)
          * Skip to main content
          * Skip to navigation
          * Resources
            * All Resources
            * Chemicals & Bioassays
              * BioSystems
              * PubChem BioAssay
              * PubChem Compound
              * PubChem Structure Search
              * PubChem Substance
              * All Chemicals & Bioassays Resources...
            * DNA & RNA
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * E-Utilities
              * GenBank
              * GenBank: BankIt
              * GenBank: Sequin
              * GenBank: tbl2asn
              * Genome Workbench
              * Influenza Virus
              * Nucleotide Database
              * PopSet
              * Primer-BLAST
              * ProSplign
              * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
              * RefSeqGene
              * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
              * Splign
              * Trace Archive
              * UniGene
              * All DNA & RNA Resources...
            * Data & Software
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * Cn3D
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * E-Utilities
              * GenBank: BankIt
              * GenBank: Sequin
              * GenBank: tbl2asn
              * Genome ProtMap
              * Genome Workbench
              * Primer-BLAST
              * ProSplign
              * PubChem Structure Search
              * SNP Submission Tool
              * Splign
              * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
              * All Data & Software Resources...
            * Domains & Structures
              * BioSystems
              * Cn3D
              * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * Structure (Molecular Modeling Database)
              * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
              * All Domains & Structures Resources...
            * Genes & Expression
              * BioSystems
              * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
              * E-Utilities
              * Gene
              * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Database 
              * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Datasets
              * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Profiles
              * Genome Workbench
              * HomoloGene
              * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
              * RefSeqGene
              * UniGene
              * All Genes & Expression Resources...
            * Genetics & Medicine
              * Bookshelf
              * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
              * Genetic Testing Registry
              * Influenza Virus
              * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
              * PubMed
              * PubMed Central (PMC)
              * PubMed Clinical Queries
              * RefSeqGene
              * All Genetics & Medicine Resources...
            * Genomes & Maps
              * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
              * GenBank: tbl2asn
              * Genome
              * Genome Project
              * Genome Data Viewer (GDV)
              * Genome ProtMap
              * Genome Workbench
              * Influenza Virus
              * Nucleotide Database
              * PopSet
              * ProSplign
              * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
              * Splign
              * Trace Archive
              * All Genomes & Maps Resources...
            * Homology
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * BLAST Link (BLink)
              * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * Genome ProtMap
              * HomoloGene
              * Protein Clusters
              * All Homology Resources...
            * Literature
              * Bookshelf
              * E-Utilities
              * Journals in NCBI Databases
              * MeSH Database
              * NCBI Handbook
              * NCBI Help Manual
              * NCBI News & Blog
              * PubMed
              * PubMed Central (PMC)
              * PubMed Clinical Queries
              * All Literature Resources...
            * Proteins
              * BioSystems
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * BLAST Link (BLink)
              * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * E-Utilities
              * ProSplign
              * Protein Clusters
              * Protein Database
              * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
              * All Proteins Resources...
            * Sequence Analysis
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * BLAST Link (BLink)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * Genome ProtMap
              * Genome Workbench
              * Influenza Virus
              * Primer-BLAST
              * ProSplign
              * Splign
              * All Sequence Analysis Resources...
            * Taxonomy
              * Taxonomy
              * Taxonomy Browser
              * Taxonomy Common Tree
              * All Taxonomy Resources...
            * Training & Tutorials
              * NCBI Education Page
              * NCBI Handbook
              * NCBI Help Manual
              * NCBI News & Blog
              * All Training & Tutorials Resources...
            * Variation
              * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
              * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
              * Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP)
              * SNP Submission Tool
              * All Variation Resources...
          * How To
            * All How To
            * Chemicals & Bioassays
            * DNA & RNA
            * Data & Software
            * Domains & Structures
            * Genes & Expression
            * Genetics & Medicine
            * Genomes & Maps
            * Homology
            * Literature
            * Proteins
            * Sequence Analysis
            * Taxonomy
            * Training & Tutorials
            * Variation
          * About NCBI Accesskeys
        

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PubMed

US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health

Search databaseAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

        
                  * Advanced
          * Help
        

## Result Filters

        
                  * Format: Abstract
        

Format

        
                  * Summary
          * Summary (text)
          * Abstract
          * Abstract (text)
          * MEDLINE
          * XML
          * PMID List
        

Apply

#### Send to

Choose Destination

        
                  * File
          * Clipboard
          * Collections
          * E-mail
          * Order
          * My Bibliography
          * Citation manager
        
          * FormatSummary (text)Abstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListCSV
        

Create File

        
                  * 1 selected item: 5142590
          * FormatSummarySummary (text)AbstractAbstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListMeSH and Other Data
          * E-mail
          * Subject
          * Additional text
          * E-mail
        

Didn't get the message? Find out why...

Add to Clipboard

Add to Collections

Order articles

Add to My Bibliography

Generate a file for use with external citation management software.

Create File

Am J Public Health. 1971 May;61(5):1038-41.

# United States government policy on abortion.

Contis G, Hern WM.

### Abstract

#### PIP:

Federal government policy in the United States lacks uniformity, as is
indicated by the fact that the Dept. of Defense permits the performance of
abortion for medical and mental health reasons, the Office of Economic
Opportunity states that no project funds may be used for any surgical
procedure intended to result in abortion, and the Dept. of Health, Education
and Welfare has no policy concerning abortion in its programs but that
abortion is a reimbursable expense under Title XIX Medicaid payments in
enrolled states. This ambiguity of the federal government is considered a
reflection of the complexity of the issue and the lack of clear consensus
concerning abortion among the American public. Factors that federal family
planning officials must consider are: 1) the ethical and moral considerations
that confront the individual citizen making a private decusion about abortion;
2) legal and constitutional issues, such as that of discrimination in the
availability of abortion services on economic grounds; and 3) the relationship
of abortion to public service needs and public health considerations, given
that 1/4-1/5 of pregnancies in the United States end in legal or illegal
abortion. Clandestine abortion constitutes a significant health problem,
accounting for a significant proportion of maternal mortality, especially
among the poor (the 1967 rate of reported mortality due to abortion with
sepsis being 7 times greater for nonwhites than whites). The Office of
Economic Opportunity in reassessing its current policy needs to ascertain the
standards of medical care, cost projections, and logistics of providing
abortion services. It is recommended that abortion services be combined with
serious efforts to provide effective subsequent contraception, as abortion as
an exclusive method of birth control would cost up to $2000 per year while the
provision of high quality family planning services is $60-$80 per woman per
year.

PMID:

        
                5142590
        

PMCID:

        
                PMC1529840
        

DOI:

        
                10.2105/ajph.61.5.1038
        
         [Indexed for MEDLINE]
        

Free PMC Article

Share

### MeSH terms

#### MeSH terms

        
                  * Abortion, Criminal
          * Abortion, Induced*
          * Attitude to Health*
          * Costs and Cost Analysis
          * Ethics
          * Family Planning Services
          * Female
          * Government Agencies*
          * Humans
          * Jurisprudence
          * Maternal Mortality
          * Pregnancy
          * United States
          * United States Office of Economic Opportunity
        

### LinkOut - more resources

#### Full Text Sources

        
                  * Atypon - PDF
          * PubMed Central
        
          * ## Supplemental Content
        

### Full text links

![Icon for

Atypon](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/corehtml/query/egifs/http:--www.ajph.org-

templates-jsp-_style2-_premium-_apha-images-APHA_100x25.gif) ![Icon for PubMed

Central](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4185393/img/3977009)

![Loading ... ](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4185393/img/3631476)

You are here: NCBI > Literature > PubMed

Support Center
![](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_app=entrez&ncbi_db=pubmed&ncbi_pdid=abstract&ncbi_phid=CE8BD2A5CF9BA19100000000016700CD)

## Simple NCBI Directory

        
                  * ### Getting Started
        
          * NCBI Education
          * NCBI Help Manual
          * NCBI Handbook
          * Training & Tutorials
          * Submit Data
          * ### Resources
        
          * Chemicals & Bioassays
          * Data & Software
          * DNA & RNA
          * Domains & Structures
          * Genes & Expression
          * Genetics & Medicine
          * Genomes & Maps
          * Homology
          * Literature
          * Proteins
          * Sequence Analysis
          * Taxonomy
          * Variation
          * ### Popular
        
          * PubMed
          * Bookshelf
          * PubMed Central
          * BLAST
          * Nucleotide
          * Genome
          * SNP
          * Gene
          * Protein
          * PubChem
          * ### Featured
        
          * Genetic Testing Registry
          * GenBank
          * Reference Sequences
          * Gene Expression Omnibus
          * Genome Data Viewer
          * Human Genome
          * Mouse Genome
          * Influenza Virus
          * Primer-BLAST
          * Sequence Read Archive
          * ### NCBI Information
        
          * About NCBI
          * Research at NCBI
          * NCBI News & Blog
          * NCBI FTP Site
          * NCBI on Facebook
          * NCBI on Twitter
          * NCBI on YouTube
          * Privacy Policy
        

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

