
    
        1. Skip to navigation
    2. Skip to content
    

![

    
                                                        Calgary Herald                          Homepage](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/ch_300x300_rgb.png?resize=120,120)
    
    * News
    
      * All News
      * Local News
      * Politics
      * Crime
      * National
      * World
      * Traffic
    
    * Opinion
    
      * All Opinion
      * Editorials
      * Columnists
      * Letters
    
    * Sports
    
      * All Sports
      * Hockey
    
        * All Hockey
        * Calgary Flames
        * NHL
    
      * Football
    
        * All Football
        * Calgary Stampeders
        * CFL
        * NFL
    
      * Spruce Meadows
      * Baseball
      * Basketball
    
        * All Basketball
        * NBA
        * NCAA
    
      * Golf
    
        * Golf Videos
    
      * Rodeo-Chucks
      * Soccer
    
        * All Soccer
        * International Soccer
        * MLS
    
      * Curling
      * Tennis
      * Auto Racing
    
    * Business
    
      * All Business
      * Energy
      * Local Business
      * Real Estate
      * Commercial Real Estate
      * FP Markets
      * FP Headlines
      * FP Money
      * Technology
    
        * All Technology
        * Gaming
        * Internet
        * Personal Tech
        * Science
        * Space
        * Tech-Biz
    
      * Small Business
    
    * Arts
    
      * All Arts
      * Local Arts
      * Movies
    
        * All Movies
        * Movie Listings
    
      * Television
    
        * All TV
        * TV Listings
    
      * Theatre
      * Music
    
        * All Music
        * NP Music
    
      * Celebrity
      * Books
      * Swerve Listings
    
    * Life
    
      * All Life
      * Swerve
      * Homes
    
        * All Homes
        * New Homes
        * Condos
        * Rec Properties
    
      * Food
    
        * All Food
        * Taste Alberta
        * Recipes
    
      * Health
    
        * All Health
        * Women
        * Men
        * Seniors
        * Sexual Health
        * Diet & Fitness
        * Family & Child
    
      * Life By Design
      * Fashion & Beauty
      * Parenting
      * Relationships
      * Puzzles & Comics
      * Royals
      * Travel
    
        * All Travel
        * Ski & Snowboard
    
      * Gift Guide
    
    * Careers
    * Obits
    * Classifieds
    
      * All Classifieds
      * FlyerCity
      * Announcements
      * Browse Listings
      * Place a Classifieds Ad
      * Local Directory
      * Special Sections
    
    * Driving
    
    * News
    * Politics
    
    * |Featured:
    
    * Energy News
    * Don Braid
    * Cannabis
    * Inside Alberta Podcast
    * Chris Varcoe
    * Licia Corbella
    * Driving
    * Video Centre
    * Bronco Unbroken
    * |
    

More

    
        * Open Search Close Search Search
    

Videos Sign In Sign Out Subscribe

# Braid: UCP health care policy invites return to PC-era chaos

Don Braid, Calgary Herald

Updated: March 26, 2019

![](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/kenney318.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=840&h=630&crop=1)

United Conservative Leader Jason Kenney provided details on the UCP plan to
get better outcomes for Alberta students at the Calgary Jewish Academy in
Calgary on Monday, March 25, 2019. Darren Makowichuk / DARREN
MAKOWICHUK/Postmedia

Share Adjust Comment Print

Health care isn't a giant issue in this election campaign -- not yet anyway.
But it may once again hit the heights when the dire risks of UCP health
promises sink in.

Jason Kenney's party would freeze spending. Any fresh funding for the front
lines would come from cash saved through cuts to administration, or unexpected
improvements to the fiscal picture.

That's not going to work. In fact, it guarantees a return to the chaos of the
Progressive Conservative years, and maybe worse, because there would be no
panic spending spikes to save the day.

This seems to be slipping under voter radar because health care is no longer a
hair-pulling crisis.

It ranks fourth in importance to voters, tied at 24 per cent with government
spending, according to a recent Angus Reid Institute survey.

The big issues, unsurprisingly, are energy and pipelines (49 per cent), and
jobs, unemployment and the economy, all at 41 per cent.

Health care was a much bigger deal in elections past. Now it isn't top of
mind. Why?

The NDP calmed down the system, made significant improvements and provided
stability for health planners, professionals and workers.

The giant, complex structure now costs $22 billion a year. It's expensive and
far from perfect, as the NDP will admit. Some wait times are growing.

But health care access and delivery are far more level and reliable than they
were in 2015.

That was essential after a decade of erratic funding and political
interference from PC ministers who couldn't keep their hands off.

The NDP has also eliminated the PCs' messy public fights over who runs the
system.

Shortly after winning in 2015, the NDP picked a board of able people who
understand the government is the ultimate boss, period. So there's no point
arguing over policy or direction.

The NDP promised, and delivered, relatively modest but consistent funding
hikes equivalent to population growth plus inflation -- between three and four
per cent annually.

In the dying Progressive Conservative years, spending increases spiked from
four per cent to more than six per cent, then down to two per cent, and up to
nearly seven per cent. If oil prices dropped, a patient could almost expect
the IV to drain out.

Staffing and programs were flatlined, resuscitated and then put through the
same survival cycle again. It was chaotic for doctors, nurses and too often
for patients.

Now the UCP proposes something even worse -- real-world cuts, with no apparent
hope of a corresponding hike the next year.

## Related

    
        * Notley unveils plan to cut surgery waits
    * Braid: NDP child care plan shows vast gap with UCP policy
    

Holding the line on funding means the system loses to inflation; a 1.5 per
cent value drop every year. That's without counting the extra demands of
population growth and aging.

A UCP freeze would thus reduce real-world health care resources by about three
per cent annually.

Unless, that is, a Kenney government could make up the difference by cutting
administration, after a review of Alberta Health Services to be completed by
Dec. 31.

By finding efficiencies everywhere, but relying mostly on administrative and
management cuts, Kenney hopes to save between $350 million and $450 million.

Even if he can do that, the funding gap created by a freeze can never be
filled.

Kenney could fire every single executive, manager, planner and co-ordinator
and eliminate the whole network of central services -- _and still only save
enough to keep front-line funding stable for one year!_

Alberta's health administration costs, as a percentage of spending, are the
lowest of any province at 3.3 per cent. The national average is 4.5. Ontario
is by far the worst, at 5.8 per cent.

Alberta spends $726 million a year on administration. Recouping every penny --
not that it's even possible -- could only happen once.

After that, the system would still be left with frozen funding that is
actually a major funding loss every year.

While signing his health-care guarantee, Kenney said, "If we can find the
money, there will be increases in the health budget. There will be no cuts."

That sounds a lot better than it could ever be.

_Don Braid’s column appears regularly in the Calgary Herald._

dbraid@postmedia.com

Twitter: @DonBraid

Facebook: Don Braid Politics

![](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/truck.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=150)
Notley promises $1.4B to expand network of roads for heavy loads
![](https://postmediacalgaryherald2.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/al-

photo-977.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=150) Mandel promises breaks for small
businesses, but won't touch minimum wage

## This Week's Flyers

## Comments

**Postmedia is pleased to bring you a new commenting experience**. We are
committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion and encourage
all readers to share their views on our articles. Comments may take up to an
hour for moderation before appearing on the site. We ask you to keep your
comments relevant and respectful. Visit our Community Guidelines for more
information.

Sign in to Comment

## Connect With Us

    
        *     *     * ##  Columnists
    
    * Columnists
    

#### Braid: Trudeau paints conservative premiers as a threat to Canada

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, bent on re-election, is already playing a
divisive, dangerous game with the country he claims to lead.

    
        * Energy
    

#### Varcoe: Trans Mountain expectations climb as clock ticks down to decision

day

The countdown has now begun on Ottawa's decision on the Trans Mountain
expansion project, with a federal announcement expected within a week.

Close

## Daily Headline News

Thank you for subscribing to Postmedia's Newsletter.

Email

By clicking “Submit”, I consent to receiving the above communication from
Postmedia Network Inc. I understand that I may unsubscribe from these
communications at any time.

Submit

## Weather

## Weather

###

    
        * ![]()
    * Currently
    * Feels Like
    

### We want you to have the most accurate weather report you can.

Please enter a valid postal code

Share this story

## Braid: UCP health care policy invites return to PC-era chaos

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Reddit
    * Email
    * Tumblr
    * Pinterest
    * Google+
    * LinkedIn
    
    * ## News
    
      * All News
      * Local News
      * Politics
      * Crime
      * National
      * World
      * Traffic
    * ## Opinion
    
      * All Opinion
      * Editorials
      * Columnists
      * Letters
    * ## Sports
    
      * All Sports
      * Hockey
      * Football
      * Spruce Meadows
      * Baseball
      * Basketball
      * Golf
      * Rodeo-Chucks
      * Soccer
      * Curling
      * Tennis
      * Auto Racing
    * ## Business
    
      * All Business
      * Energy
      * Local Business
      * Real Estate
      * Commercial Real Estate
      * FP Markets
      * FP Headlines
      * FP Money
      * Technology
      * Small Business
    * ## Arts
    
      * All Arts
      * Local Arts
      * Movies
      * Television
      * Theatre
      * Music
      * Celebrity
      * Books
      * Swerve Listings
    * ## Life
    
      * All Life
      * Swerve
      * Homes
      * Food
      * Health
      * Life By Design
      * Fashion & Beauty
      * Parenting
      * Relationships
      * Puzzles & Comics
      * Royals
      * Travel
      * Gift Guide
    

![Postmedia Logo](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/themes/vip/postmedia-theme-

broadsheet/images/common/logo-postmedia.png)

365 Bloor St East, Toronto, ON, M4W3L4, www.postmedia.com

(C) 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.

Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly prohibited.

Powered by WordPress.com VIP

    
        * ## Classifieds
    
      * Driving
      * Obits
      * Announcements
      * FlyerCity
      * Careers
      * Browse Listings
      * Place a Classified Ad
      * Local Directory
    * ## Legal
    
      * Privacy - Updated
      * Terms
      * Copyright
      * Digital Ad Registry
    * ## Services
    
      * Advertise With Us
      * Subscribe
      * My Subscription
      * Edit Profile
      * Contact Us
      * ePaper
      * Digital Access
      * Contests
      * NIE
    * ## Properties
    
      * Canada.com
      * Edmonton Journal
      * London Free Press
      * Montreal Gazette
      * National Post
      * Leader-Post (Regina)
      * Ottawa Citizen
      * The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon)
      * The Province (Vancouver)
      * Vancouver Sun
      * Windsor Star
    

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

