

![California Labor and Employment

Law](https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/client/q_glossy,ret_img/https://calaborlaw.com/wp-

content/uploads/calaborlaw.jpg)

Menu

    
        * Home
    * Filing Your Labor Board Complaint
    * Reviews
    * About
    * Contact
    

### (213) 992-3299

![California Labor and Employment

Law](https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/client/q_glossy,ret_img/https://calaborlaw.com/wp-

content/uploads/calaborlaw.jpg)

Follow us on social media

Facebook **__ Twitter_** _Google ** __ Linkedin_**_ Yelp **__ Rss_** _

Menu

    
        * Home
    * Filing Your Labor Board Complaint
    * Reviews
    * About
    * Contact
    

# How Much Do Lawsuits Cost?

By Eugene Lee | 17 __

![](https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/client/q_glossy,ret_img/https://calaborlaw.com/wp-

content/uploads/2008/09/092608-2252-howmuchdola1.jpg)![](https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/client/q_lqip,ret_wait/https://calaborlaw.com/wp-

content/uploads/2008/09/092608-2252-howmuchdola1.jpg)People in the US love to
rail about the fact that there are too many lawsuits, too many greedy
plaintiffs gaming the system, too many people refusing to take responsibility
for their own errors. Numerous websites have sprung up that have dedicated
themselves to poking fun at stupid lawsuits.

But I've always wondered this about lawsuits -- they are VERY, VERY expensive
to bring, so where do all these greedy plaintiffs with frivolous lawsuits get
the money to finance them? Do they really have $10,000 lying around to just
throw away in a bid to waste everyone's time, including theirs? Because
$10,000 or so is probably the minimum it takes to bring a lawsuit nowadays.

In Los Angeles Superior Court in California, these are some of the costs
typically associated with a lawsuit (in case you're interested, here is the
full LASC civil fee schedule ). Note, the costs are going up all the time
thanks to inflation:

    
        1.  **Complaint filing fee** : $320. You pay this to the Court at the initiation of your lawsuit. When the person you 're suing first appears in Court, he too has to pay the same fee as their "first appearance fee".
    
    2.  **Motion filing fee** : $40. Unless you or your lawyer are near the courthouse, you may have to pay a third-party attorney service company to file your motion with the courthouse, or fax-file it for you. That 's another $50 to $100 per motion depending on your rush. There is no way to predict how many motions you will need to file in your lawsuit.
    
    3.  **Depositions** : $1,000 to $2,000 per day. If you want to interview witnesses, you might be able to meet them informally and get their written declarations/affidavits for the price of a cup of coffee. But in many cases, you will probably have to formally  "depose" them. That means serving a deposition notice/ subpoena on the witness, scheduling a time that's convenient for the witness, the defendant and their attorney, and reserving a court report who can officially transcribe the proceedings. Reporters can charge $1,000 or more per day. You might also need to videotape the witness. If you're not able to do it yourself, you will need to hire a certified videographer. That's another $1,000 or more per day. If you need an interpreter for the witness, that's an additional cost.
    
    4.  **Copies** : If you need to obtain documents from the defendant to prove your case, in many cases you will need to hire a bonded copy shop to bring their scanners/copiers to the place where the documents are located, and make copies for you. They can charge a setup fee ($200 or so) plus a per page charge (10 to 40 cents per page).
    
    5.  **Experts** : Many lawsuits require you to hire an expert who can testify in court about topics that are outside the knowledge of the everyday person. Experts can include engineers, psychiatrists/ psychologists, economists, physicians, human resource experts, accident reconstructionists, etc. Experts don 't come cheap, they can charge anywhere from $200 to $400 per hour or even more.
    
    6.  **Appeals (if necessary)** : The filing fee for an appeal is roughly $700. You may also need to ask the court clerk to prepare a record for appeal that can cost hundreds more. If you need a written transcript of a court hearing to support your appeal, the costs varies widely but can be as much as $1,000.
    
    7.  **If you lose** : If you lose your lawsuit, you will likely be on the hook for the costs of your opponent, which includes all of the above and more. If you 're particularly unlucky or your lawsuit is frivolous, the court could force you to also pay your opponent's attorney fees. That bill can be astronomical given attorneys charge in the range of $200 to $1,000 per hour.
    

If you're lucky, you won't be paying any of the above costs yourself. Many
lawsuits are funded by the lawyer, not the plaintiff. These are so-called
contingency fee arrangements where the lawyer pays some, most or all of the
costs and fees associated with the lawsuit and invests their time without
charging the plaintiff. In return, the lawyer takes a percentage of the
recovery from the lawsuit if you win (but they get nothing if you lose). So
the lawyer ends up assuming most or all of the financial risk of the lawsuit.

In most cases, contingency fee lawyers aren't going to want to invest their
time and money into a case that's frivolous. If they did, they wouldn't be in
business for very long.

So who's funding all these frivolous lawsuits that are weighing down the US
economy, clogging up our courts, burning up (lots of) cash, and wasting
everyone's time? Because I sure am not nor is anyone else I know.

If you've got a viewpoint on this, I'd be interested in hearing from you in
the comment section below. I imagine defense lawyers would have a lot to say
on this topic.

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on Linkedin

Posted in Tips for Employees and tagged attorney fees, court costs

<- The McDonalds Coffee Cup Case$3.4 Mil. Settlement is Latest Female College
Coach Award ->

### 17 Comments

    
        1. Mike Leonardo on June 30, 2018 at 9:44 am
    

Piece of garbage Apple is the biggest LOSER company because apple stoled the
name iphone and ios from cisco, ipad from LG. Two companies made things before
apple. Apple doesn't make camera, processor, and batter, display. 3d touch
wasn't apple, so apple stoled from immersion. Iphone design copy from sony,
htc phone. Ipad pro copy from surface pro, keyboard, and features. Tim cock
helped two terroists what to do inside the building in san berdino, CA and
asshole(tim cock) hacked informations from two terrorists' iphone because he
is biggest isis leader and he is doing bribery to russian hackers, isis
people. Tim cook and his team are making explosives to blow up white house and
capital hill. They want to assassinate u.s president. Tim cook and susan
bennett, Lisa P. Jackson and Jimmy Lovine, TBWAMedia Arts Lab sell marijuanas,
opioids, weeds, pot, and cocaines, opium, and heroin, bath salts, lsd to
people. They kidnap underage girls to have a hot sex on the bed, they want to
lick girls' PUSSY so they got hiv, std and he loves lick anus. He always says
nigars or kkk to every black people and he says taco to mexicans. Apple are
copying animoji trademark and features from Tokyo-based Emonster kk. I have
all apple products hacked and fire came out, exploded in my hand and face, so
I lost everything and hack my info from russians. Cambridge Analytica are
stealing ur personal email, facebook, and instagram, twitter, snapchat,
myspace on all apple devices. This is 100000% true informations. Apple always
LIE to u, so do not listen to best buy, and target, and walmart, apple people
in apple store, all u.s carriers. THIS IS TOO SHAME TO APPLE AND TIM COCK. Bye
bye apple.

Reply

    
        2. john conway on November 3, 2017 at 6:48 pm
    

what do you think about a lawyer who asks for $2000 up front?

Reply

    
          * Eugene Lee on November 3, 2017 at 7:33 pm
    

That could be entirely reasonable depending on what your legal issue is. Or
maybe not. Sorry if that sounds cryptic, but I would need to know more about
your legal issue.

Reply

    
            * John Conway on November 6, 2017 at 6:02 pm
    

Thank you for your response. Please allow me to explain the situation. I have
a friend based in China selling things online. She was hit with a copyright
lawsuit saying that she was selling bootleg toys. She had her paypal frozen. I
am not very familiar with law, but I believe she was hit with a temporary
restraining order.

Reply

    
        3. Sara Welsh on December 1, 2014 at 5:55 am
    

Wow, I had no idea that lawsuits could cost so much. My uncle is thinking
about hiring a corporate lawyer to help him with a case, but I'm not sure if
it's worth going to court. It sounds like the procedure can be messy, and I'm
not sure if that's something that he wants to do. If it's something he goes
through with, I'm going to tell him to take your advice, and to find a really
great lawyer.

Sara Welsh | http://integralaw.ca/business/

Reply

    
        4. Guest on March 5, 2014 at 10:56 am
    

If someone stated online that I filed false police reports and I was never
charged with that crime, is it libel? If they stated that I came on line and
"lied" allowing someone so that person could cover their tracks and steal, is
that libel? And, if they lied about my relationship with another organization
saying they asked me to leave, but, I left because of inappropriate practices
of which I reported to the police before the police even began investigating
the organization, is that libel? If they call me names to others and tells
others I lie, one of the others being the editor of a local newspaper via
their facebook site, is that considered libel?  
Thank you,

Reply

    
        5. foolsa on June 13, 2013 at 7:23 pm
    

Is it a "frivolous"lawsuit when your boss takes you in his car along with
another employee and chews you out for over 1/2 hour while in his car and then
takes us to lunch where he continues in front of my co-worker to belittle me
and put me down? Is it when a boss calls you Judicans enstead of my name Judy?
Is it when your boss hits you in the ass with his papers when I was in his
office?.

Reply

    
          * Christopher Taylor on June 30, 2013 at 9:26 am
    

More information is necessary. What you stated so far is legal but for,
potentially, hitting you with the papers. If this is tinged with sexual
intent, and it's not a stretch to claim such an inappropriate act, then it can
be the basis for a sexual harrassment case. If you can prove sexually-laced
behavior is severe or is regular and ongoing, then you may have a reasonable
claim. The Court may not view one physical touching, especially as described
here, as creating a hostile work environment. You are invited to search for
more on this topic at my twitter link @lawsatwork.

Reply

    
        6. Anonymous on September 29, 2012 at 12:25 pm
    

frivolity is from (a) plaintiffs using litigation costs to extract a
settlement that is less than the cost of the litigation, (b) defendants
raising every possible defense and delay rather than admit liability, and (c)
attorneys in cahoots with plaintiffs controlling an organization, who
authorize sham litigation for the purpose of a kickback, and stick the
organization with the costs. Real estate lawyers seem deficient in ethics,
they pride themselves on abusing procedure to win a case. Sigh.

Reply

    
        7. Eugene Lee on March 9, 2010 at 9:58 am
    

Tom, I couldn't agree more. I had a case where the defendant filed 37
affirmative defenses. Just before trial, all but 1 defense was dismissed. All
the time spent by the parties trying to prove/disprove the 36 other defenses
was wasted. Maybe you and I should start a website devoted to frivolous
defenses.

Reply

    
        8. Tom Crane on March 1, 2010 at 7:03 am
    

"frivolous" lawsuits do exist, but generally not in the employment area. As
Gene points out, they are too expensive and risky to file without a strong
factual basis. BUT, some lawyers do "dabble" in employment law and file suits
that are more based on lack of fairness than on actual violation of some law.

More common IMO are frivolous defenses. Defense attorneys routinely lodge
pointless defenses that cannot possibly pertain to a particular lawsuit. Some
defense attorneys not all, but some then will file weak or frivolous motions
for summary judgment.

Reply

    
          * Eagle on May 17, 2012 at 9:59 am
    

I doubt a significant number of attorneys file suits regarding lack of
fairness without some actual violation of law. You speak of fairness in a way
that suggests it has no legal basis. The core of Title VII is about fairness
regardless of immutable qualities that one cannot change.

We all know how the interpretation of law is seldom construed in favor of
minorities due to the cognitive dissonance people experience in accepting
discrimination occurs unless it is egregious.

This failure to appreciate subtlety is a direct result of a lack of diversity
in the bar and the failure to appreciate standing in someone else's shoes
without exposure to intricacies of being treated differently based on biases.

Reply

    
        9. charles on February 21, 2009 at 7:43 am
    

i would simply add, what your comment implies: that a plaintiff who wants to
bring a questionable lawsuit would not be able to retain an attorney to take
the case on a contingency basis and would have to pay his/her attorney hourly
fees (on a current basis), likely to equal or exceed the $10,000 hard costs.

Reply

    
        10. Weidmann Law on January 20, 2009 at 1:35 am
    

Thank you for the referral link.

Reply

    
        11. Eugene Lee on November 15, 2008 at 4:29 am
    

jeff,

I think you make an excellent point. Absolutely, corporations DO have the
financial resources to harass competitors or enemies with baseless litigation.
For instance, the example you cite, CMG, calls to mind a category of
litigants, called "patent trolls", who file patents then sue huge companies
for supposed patent infringement. I guess I was thinking more about individual
litigants. But your point is fair! Thanks!

Reply

    
        12. Mr. T on November 14, 2008 at 5:37 pm
    

This is some really good and (need to know) information…

Reply

    
        13. jeff colton on October 18, 2008 at 9:57 am
    

There is another side to this.  
What about corporations that use lawsuits and threats of lawsuits to oppress
competition?

For instance, the agent Curtis Management (CMG) uses an aggressive campaign to
collect fees for licensing on dead celebrities. CMG is famous for being overly
and maliciously aggressive in protecting the "rights of publicity".  
Many of those claims for ownership of celebrity rights for RoP are presumed
and probably false. Some states have RoP, others do not. Recently CMG and the
estate of Marilyn Monroe lost 2 cases when they sued 4 photographers for
licensing their photos (despite having signed model releases).

Judge Morrow (in California) and Judge McMahon (in New York) both ruled that
because of the wording of her will, her rights of publicity ceased to exist at
the time of her death and could not be transferred to heirs, beneficiaries or
agents. Marilyn Monroe died in 1962, and the California RoP law wasn't enacted
until 1985.

Both Courts concluded that neither New York nor California recognized any
postmortem publicity rights at the time of her death. Therefore the subsequent
enactment of such a statute in California was irrelevant since Marilyn Monroe
could not dispose of a property interest through her will which did not then
exist.

So, for 20 years the estate and CMG have extorted fees and royalties forcing
advertisers to pay tens of millions of dollars.

Reply

### Leave a Comment Cancel Reply

Comment  
Name (required)  
Email (will not be published) (required)  
Website

#### CALL (213) 992-3299

#### 2019 CA MINIMUM WAGE

    * $11 / hr (25 or fewer employees)
    * $12 / hr (more than 25 employees)

#### 2019 IRS MILEAGE RATE:

    * 58 cents / mi

#### CONTACT FORM

Name *

First

Last

Email *

Phone *

Your Legal Issue *

Name

Submit

#### TWITTER

Tweets by CALaborLaw

#### LATEST COMMENTS

    
        * X on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * X on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * X on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * X on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * X on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * Tessa on Can Employers Require Employees to Remain on Premises? (2019)
    * X on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * Danny on Final Paychecks - When Are They Due? (2019)
    * Wesley on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    * Sally on California Meal Break & Rest Break Law (2019) - Quick Calculator + Charts
    

#### TOPICS

    
        * Announcements
    * Arbitration
    * Breaks
    * CFRA, FMLA, Medical Leave
    * Defamation
    * Discrimination-Racial, Gender, Disability
    * Editorial
    * Employment contract
    * Harassment-Sexual, Racial, Disability
    * Holiday Pay
    * Last Paycheck
    * Law
    * Misc
    * News
    * Overtime
    * Personal
    * Privacy
    * Retaliation-FEHA, CFRA, FMLA, Whistleblower
    * Tips / Tip-pool
    * Tips for Employees
    * Unemployment
    * Verdicts & Settlements
    

#### AUTHOR

![Eugene

Lee](https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/client/q_glossy,ret_img,w_150,h_150/https://calaborlaw.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/08/090605-LeeE-Victory-smallest.jpg)![Eugene

Lee](https://cdn.shortpixel.ai/client/q_lqip,ret_wait,w_150,h_150/https://calaborlaw.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/08/090605-LeeE-Victory-smallest.jpg)  
California labor attorney Eugene Lee has been in practice since 1995. He
created this blog in 2006 to help employees with workplace claims for denied
meal breaks, rest breaks, overtime and unpaid wages.

(C) 2019 California Labor and Employment Law | Powered by Beaver Builder

Law Office of Eugene Lee  
633 W 5th St, Ste 2600  
Los Angeles, CA 90071

Law Office of Eugene Lee  
879 W 190th St Suite 400  
Gardena, CA 90248

T:(213) 992-3299  
F: (213) 596-0487

Disclaimer: This website is an advertisement. The information and material
contained in this website are for general informational purposes only. They do
not constitute legal advice and should not be used or relied on as such. Any
liability that might arise from any use or reliance on the contents of this
site is expressly disclaimed. Your use of such contents does not create an
attorney-client relationship – only an express signed agreement can do that.
The content of any communication you send to us via the Internet or through
e-mail may not be considered confidential. Eugene D. Lee is licensed to
practice law in the States of New York and California only.

Creative Commons License: This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States License. You
are free to Share — to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work under
the following conditions: 1. Attribution. You must attribute the work in the
manner specified by the author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests
that they endorse you or your use of the work). 2. Noncommercial. You may not
use this work for commercial purposes. 3. No Derivative Works. You may not
alter, transform, or build upon this work.

![web analytics](https://c.statcounter.com/3218743/0/cbdac7a7/1/)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

