

Skip to content

**open-menu**

![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/white-

house-logo-sm-wh.png) ![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/white-house-logo-sm-bl.png) White House
Logo

**copy-url-to-your-clipboard** Share

    
        * Economy
    * National Security
    * Budget
    * Immigration
    * The Opioid Crisis
    

Search WhiteHouse.gov **open-search**

# Our Government

* * *

* * *

![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/legislative-196x174.jpg) The Legislative Branch

![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/executive-196x174.jpg) The Executive Branch

![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/judicial-196x174.jpg) The Judicial Branch

    
        * Share: 
    * **share-this-page-on-facebook**
    * **share-this-page-on-twitter**
    * **copy-url-to-your-clipboard**
    

![Open In This Section Menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/hamburger.svg) In this section

![Close In This Section Menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/close.svg)

HomeAbout The White House

    
        * Tours & Events
    * The Grounds
      * Overview
      * The White House Building
      * The Vice President's Residence & Office
      * Eisenhower Executive Office Building
      * Camp David
      * Air Force One
    * Past Administrations
      * First Ladies
      * Presidents
    * Our Government
      * Overview
      * The Executive Branch
      * The Legislative Branch
      * The Judicial Branch
      * The Constitution
      * Federal Agencies & Commissions
      * State & Local Government
      * Elections & Voting
    

The Federal Government is composed of three distinct branches: legislative,
executive, and judicial, whose powers are vested by the U.S. Constitution in
the Congress, the President, and the Federal courts, respectively.

There are hundreds of Federal agencies and commissions charged with handling
such responsibilities as managing America’s space program, protecting its
forests, and gathering intelligence. For a full listing of Federal Agencies,
Departments, and Commissions, visit USA.gov.

## Elections & Voting

Federal elections occur every two years, on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November. Every member of the House of Representatives and about
one-third of the Senate is up for reelection in any given election year.
Federal elections are administered by State and local Governments, although
the specifics of how elections are conducted differ between the states.

Learn More

## State & Local Government

Under the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, all powers not granted to
the Federal Government are reserved for the States and the people. All State
Governments are modeled after the Federal Government and consist of three
branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. The U.S. Constitution mandates
that all states uphold a “republican form” of government, although the three-
branch structure is not required.

Learn More

![White House Logo](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/white-house-logo-footer-sm.png)

The White House

* * *

* * *
    
        * Live
    * Jobs
    * Get Involved
    * Copyright Policy
    * Privacy Policy
    
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Instagram
    * Contact
    

![Close Menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/close.svg) ![Open

Menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/hamburger.svg) ![Close

Search](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/close.svg) ![Open

Search](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/search.svg)

    
        * News
      * Remarks
      * Briefings & Statements
      * Presidential Actions
      * Articles
      * All News
    * Issues
      * Education
      * National Security & Defense
      * Budget & Spending
      * Immigration
      * Healthcare
      * All Issues
    * The Administration
      * President Donald J. Trump
      * Vice President Michael R. Pence
      * First Lady Melania Trump
      * Mrs. Karen Pence
      * The Cabinet
      * Disclosures
    * Executive Offices
      * Council of Economic Advisers
      * Council on Environmental Quality
      * National Security Council
      * Office of Management and Budget
      * Office of National Drug Control Policy
      * Office of Science and Technology Policy
    * About The White House
      * Tours & Events
      * Past Presidents
      * Past First Ladies
      * The Grounds
      * Our Government
    * Get Involved
      * Write or Call the White House
      * White House Internship Program
      * White House Fellows
    * Contact
    * Live
    

![Presidential Crest](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/presidential-crest-gray.svg)

Type Your Search Press enter to search

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

