

#### Stack Exchange Network

Stack Exchange network consists of 175 Q&A communities including Stack
Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn,
share their knowledge, and build their careers.

Visit Stack Exchange

        
                  1.       2.       3.       4.       5.       6. Log In Sign Up
          7. ### current community
        
            * English Language & Usage
        

help chat

        
                    * English Language & Usage Meta
        

### your communities

Sign up or log in to customize your list.

### more stack exchange communities

company blog

        
                    * Tour  Start here for a quick overview of the site 
            * Help Center  Detailed answers to any questions you might have 
            * Meta  Discuss the workings and policies of this site 
            * About Us  Learn more about Stack Overflow the company 
            * Business  Learn more about hiring developers or posting ads with us
        

By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understand our
Cookie Policy, Privacy Policy, and our Terms of Service.

English Language & Usage Stack Exchange is a question and answer site for
linguists, etymologists, and serious English language enthusiasts. Join them;
it only takes a minute:

Sign up

Here's how it works:

Anybody can ask a question

Anybody can answer

The best answers are voted up and rise to the top

![English Language &

Usage](https://cdn.sstatic.net/Sites/english/img/logo.svg?v=2e0bc8b55898)

        
                  1.       2. Home 
          3.         1. Questions 
            2. Tags 
            3. Users 
            4. Unanswered
        

# Difference between "novel" and "fiction"

Ask Question

3

2

Both _novel_ and _fiction_ refer to a book in which the story is just
imaginary. But what's the difference between them and what are the scenarios
to use them right?

meaning

share |improve this question

edited Jun 11 '12 at 22:13

user2683

asked Jun 11 '12 at 7:10

![](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/ec77f789bb16f0eed3c2e63f0dad89da?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

snowfoxsnowfox

119112

        
                  * 1
        

What about the dictionary definitions of these words was unclear? - Monica
Cellio Jun 11 '12 at 15:22

        
                  * in essence, Fiction is about content: "not true." Novel is a form factor: a story of considerable plot complexity and length. A historical novel may describe true events, a fictional screenplay is fiction, but not a novel. - SF. Jun 12 '12 at 7:36
        

add a comment |

## 5 Answers 5

active oldest votes

12

_Fiction_ is a literary genre that includes novels, but it also includes other
forms such as short stories.

share |improve this answer

answered Jun 11 '12 at 7:37

![](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/45076d716901e358a65b9677608396a5?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

Barrie EnglandBarrie England

130k10205355

        
                  * 3
        

And poems, humour books, my excuses for not delivering on time. All literary
work is either Fiction or Non-fiction. Novels are only a part of the Fiction
type. - Schroedingers Cat Jun 11 '12 at 8:09

add a comment |

4

"Fiction" refers to any made-up story, anything presented as not being true
but purely for entertainment, education, etc.

Within the broad category of fiction, we divide stories up by length. The
shortest are "short stories". A "novel" means a book-length story. In between
is the "novella": you might fit 3 or 4 novellas into a reasonable-length book.
If a story takes more than one book, it becomes a "series". If there are
exactly three books in the series, it's called a "trilogy". (I'm not aware of
specific names for a series with four or five books or any number but three.
I'm not sure why that gets a specific name.)

Sometimes people attach specific word-counts to these names. Like they will
say that a novel is a story of 40,000 words or more, a novella is 20,000 to
40,000 words, and anything shorter is a short story. As far as I know there's
no standard in the publishing business, though. These are just ballpark
numbers.

These terms all imply prose, as opposed to poetry.

share|improve this answer

answered Jun 11 '12 at 15:54

![](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/f8d1a94fbefd1513e00f0e25153e61a6?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

JayJay

31.8k34692

        
                  * "40,000 words" is the description in English, I wonder what they say in other languages? - GEdgar Jun 11 '12 at 16:26
        
          * @GEdgar Sure, in languages where the average word length is longer or shorter, I imagine they'd use different numbers. The "real" definition is that a novel is "book-length". - Jay Jun 11 '12 at 18:40
        

add a comment |

3

Fiction is the act of writing something that isn't true:

> A literary work whose content is produced by the imagination and is not
necessarily based on fact.

The word _fiction_ can also as a label refer to longer works of imaginative
prose.

> The category of literature comprising works of this kind, including novels
and short stories.

A _novel_ on the other hand, is a bound written work of length:

> A fictional prose narrative of considerable length, typically having a plot
that is unfolded by the actions, speech, and thoughts of the characters.

There are two additional things to keep in mind about _novel_ versus
_fiction_.

While several novels are fiction, they do not necessarily have to be fiction
to be novels. Truman Capote's _In Cold Blood_ is one example of a non-fiction
novel.

Also, imaginative works of fiction can be of just about any length, from a few
hundred to tens or even hundreds of thousands of words.

To define and market these written works, the publishing industry has a loose
set of guidelines that define writing based on length:

        
                  * Micro-Fiction: Under 100 words
          * Flash Fiction: 100-1,000 words
          * Short Story: 1,000-7,500 words
          * Novelette: 7,500 - 20,000 words
          * Novella: 20,000 - 50,000 words
          * **Novel: 50,000-100,000 words**
          * Epic: 110,000+ words
        

(Note: This is just _one_ definition of length, but it is generally accepted
that a _novel_ is _at least_ 50,000 words, with 70,000 words being the average
length of a modern novel.)

share |improve this answer

answered Jun 11 '12 at 16:28

![](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/069193b52b7a49612abf2d0fa9510bab?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

Jed OliverJed Oliver

370311

        
                  * I remember learning the difference between Novel and Novelette/Novella is that Novelette has strictly one explicit thread (any side threads may only appear as simple cameo events seen from the main thread). Novel drives multiple threads at once. - SF. Jun 12 '12 at 7:33
        
          * Re: "they do not necessarily have to be fiction," my understanding is that a "non-fiction novel" is actually a _combination_ of fact and fiction and that the term  "novel" would not apply to any work that was purely factual. - Air Dec 18 '15 at 18:41
        

add a comment |

0

Fiction works can be classified based on their style and length of the
writing. Fiction is writing based on the author's imagination and invention of
a story, characters and/or backdrop.

Novels

Novels, novelettes (also known as "novelet") and novellas all contain the same
subject matter but exist along a spectrum in terms of word length. Novels, at
the far end of the spectrum, may have numerous conflicts, story lines, and
chapters, and generally have 40,000+ words.

Fiction refers to a story containing imaginary or made up events. A novel
refers to the length of a work of fiction. It's usually considered the longest
form of literary prose. Shorter works of fiction would be a novella or a short
story. Also, fiction can refer to things outside of writing. Movies and plays,
would be considered works of fiction

share|improve this answer

answered Jun 18 '12 at 13:02

![](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/bebf4fa8f44abda781e9c2d5ffedf908?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG)

jayujayu

1061

add a comment |

0

As against imaginative or fictional, **the novel is a realistic form**. It
represents that segment of life and society, in more or less approximate
terms,which has been seen and experienced by actual men and women of a
particular period.

While reading a novel, we may feel that we have been transported to a
different world with its own rules.Towns and villages etc holds out as
_actual_ places with their distinct colouring and feel. **Yes,the emphasis is
on actuality**.

**Fiction** on the other hand denotes an unreal thing, a **'creation' of the
mind of a person** gifted with an unusually inventive with powerful
imagination. It denotes that the account presented in a work bears no relation
with the reality of life as we know it- it is imaginative and more, it is
fictional.

share |improve this answer

answered Mar 18 '16 at 10:18

![](https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/88f0b4ff60935644b17c71b1cccda266?s=32&d=identicon&r=PG&f=1)

NitvinNitvin

273

add a comment |

## **protected** by tchrist ♦ Mar 1 '15 at 18:16

Thank you for your interest in this question. Because it has attracted low-
quality or spam answers that had to be removed, posting an answer now requires
10 reputation on this site (the association bonus does not count).

Would you like to answer one of these unanswered questions instead?

## Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged meaning

or ask your own question.

asked

|

**6 years, 11 months ago**

---|--- 

viewed

|

**93,341 times**

active

|

**3 years, 2 months ago**

Featured on Meta

        
                  * Unicorn Meta Zoo #3: How do we grade questions?
        

#### Related

4

What is the difference between "skeptical" and "cynical"?

12

Difference between 'kindness' and 'politeness'

0

The difference between using a comma or a full stop

1

Difference between "form" and "shape"

6

Difference between Let, Let's and Lets?

4

What is the difference between a scenario and situation?

1

Difference Between "Plot" and "Storyline"

4

Difference between lead and leash?

6

Is the term "graphic novel" restricted to works of fiction?

1

Difference between "welcome to", "welcome on" and "welcome at"

#### Hot Network Questions

        
                  * US doctor working in Tripoli wants me to open online account 
          * Why does the Mishnah use the terms poor person and homeowner when discussing carrying on Shabbat? 
          * Live action TV show where High school Kids go into the virtual world and have to clear levels 
          * Is using 'echo' to display attacker-controlled data on the terminal dangerous? 
          * How do you identify file type/compression in a TIFF file? 
          * Thread Pool C++ Implementation 
          * A word that means "blending into a community too much"
          * Russian word for a male zebra 
          * Someone whose aspirations exceed abilities or means 
          * If I leave the US through an airport, do I have to return through the same airport? 
          * Is it legal for a bar bouncer to confiscate a fake ID 
          * Are there any important biographies of nobodies? 
          * Why does Sin[b-a] simplify to -Sin[a-b]? 
          * Is White controlling this game? 
          * How to hide an urban landmark? 
          * Longest bridge/tunnel that can be cycled over/through? 
          * Why does logistic function use e rather than 2? 
          * How to use memset in c++? 
          * Second (easy access) account in case my bank screws up 
          * Artificer Creativity 
          * Fixing obscure 8080 emulator bug? 
          * Is it possible to have 2 different but equal size real number sets that have the same mean and standard deviation? 
          * What to do when surprise and a high initiative roll conflict with the narrative? 
          * How to ensure color fidelity of the same file on two computers?
        

more hot questions

Question feed

# Subscribe to RSS

Question feed

To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.

![](/posts/70635/ivc/d348)

##### English Language & Usage

        
                  * Tour
          * Help
          * Chat
          * Contact
          * Feedback
          * Mobile
        

##### Company

        
                  * Stack Overflow
          * Stack Overflow Business
          * Developer Jobs
          * About
          * Press
          * Legal
          * Privacy Policy
        

##### Stack Exchange

Network

        
                  * Technology
          * Life / Arts
          * Culture / Recreation
          * Science
          * Other
        
          * Stack Overflow
          * Server Fault
          * Super User
          * Web Applications
          * Ask Ubuntu
          * Webmasters
          * Game Development
        
          * TeX - LaTeX
          * Software Engineering
          * Unix & Linux
          * Ask Different (Apple)
          * WordPress Development
          * Geographic Information Systems
          * Electrical Engineering
        
          * Android Enthusiasts
          * Information Security
          * Database Administrators
          * Drupal Answers
          * SharePoint
          * User Experience
          * Mathematica
        
          * Salesforce
          * ExpressionEngine® Answers
          * Stack Overflow em Portugues
          * Blender
          * Network Engineering
          * Cryptography
          * Code Review
        
          * Magento
          * Software Recommendations
          * Signal Processing
          * Emacs
          * Raspberry Pi
          * Stack Overflow на русском
          * Programming Puzzles & Code Golf
        
          * Stack Overflow en español
          * Ethereum
          * Data Science
          * Arduino
          * Bitcoin
          * **more (31)**
        
          * Photography
          * Science Fiction & Fantasy
          * Graphic Design
          * Movies & TV
          * Music: Practice & Theory
          * Worldbuilding
          * Seasoned Advice (cooking)
        
          * Home Improvement
          * Personal Finance & Money
          * Academia
          * Law
          * **more (15)**
        
          * English Language & Usage
          * Skeptics
          * Mi Yodeya (Judaism)
          * Travel
          * Christianity
          * English Language Learners
          * Japanese Language
        
          * Arqade (gaming)
          * Bicycles
          * Role-playing Games
          * Anime & Manga
          * Puzzling
          * Motor Vehicle Maintenance & Repair
          * **more (33)**
        
          * MathOverflow
          * Mathematics
          * Cross Validated (stats)
          * Theoretical Computer Science
          * Physics
          * Chemistry
          * Biology
        
          * Computer Science
          * Philosophy
          * **more (10)**
        
          * Meta Stack Exchange
          * Stack Apps
          * API
          * Data
        
          * Blog
          * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * LinkedIn
        

site design / logo (C) 2019 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed
under cc by-sa 3.0 with attribution required. rev 2019.6.6.33900

English Language & Usage Stack Exchange works best with JavaScript enabled
![](https://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c1rF4kxgLUzNc.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

