

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

    
        *     *     *     * JOIN MWU
    

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

    
        * GAMES
    * BROWSE THESAURUS
    * WORD OF THE DAY
    * WORDS AT PLAY
    * MORE __
    

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

    
        * TIME TRAVELER
    

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

    
        * JOIN MWU
    * GAMES
    * THESAURUS
    * WORD OF THE DAY
    * WORDS AT PLAY
    * TIME TRAVELER
    

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# program

noun

pro·​gram | \ ˈprō-ˌgram ![How to pronounce program

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -grəm ![How to pronounce program

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Definition of _program_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1 [ Late Latin _programma_ , from Greek ] **:** a public notice

2a **:** a brief usually printed outline of the order to be followed, of the
features to be presented, and the persons participating (as in a public
performance)

b **:** the performance of a program especially **:** a performance broadcast
on radio or television

3 **:** a plan or system under which action may be taken toward a goal

4 **:** curriculum

5 **:** prospectus, syllabus

6a **:** a sequence of coded instructions that can be inserted into a
mechanism (such as a computer)

b dated **:** a complete plan for solving a problem by the use of a mechanism
(such as a computer) that includes both instructions to be inserted into the
mechanism and plans for human activities such as interpreting output

c **:** the genes or sequences of DNA or RNA that are part of an organism or
cell and encode or determine a process, trait, or behavior … a mouse in which
a tiny but crucial bit of the genetic program has been eliminated.-- Bruce
Fellman also **:** a process, trait, or behavior determined by or as if by the
genetic material of an organism Orb webs are marvels of geometry and
construction. They are built according to a complex behavioral program, which
is highly flexible in some respects and very precise in others. -- Michael H.
Robinson

program

verb

pro·​gram | \ ˈprō-ˌgram ![How to pronounce program

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -grəm\

variants: or less commonly programme

programmed or programed; programming or programing

Definition of _program_ (Entry 2 of 2)

transitive verb

1a **:** to arrange or furnish a program of or for **:** bill

b **:** to enter in a program

2 **:** to work out a sequence of operations to be performed by (a mechanism,
such as a computer) **:** to provide with a program

3a **:** to insert a program for (a particular action) into or as if into a
mechanism (such as a computer)

b **:** to control by or as if by a program

c(1) **:** to code in an organism's program

(2) **:** to provide with a biological program cells _programmed_ to
synthesize hemoglobin

4 **:** to predetermine the thinking, behavior, or operations of as if by
computer programming children are _programmed_ into violence -- Lisa A.
Richette

Other Words from _program_ Synonyms More Example Sentences Learn More about
_program_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _program_

Verb

programmability \ (ˌ)prō-​ˌgra-​mə-​ˈbi-​lə-​tē ![How to pronounce

programmability \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ noun

programmable \ ˈprō-​ˌgra-​mə-​bəl ![How to pronounce programmable

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ adjective or noun

## Synonyms for _program_

Synonyms: Noun

agenda, calendar, docket, schedule, timetable

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Examples of _program_ in a Sentence

Noun

a _program_ of regular dental checkups the _program_ will tell us the
scheduled order of musical numbers

Verb

He _programmed_ the computer to calculate his monthly expenses and earnings.
She is learning how to _program_ in school. Can you help me _program_ my cell
phone?

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

The _program_ is a Florida powerhouse and has won two of the last three state
titles. -- Matt Breen, _https://www.inquirer.com_ , "Blue Jays draft Roy
Halladay’s son, Braden, in 32nd round," 5 June 2019 The _program_ is a preview
for the chorus’ summer concert tour including performances at The Royal
Ontario Museum in Canada and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland. --
Joy Davis, _Aurora Beacon-News_ , "Fox Valley Festival Chorus to give concert
in Aurora," 5 June 2019 Blaszczyk has done more than enough to repay the
_program_ and is a key reason the Panthers have advanced to the quarterfinals
of the Whitaker Bank/KHSAA State Baseball Tournament. -- Jason Frakes, _The
Courier-Journal_ , "Born to play baseball at PRP, Reed Blaszczyk hopes to go
out with another state title," 4 June 2019 Although the _program_ has been
largely free of irregularities, the DC Solar tale stands as a warning sign of
how investors, perhaps too hungry for the credits, may be lax in scrutinizing
the health of the underlying business. -- _latimes.com_ , "This California
couple scammed Berkshire Hathaway out of millions, feds say," 4 June 2019 The
head of the state commission investigating the Parkland shooting concluded
last year that the Promise _program_ was flawed but likely had nothing to do
with the shooting. -- Rafael Olmeda, _sun-sentinel.com_ , "Who’ll be the
prosecutor for the Parkland murder trial if Mike Satz won’t seek re-
election?," 4 June 2019 The _program_ is also available to participants with
incomes up to 185 percent of the Federal Poverty Level. -- Leada Gore |
Lgore@al.com, _al.com_ , "New WIC income guidelines; more Alabamians may now
be eligible," 3 June 2019 The _program_ is free and offers point incentives to
frequent customers and those who donate to pet-friendly causes. -- Sara
Rodrigues, _House Beautiful_ , "How To Get Free Pet Food At Petco This
Weekend," 17 May 2019 The article incorrectly said that the ATA _program_ was
the target of that criticism. ... -- _WSJ_ , "Corrections  & Amplifications,"
13 May 2019

Recent Examples on the Web: Verb

The third planet to go retrograde this month is Saturn, the planet of time,
which starts its regularly _programmed_ retrograde on Monday, April 29 (which
ends on September 18). -- Randon Rosenbohm, _Allure_ , "What April’s Gemini
Horoscope Means for You," 31 Mar. 2019 On the plus side, the machine features
an eight-hour sleep mode that can be _programmed_ to match your own sleeping
schedule. -- Andrew Moseman, _Popular Mechanics_ , "How Much Litter Box Do You
Really Get for $500?," 23 Jan. 2019 By contrast, President Trump’s campaign-
style rally in Michigan Saturday night, staged as counter- _programming_ to
the press dinner, was a mostly forgettable 80 minutes. -- Linda Feldmann, _The
Christian Science Monitor_ , "Traveling with Trump as he skipped – and
skewered – the press dinner," 30 Apr. 2018 Possible programming failure
McPherson and other experts also question whether there was a problem with how
the car was _programmed_. -- Ryan Randazzo, _azcentral_ , "What went wrong
with Uber's Volvo in fatal crash? Experts shocked by technology failure," 22
Mar. 2018 This is at odds with how humans are biologically _programmed_. --
Stephanie Walden, _USA TODAY_ , "Brain scientists identify a new kind of
hunger that makes us overeat," 11 Jan. 2018 Software _programmed_ in Cobol
powers millions of banking transactions every day and underpins critical
computer mainframes. -- Max Colchester, _WSJ_ , "Do You Know Cobol? If So,
There Might Be a Job for You.," 21 Sep. 2018 As a result, the number of
channels and the amount of sports _programming_ in Spanish have multiplied and
can even be bewildering. -- James Wagner, _New York Times_ , "Telemundo Has a
Big Goal: Win the World Cup," 23 June 2018 The disaster drill occurred after a
morning of _programing_ on the dig law. -- Amy Lavalley, _Post-Tribune_ , "Gas
line safety reminder digs in for spring projects," 23 Mar. 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'program.' Views expressed in the
examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send
us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _program_

Noun

1633, in the meaning defined at sense 1

Verb

1846, in the meaning defined at sense 1a

## History and Etymology for _program_

Noun

French _programme_ agenda, public notice, from Greek _programma_ , from
_prographein_ to write before, from _pro-_ before + _graphein_ to write — more
at carve

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _program_

Share _program_

Post the Definition of program to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of program on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _program_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

## Dictionary Entries near _program_

progoneate

progradation

prograde

program

program clock

program director

programist

## Phrases Related to _program_

get with the program

## Statistics for _program_

Last Updated

8 Jun 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _program_

## The first known use of _program_ was in 1633

See more words from the same year

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _program_

program

_noun_

![How to pronounce program \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) ![How to pronounce

program \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _program_

(Entry 1 of 2)

**:** a plan of things that are done in order to achieve a specific result

**:** a set of instructions that tell a computer what to do

**:** a thin book or a piece of paper that gives information about a concert,
play, sports game, etc.

program

_verb_

![How to pronounce program \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

English Language Learners Definition of _program_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** to give (a computer) a set of instructions to perform a particular
action **:** to create a program for (a computer)

**:** to give (a machine) a set of instructions to perform a particular action

**:** to make (a person or animal) behave or think in a particular way

See the full definition for _program_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

program

noun

pro·​gram | \ ˈprō-ˌgram ![How to pronounce program

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -grəm\

## Kids Definition of _program_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1 **:** a brief statement or written outline (as of a concert, play, ceremony,
or religious service)

2 **:** performance sense 2 a television _program_

3 **:** a plan of action … this little town had the most successful school
lunch _program_ in the state. -- Andrew Clements, _Frindle_

4 **:** a set of step-by-step instructions that tell a computer to do
something with data

program

verb

programmed\ ˈprō-​ˌgramd , -​grəmd \; programming

Kids Definition of _program_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** to give (a computer) a set of instructions **:** provide with a program

program

noun

pro·​gram

variants: or chiefly British programme \ ˈprō-​ˌgram ![How to pronounce

programme \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -​grəm ![How to pronounce programme

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Medical Definition of _program_

(Entry 1 of 2)

**:** the genes or sequences of DNA or RNA that are part of an organism or
cell and encode or determine a process, trait, or behavior

program

transitive verb

variants: or chiefly British programme

programmed or programed; programming or programing

Medical Definition of _program_ (Entry 2 of 2)

1 **:** to code in an organism's program

2 **:** to provide with a biological program cells _programmed_ to synthesize
hemoglobin

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _program_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _program_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _program_

Spanish Central: Translation of _program_

Nglish: Translation of _program_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _program_ for Arabic Speakers

Comments on _program_

What made you want to look up _program_? Please tell us where you read or
heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### chasten

![Listen to the pronounciation of chasten](/images/audio.svg)

to cause to be more humble or restrained

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

    
        * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    
    * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
    
    * clementine tangerine
    * nectarine orange
    

![True or

False](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Test your knowledge - and maybe learn something along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

![SCRABBLE®

Sprint](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

    
        1. auspice  Trump comments on North Korea rumors
    
    2. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
    
    3. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
    

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

    
        * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
    

Your poem could win $$

    
        * ![pool cover photo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Uncovering the "Hidden" Senses of 'Cover'
    

Covering up a scandal? Bad. The bill? Good.

    
        * ![image236845661](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) 'Tushy,' 'Natiform,' and More Butt Words
    

For readers of all ages.

    
        * ![woman taking selfie talking to camera](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Words We’re Watching: ‘Velfie’
    

Be the star of your own movie.

Ask the Editors

    
        * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
    

You all would not have guessed some of these

    
        * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
    

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

    
        * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
    

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

    
        * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
    

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

    
        * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
    

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

    
        * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
    

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

    
        * ![True or False](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) True or False?
    

Test your knowledge - and maybe learn something along the way.

Take the quiz

    
        * ![SCRABBLE® Sprint](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) SCRABBLE® Sprint
    

SCRABBLE® fans, sharpen your skills!

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

    
        * SPANISH CENTRAL
    * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
    * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
    * VISUAL DICTIONARY
    * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
    * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
    * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
    * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
    

FOLLOW US

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * YouTube
    * Instagram
    
    * Browse the Dictionary:
    * a
    * b
    * c
    * d
    * e
    * f
    * g
    * h
    * i
    * j
    * k
    * l
    * m
    * n
    * o
    * p
    * q
    * r
    * s
    * t
    * u
    * v
    * w
    * x
    * y
    * z
    * 0-9
    * Home 
    * Help 
    * Apps 
    * About Us 
    * Shop 
    * Advertising Info 
    * Dictionary API 
    * Contact Us 
    * Video 
    * Favorites 
    * Word of the Year 
    * Law Dictionary 
    * Medical Dictionary 
    * Privacy Policy 
    * Terms of Use
    * Browse the Thesaurus 
    * Browse the Medical Dictionary
    * Browse the Legal Dictionary
    * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
    

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

