

### Editions

Africa Australia Canada Canada (français) España France Global Perspectives
Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States

### Sections

    
        * Home
    * Arts + Culture
    * Business + Economy
    * Cities
    * Education
    * Environment + Energy
    * FactCheck
    * Health + Medicine
    * Politics + Society
    * Science + Technology
    

### Search

### Services

    
        * Events
    * Job board
    * Newsletter
    * Read on Play Newsstand
    * Read on Apple News
    * Read on Flipboard
    

### Information

    
        * Who we are
    * Our charter
    * Our team
    * Our audience
    * Partners and funders
    * Republishing guidelines
    * Contact us
    * Donate
    * Friends of The Conversation
    * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
    * Privacy policy
    * Terms and conditions
    * Corrections
    

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)

    
        * __
    * Edition:
    

Available editions

Australia __

    
        * Africa
    * Canada
    * Canada (français)
    * España
    * France
    * Global Perspectives
    * Indonesia
    * New Zealand
    * United Kingdom
    * United States
    * Job Board
    * Donate
    * Become an author
    * Sign up as a reader
    * Sign in
    * __ Get newsletter 
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)
Search

__

Academic rigour, journalistic flair

    
        1. Arts  + Culture
    2. Business + Economy
    3. Cities
    4. Education
    5. Environment + Energy
    6. FactCheck
    7. Health + Medicine
    8. Politics + Society
    9. Science + Technology
    

### __Follow Topics

    
        1. Health Check
    2. Weekly Dose
    3. Science or Snake Oil
    4. Research Check
    5. Indigenous health
    6. Cancer
    7. Health policy
    8. Skin
    9. Sugar
    

# **Is the Cuban healthcare system really as great as people claim?**

November 30, 2016 9.07pm AEDT

____ Rich Warner, _Anglia Ruskin University_

### Author

    
        1. ![](/assets/author/width170_default-19ec5bd0b0425d75df0ad1707d18c36b.jpg) Rich Warner
    

PhD Candidate, Anglia Ruskin University

### Disclosure statement

Rich Warner does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from
any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has
disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment.

### Partners

![Anglia Ruskin

University](https://images.theconversation.com/institutions/1887/logos/logo-1423501817.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=170&h=170)

Anglia Ruskin University provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK.

View all partners

Republish this article

![](/assets/call-to-actions/republish-ca547a7c5135cc6d1a28933dc8b6823c.png)
Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under Creative Commons
licence.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
The municipal hospital of Havana, Cuba. RPBaiao/Shutterstock.com

    
        * __ Email
    * __ Twitter
    * __ Facebook
    * __ LinkedIn
    * __ WhatsApp
    * __ Messenger
    

Pundits have been discussing the merits (or not) of Fidel Castro’s legacy as
his body lies in state. The Cuban healthcare system is often stated as one of
El Commandante’s greatest achievements. But how great is the system really? As
someone who trained as a doctor in Cuba, I’d like to give you an insider’s
view.

The Cuban healthcare system, borne out of its revolutionary socialist
ideology, regards accessibility to healthcare as a fundamental right of its
citizens. It focuses heavily on a preventative approach to medicine and
offering the simplest check-up to the most complex surgery, free of charge.
Dental care, medicines and even home visits from doctors are all covered by
the system.

The island has the health statistics to support this seemingly impeccable
system. An infant mortality rate of 4.2 per thousand births (compared with a
rate of 3.5 per thousand births in the UK in 2015), life expectancy of 77
years for men and 81 years for women (on par with the UK’s life expectancy of
79 years for men and 83 years for women), and a doctor to patient ratio of one
per 150, which surpasses many developed nations (UK ratio from the latest
World Bank data is 2.8 doctors per 1,000 patients). It is no surprise
therefore, that the secretary general of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon,
during a visit to Cuba hailed its healthcare service as, “a model for many
countries”.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/147933/original/image-20161129-10988-1n7zegr.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
Ban Ki-moon is a fan of Cuba’s healthcare system. Shutterstock.com

## Doing a lot with a little

Is all of this just propaganda? My answer would be no. I had the opportunity
to spend seven years in this country as a medical student and saw firsthand
the positives as well as the negatives of this healthcare service.

As an American citizen, I was always impressed by how much Cubans were able to
accomplish with so little. The professionalism and humility displayed by
healthcare workers was without doubt commendable. It is these people who
though receiving paltry salaries (doctors earn about £52 a month), are in many
instances overworked because thousands of their colleagues were sent to other
countries such as Venezuela and Brazil to participate in healthcare missions.

In addition they do this without access to the latest in diagnostic technology
or have to wait weeks for basic equipment to arrive at hospitals to perform
procedures, even at times without electricity or running water. They still
find the strength to push through all these obstacles and challenges to
deliver a service worthy of praise.

Cuban doctors generally remark that becoming a doctor in their country is not
about the money but about the need to help others. This was one of the first
things I was taught in medical school. Though a noble sentiment, this is a
main issue with the Cuban model. The government spends roughly
US$300-$400(£240-£320) per person each year on healthcare, pays doctors $64
(£52) per month, but gains about US$8 billion (£6.4 billion) annually as a
result of its overseas medical missions. It’s difficult to say where the gains
obtained by the government is invested.

Many doctors opt for participating in these missions as the salaries they
receive are remarkably better (even though the Cuban government receives about
a third of it). Sending thousands of doctors overseas, though a commendable
action, leaves a domestic system under pressure. With fewer doctors and
specialists at home, queues at hospitals and clinics are longer, and so are
waiting times. Doctors have more work to cover in a stressful profession with
limited resources. A patient may end up travelling to another province to
visit a specialist because the one stationed nearest to him or her has been
sent to Venezuela. This may be the reason why many more medical professionals
are currently being trained across Cuba to help fill the void left by those
sent around the globe.

## Crumbling infrastructure

The healthcare infrastructure in Cuba also requires serious attention. Some of
the clinics and hospitals in operation are in dire need of repairs. So too is
the urgent need of more modern medical equipment and stable electricity and
water. These issues however, cannot be solely placed at the feet of the Cuban
government as the trade embargo placed on Cuba by the US government has had
detrimental effect. An example of this is sourcing medical equipment from as
far as China instead of a neighbouring country like the US. With all these
difficulties the country’s continued emphasis on primary healthcare and
prevention may be the key to its success.

The island continues to offer hundreds of scholarships annually to foreign
students including those from the US. These scholarships are generally open to
students from low income families who may not have been able to attend medical
school because of their socioeconomic background. The Latin American School of
Medicine (Escuela Latinoamericana de Medicina) is one of the largest medical
schools in the western hemisphere with thousands of students from over 100
different countries.

The Cuban healthcare service has stood the test of time. It has afforded a
foreigner like myself the opportunity to study a career free of charge while
many of my colleagues are thousands of dollars in debt after attending medical
schools in the US. It ensures that open heart surgery doesn’t result in
lifelong indebtedness. It has created globally competitive biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries. It doesn’t turn people away because of their
socioeconomic status. It is a system that has been there for its people. Yes,
it has its flaws and challenges which need remedying, but it is not merely a
propaganda tool for the powers that be.

__

    
        * Healthcare
    * Cuba
    * Fidel Castro
    
    * __ Tweet
    * __ Share
    * __ Get newsletter Newsletter
    

### You might also like

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Cuban doctors vaccinate displaced Haitians at a camp in Port-au-Prince. United
Nations Photo

## Castro’s legacy: Cuban doctors still go abroad, but it’s no longer driven

by international solidarity

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Not quite brothers in arms. EPA/Alejandro Ernesto

## What the US can learn from Cuba during Obama’s historic visit

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
A woman holding a picture of Castro and Chavez waits to pay homage to Castro
in Havana on Nov. 28, 2016. AP Photo/Ricardo Mazalan

## Questions I never got to ask Fidel Castro

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Cubans are migrating to the US in greater numbers. Reuters

## Explainer: why are more Cubans migrating to the US?

### Most popular on The Conversation

    
        * Are you burnt out at work? Ask yourself these 4 questions
    * Why the raids on Australian media present a clear threat to democracy
    * The Reserve Bank will cut rates again and again, until we lift spending and push up prices
    * ‘I really have thought this can’t go on’: loneliness looms for rising numbers of older private renters
    * Man’s stressed friend: how your mental health can affect your dog
    * Teachers are more depressed and anxious than the average Australian
    * Vital Signs. If we fall into a recession (and we might) we’ll have ourselves to blame
    * Why the idea of alien life now seems inevitable and possibly imminent
    * Kids are more vulnerable to the flu – here’s what to look out for this winter
    * We taught bees a simple number language – and they got it
    

### Events

    
        * Your Leadership Voice - Women In Focus (Classic)  -- Caulfield East , Victoria
    
    * Your Leadership Voice: Women in Focus -- Caulfield, Victoria
    
    * Updates in Commercial Leasing -- Melbourne, Victoria
    
    * Sydney Ideas: Cultural power in the online world -- Sydney, New South Wales
    
    * Effective policy implementation: a team approach -- Canberra, Australian Capital Territory
    

__ More events

### Jobs

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/2/logos/width36_logo-1501461860.png)
    

##### Technical Officer Optics

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/86/logos/width36_logo-1402876329.jpg)
    

##### Associate Professor/ Professor In Diagnostic Imaging

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/13/logos/width36_logo-1446011232.jpg)
    

##### Csiro Science Leader Digital Integration For Bio Prediction

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/79/logos/width36_logo-1537164695.jpg)
    

##### Ph D Scholarship Researching Mental Illness

    
        * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/1/logos/width36_logo-1520549009.png)
    

##### Experiential Learning Coordinator

__ More jobs

## The Conversation

###### Community

    
        * Community standards
    * Republishing guidelines
    * Friends of The Conversation
    * Research and Expert Database
    * __Analytics
    * __Job Board
    * __Events
    * __Our feeds
    * __Donate
    

###### Company

    
        * Who we are
    * Our charter
    * Our team
    * Our audience
    * Resource for Teachers
    * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
    * Our blog
    * Partners and funders
    * Resource for media
    * Contact us
    * Work with us
    

###### Stay informed and subscribe to our free daily newsletter and get the

latest analysis and commentary directly in your inbox.

Email address

_✔_ __![](/assets/spinner-9643e2633c59d728d78b58f465f2fb9c.gif)

###### Follow us on social media

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections

Copyright (C) 2010–2019, The Conversation Media Group Ltd

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

