

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Economics

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Social science that analyzes the production, distribution, and consumption of
goods and services

This article is about the social science. For other uses, see Economics
(disambiguation) and Economic Theory (journal).

For a topical guide to this subject, see Outline of economics.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/40/Countries_by_Real_GDP_Growth_Rate_%282016%29.svg/280px-

Countries_by_Real_GDP_Growth_Rate_%282016%29.svg.png)

Countries by real GDP growth rate in 2016. Countries in red were in recession.

## Part of a series on

Economics

    
        * Index
    * Outline
    * Category
    
    * History
    * Branches
    * Classification
    
    * History of economics
    * Schools of economics
    
    
    * Mainstream economics
    * Heterodox economics
    * Economic methodology
    
    
    * Economic theory
    * Political economy
    
    
    * Microeconomics
    * Macroeconomics
    
    
    * International economics
    
    
    * Applied economics
    
    
    * Mathematical economics
    * Econometrics
    
    * JEL classification codes
    
    * Concepts
    * Theory
    * Techniques
    
    * Economic systems
    * Economic growth
    * Market
    * National accounting
    * Experimental economics
    * Computational economics
    
    
    * Game theory
    * Operations research
    

By application

    
        * Agricultural
    * Behavioral
    * Business
    * Cultural
    * Demographic
    * Development
    * Digitization
    * Ecological
    * Education
    * Engineering
    * Environmental
    * Evolutionary
    * Expeditionary
    * Economic geography
    * Financial
    * Health
    * Economic history
    * Industrial organization
    * Information
    * Institutional
    * Knowledge
    * Labour
    * Law
    * Managerial
    * Monetary
    * Natural resource
    * Organizational
    * Personnel
    * Economic planning
    * Economic policy
    * Public economics
    * Public / Social choice
    * Regional
    * Rural
    * Service
    * Socioeconomics
    * Economic sociology
    * Economic statistics
    * Urban
    * Welfare
    * Welfare economics
    

Notable economists

    
        * François Quesnay
    * Adam Smith
    * David Ricardo
    * Thomas Robert Malthus
    * John Stuart Mill
    * Karl Marx
    * Léon Walras
    * Alfred Marshall
    * John Maynard Keynes
    * Arthur Cecil Pigou
    * Paul Samuelson
    * _more_
    

Lists

    
        * Economists
    * Publications (journals)
    

Glossary

    
        * Glossary of economics
    
    * ![Emblem-money.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Emblem-money.svg/16px-Emblem-money.svg.png) Business portal
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

**Economics** (/ ɛkəˈnɒmɪks, iːkə-/)[1][2][3] is the social science that
studies the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and
services.[4]

Economics focuses on the behaviour and interactions of economic agents and how
economies work. Microeconomics analyzes basic elements in the economy,
including individual agents and markets, their interactions, and the outcomes
of interactions. Individual agents may include, for example, households,
firms, buyers, and sellers. Macroeconomics analyzes the entire economy
(meaning aggregated production, consumption, saving, and investment) and
issues affecting it, including unemployment of resources (labour, capital, and
land), inflation, economic growth, and the public policies that address these
issues (monetary, fiscal, and other policies). See glossary of economics.

Other broad distinctions within economics include those between positive
economics, describing "what is", and normative economics, advocating "what
ought to be"; between economic theory and applied economics; between rational
and behavioural economics; and between mainstream economics and heterodox
economics.[5]

Economic analysis can be applied throughout society, in business, finance,
health care, and government. Economic analysis is sometimes also applied to
such diverse subjects as crime, education,[6] the family, law, politics,
religion,[7] social institutions, war,[8] science,[9] and the environment.[10]

## Contents

    
        * 1 The term and its various definitions
    * 2 Microeconomics
      * 2.1 Markets
      * 2.2 Production, cost, and efficiency
      * 2.3 Specialization
      * 2.4 Supply and demand
      * 2.5 Firms
      * 2.6 Uncertainty and game theory
      * 2.7 Market failure
      * 2.8 Public sector
    * 3 Macroeconomics
      * 3.1 Growth
      * 3.2 Business cycle
      * 3.3 Unemployment
      * 3.4 Inflation and monetary policy
      * 3.5 Fiscal policy
    * 4 International economics
    * 5 Development economics
    * 6 Economic systems
    * 7 Practice
      * 7.1 Theory
      * 7.2 Empirical investigation
      * 7.3 Profession
    * 8 Related subjects
    * 9 History
      * 9.1 Classical political economy
      * 9.2 Marxism
      * 9.3 Neoclassical economics
      * 9.4 Keynesian economics
      * 9.5 Chicago school of economics
      * 9.6 Other schools and approaches
    * 10 Agreements
    * 11 Criticisms
      * 11.1 General criticisms
      * 11.2 Criticisms of assumptions
    * 12 See also
      * 12.1 General
    * 13 Notes
    * 14 References
    * 15 Further reading
    * 16 External links
      * 16.1 General information
      * 16.2 Institutions and organizations
      * 16.3 Study resources
    

## The term and its various definitions

The discipline was renamed in the late 19th century, primarily due to Alfred
Marshall, from "political economy" to "economics" as a shorter term for
"economic science". At that time, it became more open to rigorous thinking and
made increased use of mathematics, which helped support efforts to have it
accepted as a science and as a separate discipline outside of political
science and other social sciences.[a][12][13][14]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Countries_by_GDP_%28Nominal%29_in_2014.svg/550px-

Countries_by_GDP_%28Nominal%29_in_2014.svg.png)

A map of world economies by size of GDP (nominal) in USD, _World Bank_ ,
2014.[15]

There are a variety of modern definitions of economics; some reflect evolving
views of the subject or different views among economists.[16][17] Scottish
philosopher Adam Smith (1776) defined what was then called political economy
as "an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations", in
particular as:

> a branch of the science of a statesman or legislator [with the twofold
objectives of providing] a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people ...
[and] to supply the state or commonwealth with a revenue for the publick
services.[18]

Jean-Baptiste Say (1803), distinguishing the subject from its public-policy
uses, defines it as the science _of_ production, distribution, and consumption
of wealth.[19] On the satirical side, Thomas Carlyle (1849) coined "the dismal
science" as an epithet for classical economics, in this context, commonly
linked to the pessimistic analysis of Malthus (1798).[20] John Stuart Mill
(1844) defines the subject in a social context as:

> The science which traces the laws of such of the phenomena of society as
arise from the combined operations of mankind for the production of wealth, in
so far as those phenomena are not modified by the pursuit of any other
object.[21]

Alfred Marshall provides a still widely cited definition in his textbook
_Principles of Economics_ (1890) that extends analysis beyond wealth and from
the societal to the microeconomic level:

> Economics is a study of man in the ordinary business of life. It enquires
how he gets his income and how he uses it. Thus, it is on the one side, the
study of wealth and on the other and more important side, a part of the study
of man.[22]

Lionel Robbins (1932) developed implications of what has been termed
"[p]erhaps the most commonly accepted current definition of the subject":[17]

> Economics is a science which studies human behaviour as a relationship
between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses.[23]

Robbins describes the definition as not _classificatory_ in "pick[ing] out
certain _kinds_ of behaviour" but rather _analytical_ in "focus[ing] attention
on a particular _aspect_ of behaviour, the form imposed by the influence of
scarcity."[24] He affirmed that previous economists have usually centred their
studies on the analysis of wealth: how wealth is created (production),
distributed, and consumed; and how wealth can grow.[25] But he said that
economics can be used to study other things, such as war, that are outside its
usual focus. This is because war has as the goal winning it (as a sought after
**end** ), generates both cost and benefits; and, **resources** (human life
and other costs) are used to attain the goal. If the war is not winnable or if
the expected costs outweigh the benefits, the deciding **actors** (assuming
they are rational) may never go to war (a **decision** ) but rather explore
other alternatives. We cannot define economics as the science that studies
wealth, war, crime, education, and any other field economic analysis can be
applied to; but, as the science that studies a particular common aspect of
each of those subjects (they all use scarce resources to attain a sought after
end).

Some subsequent comments criticized the definition as overly broad in failing
to limit its subject matter to analysis of markets. From the 1960s, however,
such comments abated as the economic theory of maximizing behaviour and
rational-choice modelling expanded the domain of the subject to areas
previously treated in other fields.[26] There are other criticisms as well,
such as in scarcity not accounting for the macroeconomics of high
unemployment.[27]

Gary Becker, a contributor to the expansion of economics into new areas,
describes the approach he favours as "combin[ing the] assumptions of
maximizing behaviour, stable preferences, and market equilibrium, used
relentlessly and unflinchingly."[28] One commentary characterizes the remark
as making economics an approach rather than a subject matter but with great
specificity as to the "choice process and the type of social interaction that
[such] analysis involves." The same source reviews a range of definitions
included in principles of economics textbooks and concludes that the lack of
agreement need not affect the subject-matter that the texts treat. Among
economists more generally, it argues that a particular definition presented
may reflect the direction toward which the author believes economics is
evolving, or should evolve.[17]

## Microeconomics

Main article: Microeconomics

### Markets

Main article: Market (economics)

![A vegetable vendor in a

marketplace.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/Ballard_Farmers%27_Market_-

_vegetables.jpg/250px-Ballard_Farmers%27_Market_-_vegetables.jpg)

Economists study trade, production and consumption decisions, such as those
that occur in a traditional marketplace.

![Two traders sit at computer monitors with financial

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b8/Sao_Paulo_Stock_Exchange.jpg/250px-

Sao_Paulo_Stock_Exchange.jpg)

Electronic trading brings together buyers and sellers through an electronic
trading platform and network to create virtual market places. Pictured: São
Paulo Stock Exchange, Brazil.

Microeconomics examines how entities, forming a market structure, interact
within a market to create a market system. These entities include private and
public players with various classifications, typically operating under
scarcity of tradable units and light government regulation.[ _clarification
needed_ ] The item traded may be a tangible product such as apples or a
service such as repair services, legal counsel, or entertainment.

In theory, in a free market the aggregates (sum of) of _quantity demanded_ by
buyers and _quantity supplied_ by sellers may reach economic equilibrium over
time in reaction to price changes; in practice, various issues may prevent
equilibrium, and any equilibrium reached may not necessarily be morally
equitable. For example, if the supply of healthcare services is limited by
external factors, the equilibrium price may be unaffordable for many who
desire it but cannot pay for it.

Various market structures exist. In perfectly competitive markets, no
participants are large enough to have the market power to set the price of a
homogeneous product. In other words, every participant is a "price taker" as
no participant influences the price of a product. In the real world, markets
often experience imperfect competition.

Forms include monopoly (in which there is only one seller of a good), duopoly
(in which there are only two sellers of a good), oligopoly (in which there are
few sellers of a good), monopolistic competition (in which there are many
sellers producing highly differentiated goods), monopsony (in which there is
only one buyer of a good), and oligopsony (in which there are few buyers of a
good). Unlike perfect competition, imperfect competition invariably means
market power is unequally distributed. Firms under imperfect competition have
the potential to be "price makers", which means that, by holding a
disproportionately high share of market power, they can influence the prices
of their products.

Microeconomics studies individual markets by simplifying the economic system
by assuming that activity in the market being analysed does not affect other
markets. This method of analysis is known as partial-equilibrium analysis
(supply and demand). This method aggregates (the sum of all activity) in only
one market. General-equilibrium theory studies various markets and their
behaviour. It aggregates (the sum of all activity) across _all_ markets. This
method studies both changes in markets and their interactions leading towards
equilibrium.[29]

### Production, cost, and efficiency

Main articles: Production theory basics, Opportunity cost, Economic
efficiency, and Production–possibility frontier

In microeconomics, production is the conversion of inputs into outputs. It is
an economic process that uses inputs to create a commodity or a service for
exchange or direct use. Production is a flow and thus a rate of output per
period of time. Distinctions include such production alternatives as for
consumption (food, haircuts, etc.) vs. investment goods (new tractors,
buildings, roads, etc.), public goods (national defence, smallpox
vaccinations, etc.) or private goods (new computers, bananas, etc.), and
"guns" vs "butter".

Opportunity cost is the economic cost of production: the value of the next
best opportunity foregone. Choices must be made between desirable yet mutually
exclusive actions. It has been described as expressing "the basic relationship
between scarcity and choice".[30] For example, if a baker uses a sack of flour
to make pretzels one morning, then the baker cannot use either the flour or
the morning to make bagels instead. Part of the cost of making pretzels is
that neither the flour nor the morning are available any longer, for use in
some other way. The opportunity cost of an activity is an element in ensuring
that scarce resources are used efficiently, such that the cost is weighed
against the value of that activity in deciding on more or less of it.
Opportunity costs are not restricted to monetary or financial costs but could
be measured by the real cost of output forgone, leisure, or anything else that
provides the alternative benefit (utility).[31]

Inputs used in the production process include such primary factors of
production as labour services, capital (durable produced goods used in
production, such as an existing factory), and land (including natural
resources). Other inputs may include intermediate goods used in production of
final goods, such as the steel in a new car.

Economic efficiency measures how well a system generates desired output with a
given set of inputs and available technology. Efficiency is improved if more
output is generated without changing inputs, or in other words, the amount of
"waste" is reduced. A widely accepted general standard is Pareto efficiency,
which is reached when no further change can make someone better off without
making someone else worse off.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/67/Production_Possibilities_Frontier_Curve.svg/350px-

Production_Possibilities_Frontier_Curve.svg.png)

An example production–possibility frontier with illustrative points marked.

The production–possibility frontier (PPF) is an expository figure for
representing scarcity, cost, and efficiency. In the simplest case an economy
can produce just two goods (say "guns" and "butter"). The PPF is a table or
graph (as at the right) showing the different quantity combinations of the two
goods producible with a given technology and total factor inputs, which limit
feasible total output. Each point on the curve shows potential total output
for the economy, which is the maximum feasible output of one good, given a
feasible output quantity of the other good.

Scarcity is represented in the figure by people being willing but unable in
the aggregate to consume _beyond the PPF_ (such as at _X_ ) and by the
negative slope of the curve.[32] If production of one good _increases_ along
the curve, production of the other good _decreases_ , an inverse relationship.
This is because increasing output of one good requires transferring inputs to
it from production of the other good, decreasing the latter.

The slope of the curve at a point on it gives the trade-off between the two
goods. It measures what an additional unit of one good costs in units forgone
of the other good, an example of a _real opportunity cost_. Thus, if one more
Gun costs 100 units of butter, the opportunity cost of one Gun is 100 Butter.
_Along the PPF_ , scarcity implies that choosing _more_ of one good in the
aggregate entails doing with _less_ of the other good. Still, in a market
economy, movement along the curve may indicate that the choice of the
increased output is anticipated to be worth the cost to the agents.

By construction, each point on the curve shows _productive efficiency_ in
maximizing output for given total inputs. A point _inside_ the curve (as at
_A_ ), is feasible but represents _production inefficiency_ (wasteful use of
inputs), in that output of _one or both goods_ could increase by moving in a
northeast direction to a point on the curve. Examples cited of such
inefficiency include high unemployment during a business-cycle recession or
economic organization of a country that discourages full use of resources.
Being on the curve might still not fully satisfy allocative efficiency (also
called Pareto efficiency) if it does not produce a mix of goods that consumers
prefer over other points.

Much applied economics in public policy is concerned with determining how the
efficiency of an economy can be improved. Recognizing the reality of scarcity
and then figuring out how to organize society for the most efficient use of
resources has been described as the "essence of economics", where the subject
"makes its unique contribution."[33]

### Specialization

Main articles: Division of labour, Comparative advantage, and Gains from trade

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e1/Late_Medieval_Trade_Routes.jpg/450px-

Late_Medieval_Trade_Routes.jpg)

A map showing the main trade routes for goods within late medieval Europe.

Specialization is considered key to economic efficiency based on theoretical
and empirical considerations. Different individuals or nations may have
different real opportunity costs of production, say from differences in stocks
of human capital per worker or capital/labour ratios. According to theory,
this may give a comparative advantage in production of goods that make more
intensive use of the relatively more abundant, thus _relatively_ cheaper,
input.

Even if one region has an absolute advantage as to the ratio of its outputs to
inputs in every type of output, it may still specialize in the output in which
it has a comparative advantage and thereby gain from trading with a region
that lacks any absolute advantage but has a comparative advantage in producing
something else.

It has been observed that a high volume of trade occurs among regions even
with access to a similar technology and mix of factor inputs, including high-
income countries. This has led to investigation of economies of scale and
agglomeration to explain specialization in similar but differentiated product
lines, to the overall benefit of respective trading parties or regions.[34]

The general theory of specialization applies to trade among individuals,
farms, manufacturers, service providers, and economies. Among each of these
production systems, there may be a corresponding _division of labour_ with
different work groups specializing, or correspondingly different types of
capital equipment and differentiated land uses.[35]

An example that combines features above is a country that specializes in the
production of high-tech knowledge products, as developed countries do, and
trades with developing nations for goods produced in factories where labour is
relatively cheap and plentiful, resulting in different in opportunity costs of
production. More total output and utility thereby results from specializing in
production and trading than if each country produced its own high-tech and
low-tech products.

Theory and observation set out the conditions such that market prices of
outputs and productive inputs select an allocation of factor inputs by
comparative advantage, so that (relatively) low-cost inputs go to producing
low-cost outputs. In the process, aggregate output may increase as a by-
product or by design.[36] Such specialization of production creates
opportunities for gains from trade whereby resource owners benefit from trade
in the sale of one type of output for other, more highly valued goods. A
measure of gains from trade is the _increased income levels_ that trade may
facilitate.[37]

### Supply and demand

Main article: Supply and demand

![A graph depicting Quantity on the X-axis and Price on the

Y-axis](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/eb/Supply-demand-

right-shift-demand.svg/350px-Supply-demand-right-shift-demand.svg.png)

The supply and demand model describes how prices vary as a result of a balance
between product availability and demand. The graph depicts an increase (that
is, right-shift) in demand from D1 to D2 along with the consequent increase in
price and quantity required to reach a new equilibrium point on the supply
curve (S).

Prices and quantities have been described as the most directly observable
attributes of goods produced and exchanged in a market economy.[38] The theory
of supply and demand is an organizing principle for explaining how prices
coordinate the amounts produced and consumed. In microeconomics, it applies to
price and output determination for a market with perfect competition, which
includes the condition of no buyers or sellers large enough to have price-
setting power.

For a given market of a commodity, _demand_ is the relation of the quantity
that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit price of the good.
Demand is often represented by a table or a graph showing price and quantity
demanded (as in the figure). Demand theory describes individual consumers as
rationally choosing the most preferred quantity of each good, given income,
prices, tastes, etc. A term for this is "constrained utility maximization"
(with income and wealth as the constraints on demand). Here, utility refers to
the hypothesized relation of each individual consumer for ranking different
commodity bundles as more or less preferred.

The law of demand states that, in general, price and quantity demanded in a
given market are inversely related. That is, the higher the price of a
product, the less of it people would be prepared to buy (other things
unchanged). As the price of a commodity falls, consumers move toward it from
relatively more expensive goods (the substitution effect). In addition,
purchasing power from the price decline increases ability to buy (the income
effect). Other factors can change demand; for example an increase in income
will shift the demand curve for a normal good outward relative to the origin,
as in the figure. All determinants are predominantly taken as constant factors
of demand and supply.

_Supply_ is the relation between the price of a good and the quantity
available for sale at that price. It may be represented as a table or graph
relating price and quantity supplied. Producers, for example business firms,
are hypothesized to be _profit maximizers_ , meaning that they attempt to
produce and supply the amount of goods that will bring them the highest
profit. Supply is typically represented as a function relating price and
quantity, if other factors are unchanged.

That is, the higher the price at which the good can be sold, the more of it
producers will supply, as in the figure. The higher price makes it profitable
to increase production. Just as on the demand side, the position of the supply
can shift, say from a change in the price of a productive input or a technical
improvement. The "Law of Supply" states that, in general, a rise in price
leads to an expansion in supply and a fall in price leads to a contraction in
supply. Here as well, the determinants of supply, such as price of
substitutes, cost of production, technology applied and various factors inputs
of production are all taken to be constant for a specific time period of
evaluation of supply.

Market equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded,
the intersection of the supply and demand curves in the figure above. At a
price below equilibrium, there is a shortage of quantity supplied compared to
quantity demanded. This is posited to bid the price up. At a price above
equilibrium, there is a surplus of quantity supplied compared to quantity
demanded. This pushes the price down. The model of supply and demand predicts
that for given supply and demand curves, price and quantity will stabilize at
the price that makes quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded. Similarly,
demand-and-supply theory predicts a new price-quantity combination from a
shift in demand (as to the figure), or in supply.

For a given quantity of a consumer good, the point on the demand curve
indicates the value, or marginal utility, to consumers for that unit. It
measures what the consumer would be prepared to pay for that unit.[39] The
corresponding point on the supply curve measures marginal cost, the increase
in total cost to the supplier for the corresponding unit of the good. The
price in equilibrium is determined by supply and demand. In a perfectly
competitive market, supply and demand equate marginal cost and marginal
utility at equilibrium.[40]

On the supply side of the market, some factors of production are described as
(relatively) _variable_ in the short run, which affects the cost of changing
output levels. Their usage rates can be changed easily, such as electrical
power, raw-material inputs, and over-time and temp work. Other inputs are
relatively _fixed_ , such as plant and equipment and key personnel. In the
long run, all inputs may be adjusted by management. These distinctions
translate to differences in the elasticity (responsiveness) of the supply
curve in the short and long runs and corresponding differences in the price-
quantity change from a shift on the supply or demand side of the market.

Marginalist theory, such as above, describes the consumers as attempting to
reach most-preferred positions, subject to income and wealth constraints while
producers attempt to maximize profits subject to their own constraints,
including demand for goods produced, technology, and the price of inputs. For
the consumer, that point comes where marginal utility of a good, net of price,
reaches zero, leaving no net gain from further consumption increases.
Analogously, the producer compares marginal revenue (identical to price for
the perfect competitor) against the marginal cost of a good, with _marginal
profit_ the difference. At the point where marginal profit reaches zero,
further increases in production of the good stop. For movement to market
equilibrium and for changes in equilibrium, price and quantity also change "at
the margin": more-or-less of something, rather than necessarily all-or-
nothing.

Other applications of demand and supply include the distribution of income
among the factors of production, including labour and capital, through factor
markets. In a competitive labour market for example the quantity of labour
employed and the price of labour (the wage rate) depends on the demand for
labour (from employers for production) and supply of labour (from potential
workers). Labour economics examines the interaction of workers and employers
through such markets to explain patterns and changes of wages and other labour
income, labour mobility, and (un)employment, productivity through human
capital, and related public-policy issues.[41]

Demand-and-supply analysis is used to explain the behaviour of perfectly
competitive markets, but as a standard of comparison it can be extended to any
type of market. It can also be generalized to explain variables across the
economy, for example, total output (estimated as real GDP) and the general
price level, as studied in macroeconomics.[42] Tracing the qualitative and
quantitative effects of variables that change supply and demand, whether in
the short or long run, is a standard exercise in applied economics. Economic
theory may also specify conditions such that supply and demand through the
market is an efficient mechanism for allocating resources.[43]

### Firms

Main articles: Theory of the firm, Industrial organization, Business
economics, and Managerial economics

People frequently do not trade directly on markets. Instead, on the supply
side, they may work in and produce through _firms_. The most obvious kinds of
firms are corporations, partnerships and trusts. According to Ronald Coase,
people begin to organize their production in firms when the costs of doing
business becomes lower than doing it on the market.[44] Firms combine labour
and capital, and can achieve far greater economies of scale (when the average
cost per unit declines as more units are produced) than individual market
trading.

In perfectly competitive markets studied in the theory of supply and demand,
there are many producers, none of which significantly influence price.
Industrial organization generalizes from that special case to study the
strategic behaviour of firms that do have significant control of price. It
considers the structure of such markets and their interactions. Common market
structures studied besides perfect competition include monopolistic
competition, various forms of oligopoly, and monopoly.[45]

Managerial economics applies microeconomic analysis to specific decisions in
business firms or other management units. It draws heavily from quantitative
methods such as operations research and programming and from statistical
methods such as regression analysis in the absence of certainty and perfect
knowledge. A unifying theme is the attempt to optimize business decisions,
including unit-cost minimization and profit maximization, given the firm's
objectives and constraints imposed by technology and market conditions.[46]

### Uncertainty and game theory

Main articles: Information economics, Game theory, and Financial economics

Uncertainty in economics is an unknown prospect of gain or loss, whether
quantifiable as risk or not. Without it, household behaviour would be
unaffected by uncertain employment and income prospects, financial and capital
markets would reduce to exchange of a single instrument in each market period,
and there would be no communications industry.[47] Given its different forms,
there are various ways of representing uncertainty and modelling economic
agents' responses to it.[48]

Game theory is a branch of applied mathematics that considers strategic
interactions between agents, one kind of uncertainty. It provides a
mathematical foundation of industrial organization, discussed above, to model
different types of firm behaviour, for example in an solipsistic industry (few
sellers), but equally applicable to wage negotiations, bargaining, contract
design, and any situation where individual agents are few enough to have
perceptible effects on each other. In behavioural economics, it has been used
to model the strategies agents choose when interacting with others whose
interests are at least partially adverse to their own.[49]

In this, it generalizes maximization approaches developed to analyse market
actors such as in the supply and demand model and allows for incomplete
information of actors. The field dates from the 1944 classic _Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior_ by John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. It has
significant applications seemingly outside of economics in such diverse
subjects as formulation of nuclear strategies, ethics, political science, and
evolutionary biology.[50]

Risk aversion may stimulate activity that in well-functioning markets smooths
out risk and communicates information about risk, as in markets for insurance,
commodity futures contracts, and financial instruments. Financial economics or
simply finance describes the allocation of financial resources. It also
analyses the pricing of financial instruments, the financial structure of
companies, the efficiency and fragility of financial markets,[51] financial
crises, and related government policy or regulation.[52]

Some market organizations may give rise to inefficiencies associated with
uncertainty. Based on George Akerlof's "Market for Lemons" article, the
paradigm example is of a dodgy second-hand car market. Customers without
knowledge of whether a car is a "lemon" depress its price below what a quality
second-hand car would be.[53] Information asymmetry arises here, if the seller
has more relevant information than the buyer but no incentive to disclose it.
Related problems in insurance are adverse selection, such that those at most
risk are most likely to insure (say reckless drivers), and moral hazard, such
that insurance results in riskier behaviour (say more reckless driving).[54]

Both problems may raise insurance costs and reduce efficiency by driving
otherwise willing transactors from the market ("incomplete markets").
Moreover, attempting to reduce one problem, say adverse selection by mandating
insurance, may add to another, say moral hazard. Information economics, which
studies such problems, has relevance in subjects such as insurance, contract
law, mechanism design, monetary economics, and health care.[54] Applied
subjects include market and legal remedies to spread or reduce risk, such as
warranties, government-mandated partial insurance, restructuring or bankruptcy
law, inspection, and regulation for quality and information
disclosure.[55][56]

### Market failure

Main articles: Market failure, Government failure, Information economics,
Environmental economics, and Agricultural economics

![A smokestack releasing

smoke](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/87/Smokestack_in_Detroit.jpg/250px-

Smokestack_in_Detroit.jpg)

Pollution can be a simple example of market failure. If costs of production
are not borne by producers but are by the environment, accident victims or
others, then prices are distorted.

The term "market failure" encompasses several problems which may undermine
standard economic assumptions. Although economists categorize market failures
differently, the following categories emerge in the main texts.[b]

Information asymmetries and incomplete markets may result in economic
inefficiency but also a possibility of improving efficiency through market,
legal, and regulatory remedies, as discussed above.

Natural monopoly, or the overlapping concepts of "practical" and "technical"
monopoly, is an extreme case of _failure of competition_ as a restraint on
producers. Extreme economies of scale are one possible cause.

Public goods are goods which are under-supplied in a typical market. The
defining features are that people can consume public goods without having to
pay for them and that more than one person can consume the good at the same
time.

Externalities occur where there are significant social costs or benefits from
production or consumption that are not reflected in market prices. For
example, air pollution may generate a negative externality, and education may
generate a positive externality (less crime, etc.). Governments often tax and
otherwise restrict the sale of goods that have negative externalities and
subsidize or otherwise promote the purchase of goods that have positive
externalities in an effort to correct the price distortions caused by these
externalities.[57] Elementary demand-and-supply theory predicts equilibrium
but not the speed of adjustment for changes of equilibrium due to a shift in
demand or supply.[58]

In many areas, some form of price stickiness is postulated to account for
quantities, rather than prices, adjusting in the short run to changes on the
demand side or the supply side. This includes standard analysis of the
business cycle in macroeconomics. Analysis often revolves around causes of
such price stickiness and their implications for reaching a hypothesized long-
run equilibrium. Examples of such price stickiness in particular markets
include wage rates in labour markets and posted prices in markets deviating
from perfect competition.

![A woman takes samples of water from a

river.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/da/Field_Trip-

_water_sampling.jpg/250px-Field_Trip-_water_sampling.jpg)

Environmental scientist sampling water

Some specialized fields of economics deal in market failure more than others.
The economics of the public sector is one example. Much environmental
economics concerns externalities or "public bads".

Policy options include regulations that reflect cost-benefit analysis or
market solutions that change incentives, such as emission fees or redefinition
of property rights.[59]

### Public sector

Main articles: Economics of the public sector and Public finance

See also: Welfare economics

Public finance is the field of economics that deals with budgeting the
revenues and expenditures of a public sector entity, usually government. The
subject addresses such matters as tax incidence (who really pays a particular
tax), cost-benefit analysis of government programmes, effects on economic
efficiency and income distribution of different kinds of spending and taxes,
and fiscal politics. The latter, an aspect of public choice theory, models
public-sector behaviour analogously to microeconomics, involving interactions
of self-interested voters, politicians, and bureaucrats.[60]

Much of economics is positive, seeking to describe and predict economic
phenomena. Normative economics seeks to identify what economies _ought_ to be
like.

Welfare economics is a normative branch of economics that uses microeconomic
techniques to simultaneously determine the allocative efficiency within an
economy and the income distribution associated with it. It attempts to measure
social welfare by examining the economic activities of the individuals that
comprise society.[61]

## Macroeconomics

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/DiagFuncMacroSyst.pdf/page1-450px-

DiagFuncMacroSyst.pdf.jpg)

The circulation of money in an economy in a macroeconomic model.

Main article: Macroeconomics

Macroeconomics examines the economy as a whole to explain broad aggregates and
their interactions "top down", that is, using a simplified form of general-
equilibrium theory.[62] Such aggregates include national income and output,
the unemployment rate, and price inflation and subaggregates like total
consumption and investment spending and their components. It also studies
effects of monetary policy and fiscal policy.

Since at least the 1960s, macroeconomics has been characterized by further
integration as to micro-based modelling of sectors, including rationality of
players, efficient use of market information, and imperfect competition.[63]
This has addressed a long-standing concern about inconsistent developments of
the same subject.[64]

Macroeconomic analysis also considers factors affecting the long-term level
and growth of national income. Such factors include capital accumulation,
technological change and labour force growth.[65]

### Growth

Main article: Economic growth

_Growth economics_ studies factors that explain economic growth – the increase
in output _per capita_ of a country over a long period of time. The same
factors are used to explain differences in the _level_ of output _per capita_
_between_ countries, in particular why some countries grow faster than others,
and whether countries converge at the same rates of growth.

Much-studied factors include the rate of investment, population growth, and
technological change. These are represented in theoretical and empirical forms
(as in the neoclassical and endogenous growth models) and in growth
accounting.[66]

### Business cycle

Main article: Business cycle

See also: Circular flow of income, Aggregate supply, Aggregate demand, and
Unemployment

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fb/Economic_cycle.svg/450px-

Economic_cycle.svg.png)

A basic illustration of economic/business cycles.

The economics of a depression were the spur for the creation of
"macroeconomics" as a separate discipline. During the Great Depression of the
1930s, John Maynard Keynes authored a book entitled _The General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money_ outlining the key theories of Keynesian
economics. Keynes contended that aggregate demand for goods might be
insufficient during economic downturns, leading to unnecessarily high
unemployment and losses of potential output.

He therefore advocated active policy responses by the public sector, including
monetary policy actions by the central bank and fiscal policy actions by the
government to stabilize output over the business cycle.[67] Thus, a central
conclusion of Keynesian economics is that, in some situations, no strong
automatic mechanism moves output and employment towards full employment
levels. John Hicks' IS/LM model has been the most influential interpretation
of _The General Theory_.

Over the years, understanding of the business cycle has branched into various
research programmes, mostly related to or distinct from Keynesianism. The
neoclassical synthesis refers to the reconciliation of Keynesian economics
with neoclassical economics, stating that Keynesianism is correct in the short
run but qualified by neoclassical-like considerations in the intermediate and
long run.[68]

New classical macroeconomics, as distinct from the Keynesian view of the
business cycle, posits market clearing with imperfect information. It includes
Friedman's permanent income hypothesis on consumption and "rational
expectations" theory,[69] led by Robert Lucas, and real business cycle
theory.[70]

In contrast, the new Keynesian approach retains the rational expectations
assumption, however it assumes a variety of market failures. In particular,
New Keynesians assume prices and wages are "sticky", which means they do not
adjust instantaneously to changes in economic conditions.[71]

Thus, the new classicals assume that prices and wages adjust automatically to
attain full employment, whereas the new Keynesians see full employment as
being automatically achieved only in the long run, and hence government and
central-bank policies are needed because the "long run" may be very long.

### Unemployment

Main article: Unemployment

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e9/US_employment_1995-2012.png/450px-

US_employment_1995-2012.png)

The percentage of the US population employed, 1995–2012.

The amount of unemployment in an economy is measured by the unemployment rate,
the percentage of workers without jobs in the labour force. The labour force
only includes workers actively looking for jobs. People who are retired,
pursuing education, or discouraged from seeking work by a lack of job
prospects are excluded from the labour force. Unemployment can be generally
broken down into several types that are related to different causes.[72]

Classical models of unemployment occurs when wages are too high for employers
to be willing to hire more workers. Consistent with classical unemployment,
frictional unemployment occurs when appropriate job vacancies exist for a
worker, but the length of time needed to search for and find the job leads to
a period of unemployment.[72]

Structural unemployment covers a variety of possible causes of unemployment
including a mismatch between workers' skills and the skills required for open
jobs.[73] Large amounts of structural unemployment can occur when an economy
is transitioning industries and workers find their previous set of skills are
no longer in demand. Structural unemployment is similar to frictional
unemployment since both reflect the problem of matching workers with job
vacancies, but structural unemployment covers the time needed to acquire new
skills not just the short term search process.[74]

While some types of unemployment may occur regardless of the condition of the
economy, cyclical unemployment occurs when growth stagnates. Okun's law
represents the empirical relationship between unemployment and economic
growth.[75] The original version of Okun's law states that a 3% increase in
output would lead to a 1% decrease in unemployment.[76]

### Inflation and monetary policy

Main articles: Inflation and Monetary policy

See also: Money, Quantity theory of money, and History of money

Money is a _means of final payment_ for goods in most price system economies,
and is the unit of account in which prices are typically stated. Money has
general acceptability, relative consistency in value, divisibility,
durability, portability, elasticity in supply, and longevity with mass public
confidence. It includes currency held by the nonbank public and checkable
deposits. It has been described as a social convention, like language, useful
to one largely because it is useful to others. In the words of Francis Amasa
Walker, a well-known 19th-century economist, "Money is what money does"
("Money is _that_ money does" in the original).[77]

As a medium of exchange, money facilitates trade. It is essentially a measure
of value and more importantly, a store of value being a basis for credit
creation. Its economic function can be contrasted with barter (non-monetary
exchange). Given a diverse array of produced goods and specialized producers,
barter may entail a hard-to-locate double coincidence of wants as to what is
exchanged, say apples and a book. Money can reduce the transaction cost of
exchange because of its ready acceptability. Then it is less costly for the
seller to accept money in exchange, rather than what the buyer produces.[78]

At the level of an economy, theory and evidence are consistent with a positive
relationship running from the total money supply to the nominal value of total
output and to the general price level. For this reason, management of the
money supply is a key aspect of monetary policy.[79]

### Fiscal policy

Main articles: Fiscal policy, Government spending, and Taxation

Governments implement fiscal policy to influence macroeconomic conditions by
adjusting spending and taxation policies to alter aggregate demand. When
aggregate demand falls below the potential output of the economy, there is an
output gap where some productive capacity is left unemployed. Governments
increase spending and cut taxes to boost aggregate demand. Resources that have
been idled can be used by the government.

For example, unemployed home builders can be hired to expand highways. Tax
cuts allow consumers to increase their spending, which boosts aggregate
demand. Both tax cuts and spending have multiplier effects where the initial
increase in demand from the policy percolates through the economy and
generates additional economic activity.

The effects of fiscal policy can be limited by crowding out. When there is no
output gap, the economy is producing at full capacity and there are no excess
productive resources. If the government increases spending in this situation,
the government uses resources that otherwise would have been used by the
private sector, so there is no increase in overall output. Some economists
think that crowding out is always an issue while others do not think it is a
major issue when output is depressed.

Sceptics of fiscal policy also make the argument of Ricardian equivalence.
They argue that an increase in debt will have to be paid for with future tax
increases, which will cause people to reduce their consumption and save money
to pay for the future tax increase. Under Ricardian equivalence, any boost in
demand from tax cuts will be offset by the increased saving intended to pay
for future higher taxes.

## International economics

Main article: International economics

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Countries_by_GDP_%28PPP%29_Per_Capita_in_2015.svg/400px-

Countries_by_GDP_%28PPP%29_Per_Capita_in_2015.svg.png)

List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita in 2014.

International trade studies determinants of goods-and-services flows across
international boundaries. It also concerns the size and distribution of gains
from trade. Policy applications include estimating the effects of changing
tariff rates and trade quotas. International finance is a macroeconomic field
which examines the flow of capital across international borders, and the
effects of these movements on exchange rates. Increased trade in goods,
services and capital between countries is a major effect of contemporary
globalization.[80]

## Development economics

The distinct field of _development economics_ examines economic aspects of the
economic development process in relatively low-income countries focusing on
structural change, poverty, and economic growth. Approaches in development
economics frequently incorporate social and political factors.[81]

## Economic systems

Main article: Economic system

Economic systems is the branch of economics that studies the methods and
institutions by which societies determine the ownership, direction, and
allocation of economic resources. An _economic system_ of a society is the
unit of analysis.

Among contemporary systems at different ends of the organizational spectrum
are socialist systems and capitalist systems, in which most production occurs
in respectively state-run and private enterprises. In between are mixed
economies. A common element is the interaction of economic and political
influences, broadly described as political economy. _Comparative economic
systems_ studies the relative performance and behaviour of different economies
or systems.[82]

The U.S. Export-Import Bank defines a Marxist–Leninist state as having a
centrally planned economy.[83] They are now rare; examples can still be seen
in Cuba, North Korea and Laos.[84][ _needs update_ ]

## Practice

Main articles: Economic methodology, Mathematical economics, and Schools of
economics

Contemporary economics uses mathematics. Economists draw on the tools of
calculus, linear algebra, statistics, game theory, and computer science.[85]
Professional economists are expected to be familiar with these tools, while a
minority specialize in econometrics and mathematical methods.

### Theory

Mainstream economic theory relies upon _a priori_ quantitative economic
models, which employ a variety of concepts. Theory typically proceeds with an
assumption of _ceteris paribus_ , which means holding constant explanatory
variables other than the one under consideration. When creating theories, the
objective is to find ones which are at least as simple in information
requirements, more precise in predictions, and more fruitful in generating
additional research than prior theories.[86] While neoclassical economic
theory constitutes both the dominant or orthodox theoretical as well as
methodological framework, economic theory can also take the form of other
schools of thought such as in heterodox economic theories.

In microeconomics, principal concepts include supply and demand, marginalism,
rational choice theory, opportunity cost, budget constraints, utility, and the
theory of the firm.[87] Early macroeconomic models focused on modelling the
relationships between aggregate variables, but as the relationships appeared
to change over time macroeconomists, including new Keynesians, reformulated
their models in microfoundations.[71]

The aforementioned microeconomic concepts play a major part in macroeconomic
models – for instance, in monetary theory, the quantity theory of money
predicts that increases in the growth rate of the money supply increase
inflation, and inflation is assumed to be influenced by rational expectations.
In development economics, slower growth in developed nations has been
sometimes predicted because of the declining marginal returns of investment
and capital, and this has been observed in the Four Asian Tigers. Sometimes an
economic hypothesis is only _qualitative_ , not _quantitative_.[88]

Expositions of economic reasoning often use two-dimensional graphs to
illustrate theoretical relationships. At a higher level of generality, Paul
Samuelson's treatise _Foundations of Economic Analysis_ (1947) used
mathematical methods beyond graphs to represent the theory, particularly as to
maximizing behavioural relations of agents reaching equilibrium. The book
focused on examining the class of statements called _operationally meaningful
theorems_ in economics, which are theorems that can conceivably be refuted by
empirical data.[89]

### Empirical investigation

Main articles: Econometrics and Experimental economics

Economic theories are frequently tested empirically, largely through the use
of econometrics using economic data.[90] The controlled experiments common to
the physical sciences are difficult and uncommon in economics,[91] and instead
broad data is observationally studied; this type of testing is typically
regarded as less rigorous than controlled experimentation, and the conclusions
typically more tentative. However, the field of experimental economics is
growing, and increasing use is being made of natural experiments.

Statistical methods such as regression analysis are common. Practitioners use
such methods to estimate the size, economic significance, and statistical
significance ("signal strength") of the hypothesized relation(s) and to adjust
for noise from other variables. By such means, a hypothesis may gain
acceptance, although in a probabilistic, rather than certain, sense.
Acceptance is dependent upon the falsifiable hypothesis surviving tests. Use
of commonly accepted methods need not produce a final conclusion or even a
consensus on a particular question, given different tests, data sets, and
prior beliefs.

Criticisms based on professional standards and non-replicability of results
serve as further checks against bias, errors, and over-generalization,[92][93]
although much economic research has been accused of being non-replicable, and
prestigious journals have been accused of not facilitating replication through
the provision of the code and data.[94] Like theories, uses of test statistics
are themselves open to critical analysis,[95] although critical commentary on
papers in economics in prestigious journals such as the _American Economic
Review_ has declined precipitously in the past 40 years. This has been
attributed to journals' incentives to maximize citations in order to rank
higher on the Social Science Citation Index (SSCI).[96]

In applied economics, input-output models employing linear programming methods
are quite common. Large amounts of data are run through computer programs to
analyse the impact of certain policies; IMPLAN is one well-known example.

Experimental economics has promoted the use of scientifically controlled
experiments. This has reduced the long-noted distinction of economics from
natural sciences because it allows direct tests of what were previously taken
as axioms.[97] In some cases these have found that the axioms are not entirely
correct; for example, the ultimatum game has revealed that people reject
unequal offers.

In behavioural economics, psychologist Daniel Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in
economics in 2002 for his and Amos Tversky's empirical discovery of several
cognitive biases and heuristics. Similar empirical testing occurs in
neuroeconomics. Another example is the assumption of narrowly selfish
preferences versus a model that tests for selfish, altruistic, and cooperative
preferences.[98] These techniques have led some to argue that economics is a
"genuine science".[99]

### Profession

Main article: Economist

The professionalization of economics, reflected in the growth of graduate
programmes on the subject, has been described as "the main change in economics
since around 1900".[100] Most major universities and many colleges have a
major, school, or department in which academic degrees are awarded in the
subject, whether in the liberal arts, business, or for professional study.

In the private sector, professional economists are employed as consultants and
in industry, including banking and finance. Economists also work for various
government departments and agencies, for example, the national treasury,
central bank or bureau of statistics.

There are dozens of prizes awarded to economists each year for outstanding
intellectual contributions to the field, the most prominent of which is the
Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.

## Related subjects

Main articles: Law and economics, Natural resource economics, Philosophy and
economics, and Political economy

Economics is one social science among several and has fields bordering on
other areas, including economic geography, economic history, public choice,
energy economics, cultural economics, family economics and institutional
economics.

Law and economics, or economic analysis of law, is an approach to legal theory
that applies methods of economics to law. It includes the use of economic
concepts to explain the effects of legal rules, to assess which legal rules
are economically efficient, and to predict what the legal rules will be.[101]
A seminal article by Ronald Coase published in 1961 suggested that well-
defined property rights could overcome the problems of externalities.[102]

Political economy is the interdisciplinary study that combines economics, law,
and political science in explaining how political institutions, the political
environment, and the economic system (capitalist, socialist, mixed) influence
each other. It studies questions such as how monopoly, rent-seeking behaviour,
and externalities should impact government policy.[103] Historians have
employed _political economy_ to explore the ways in the past that persons and
groups with common economic interests have used politics to effect changes
beneficial to their interests.[104]

Energy economics is a broad scientific subject area which includes topics
related to energy supply and energy demand. Georgescu-Roegen reintroduced the
concept of entropy in relation to economics and energy from thermodynamics, as
distinguished from what he viewed as the mechanistic foundation of
neoclassical economics drawn from Newtonian physics. His work contributed
significantly to thermoeconomics and to ecological economics. He also did
foundational work which later developed into evolutionary economics.[105]

The sociological subfield of economic sociology arose, primarily through the
work of Émile Durkheim, Max Weber and Georg Simmel, as an approach to
analysing the effects of economic phenomena in relation to the overarching
social paradigm (i.e. modernity).[106] Classic works include Max Weber's _The
Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism_ (1905) and Georg Simmel's _The
Philosophy of Money_ (1900). More recently, the works of Mark Granovetter,
Peter Hedstrom and Richard Swedberg have been influential in this field.

## History

Main articles: History of economic thought and History of macroeconomic
thought

Economic writings date from earlier Mesopotamian, Greek, Roman, Indian
subcontinent, Chinese, Persian, and Arab civilizations. Economic precepts
occur throughout the writings of the Boeotian poet Hesiod and several economic
historians have described Hesiod himself as the "first economist".[107] Other
notable writers from Antiquity through to the Renaissance include Aristotle,
Xenophon, Chanakya (also known as Kautilya), Qin Shi Huang, Thomas Aquinas,
and Ibn Khaldun. Joseph Schumpeter described Aquinas as "coming nearer than
any other group to being the "founders' of scientific economics" as to
monetary, interest, and value theory within a natural-law perspective.[108][
_not in citation given_ ]

![A seaport with a ship

arriving](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/29/Lorrain.seaport.jpg/250px-

Lorrain.seaport.jpg)

A 1638 painting of a French seaport during the heyday of mercantilism.

Two groups, later called "mercantilists" and "physiocrats", more directly
influenced the subsequent development of the subject. Both groups were
associated with the rise of economic nationalism and modern capitalism in
Europe. Mercantilism was an economic doctrine that flourished from the 16th to
18th century in a prolific pamphlet literature, whether of merchants or
statesmen. It held that a nation's wealth depended on its accumulation of gold
and silver. Nations without access to mines could obtain gold and silver from
trade only by selling goods abroad and restricting imports other than of gold
and silver. The doctrine called for importing cheap raw materials to be used
in manufacturing goods, which could be exported, and for state regulation to
impose protective tariffs on foreign manufactured goods and prohibit
manufacturing in the colonies.[109]

Physiocrats, a group of 18th-century French thinkers and writers, developed
the idea of the economy as a circular flow of income and output. Physiocrats
believed that only agricultural production generated a clear surplus over
cost, so that agriculture was the basis of all wealth. Thus, they opposed the
mercantilist policy of promoting manufacturing and trade at the expense of
agriculture, including import tariffs. Physiocrats advocated replacing
administratively costly tax collections with a single tax on income of land
owners. In reaction against copious mercantilist trade regulations, the
physiocrats advocated a policy of _laissez-faire_ , which called for minimal
government intervention in the economy.[110]

Adam Smith (1723–1790) was an early economic theorist.[111] Smith was harshly
critical of the mercantilists but described the physiocratic system "with all
its imperfections" as "perhaps the purest approximation to the truth that has
yet been published" on the subject.[112]

### Classical political economy

Main article: Classical economics

![Picture of Adam Smith facing to the

right](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0a/AdamSmith.jpg/170px-

AdamSmith.jpg)

The publication of Adam Smith's _The Wealth of Nations_ in 1776 is considered
to be the first formalisation of economic thought.

The publication of Adam Smith's _The Wealth of Nations_ in 1776, has been
described as "the effective birth of economics as a separate discipline."[113]
The book identified land, labour, and capital as the three factors of
production and the major contributors to a nation's wealth, as distinct from
the physiocratic idea that only agriculture was productive.

Smith discusses potential benefits of specialization by division of labour,
including increased labour productivity and gains from trade, whether between
town and country or across countries.[114] His "theorem" that "the division of
labor is limited by the extent of the market" has been described as the "core
of a theory of the functions of firm and industry" and a "fundamental
principle of economic organization."[115] To Smith has also been ascribed "the
most important substantive proposition in all of economics" and foundation of
resource-allocation theory – that, under competition, resource owners (of
labour, land, and capital) seek their most profitable uses, resulting in an
equal rate of return for all uses in equilibrium (adjusted for apparent
differences arising from such factors as training and unemployment).[116]

In an argument that includes "one of the most famous passages in all
economics,"[117] Smith represents every individual as trying to employ any
capital they might command for their own advantage, not that of the
society,[c] and for the sake of profit, which is necessary at some level for
employing capital in domestic industry, and positively related to the value of
produce.[119] In this:

> He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor
knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to
that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing
that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he
intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by
an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is
it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his
own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than
when he really intends to promote it.[120]

The Rev. Thomas Robert Malthus (1798) used the concept of diminishing returns
to explain low living standards. Human population, he argued, tended to
increase geometrically, outstripping the production of food, which increased
arithmetically. The force of a rapidly growing population against a limited
amount of land meant diminishing returns to labour. The result, he claimed,
was chronically low wages, which prevented the standard of living for most of
the population from rising above the subsistence level.[121] Economist Julian
Lincoln Simon has criticized Malthus's conclusions.[122]

While Adam Smith emphasized the production of income, David Ricardo (1817)
focused on the distribution of income among landowners, workers, and
capitalists. Ricardo saw an inherent conflict between landowners on the one
hand and labour and capital on the other. He posited that the growth of
population and capital, pressing against a fixed supply of land, pushes up
rents and holds down wages and profits. Ricardo was the first to state and
prove the principle of comparative advantage, according to which each country
should specialize in producing and exporting goods in that it has a lower
_relative_ cost of production, rather relying only on its own production.[123]
It has been termed a "fundamental analytical explanation" for gains from
trade.[124]

Coming at the end of the classical tradition, John Stuart Mill (1848) parted
company with the earlier classical economists on the inevitability of the
distribution of income produced by the market system. Mill pointed to a
distinct difference between the market's two roles: allocation of resources
and distribution of income. The market might be efficient in allocating
resources but not in distributing income, he wrote, making it necessary for
society to intervene.[125]

Value theory was important in classical theory. Smith wrote that the "real
price of every thing ... is the toil and trouble of acquiring it". Smith
maintained that, with rent and profit, other costs besides wages also enter
the price of a commodity.[126] Other classical economists presented variations
on Smith, termed the 'labour theory of value'. Classical economics focused on
the tendency of any market economy to settle in a final stationary state made
up of a constant stock of physical wealth (capital) and a constant population
size.

### Marxism

Main article: Marxian economics

![Photograph of Karl Marx facing the

viewer](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d4/Karl_Marx_001.jpg/170px-

Karl_Marx_001.jpg)

The Marxist school of economic thought comes from the work of German economist
Karl Marx.

Marxist (later, Marxian) economics descends from classical economics. It
derives from the work of Karl Marx. The first volume of Marx's major work,
_Das Kapital_ , was published in German in 1867. In it, Marx focused on the
labour theory of value and the theory of surplus value which, he believed,
explained the exploitation of labour by capital.[127] The labour theory of
value held that the value of an exchanged commodity was determined by the
labour that went into its production and the theory of surplus value
demonstrated how the workers only got paid a proportion of the value their
work had created.[83]

### Neoclassical economics

Main article: Neoclassical economics

At the dawn as a social science, **economics** was defined and discussed at
length as the study of production, distribution, and consumption of wealth by
Jean-Baptiste Say in his _Treatise on Political Economy or, The Production,
Distribution, and Consumption of Wealth_ (1803). These three items are
considered by the science only in relation to the increase or diminution of
wealth, and not in reference to their processes of execution.[d] Say's
definition has prevailed up to our time, saved by substituting the word
"wealth" for "goods and services" meaning that wealth may include non-material
objects as well. One hundred and thirty years later, Lionel Robbins noticed
that this definition no longer sufficed,[e] because many economists were
making theoretical and philosophical inroads in other areas of human activity.
In his _Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science_ , he
proposed a definition of economics as a study of a particular aspect of human
behaviour, the one that falls under the influence of scarcity,[f] which forces
people to choose, allocate scarce resources to competing ends, and economize
(seeking the greatest welfare while avoiding the wasting of scarce resources).
For Robbins, the insufficiency was solved, and his definition allows us to
proclaim, with an easy conscience, education economics, safety and security
economics, health economics, war economics, and of course, production,
distribution and consumption economics as valid subjects of the economic
science."

Citing Robbins: "Economics is the science which studies human behavior as a
relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses".[24]
After discussing it for decades, Robbins' definition became widely accepted by
mainstream economists, and it has opened way into current textbooks.[128]
Although far from unanimous, most mainstream economists would accept some
version of Robbins' definition, even though many have raised serious
objections to the scope and method of economics, emanating from that
definition.[129] Due to the lack of strong consensus, and that production,
distribution and consumption of goods and services is the prime area of study
of economics, the old definition still stands in many quarters.

A body of theory later termed "neoclassical economics" or "marginalism" formed
from about 1870 to 1910. The term "economics" was popularized by such
neoclassical economists as Alfred Marshall as a concise synonym for "economic
science" and a substitute for the earlier "political economy".[13][14] This
corresponded to the influence on the subject of mathematical methods used in
the natural sciences.[130]

Neoclassical economics systematized supply and demand as joint determinants of
price and quantity in market equilibrium, affecting both the allocation of
output and the distribution of income. It dispensed with the labour theory of
value inherited from classical economics in favour of a marginal utility
theory of value on the demand side and a more general theory of costs on the
supply side.[131] In the 20th century, neoclassical theorists moved away from
an earlier notion suggesting that total utility for a society could be
measured in favour of ordinal utility, which hypothesizes merely behaviour-
based relations across persons.[40][132]

In microeconomics, neoclassical economics represents incentives and costs as
playing a pervasive role in shaping decision making. An immediate example of
this is the consumer theory of individual demand, which isolates how prices
(as costs) and income affect quantity demanded.[40] In macroeconomics it is
reflected in an early and lasting neoclassical synthesis with Keynesian
macroeconomics.[68][133]

Neoclassical economics is occasionally referred as _orthodox economics_
whether by its critics or sympathizers. Modern mainstream economics builds on
neoclassical economics but with many refinements that either supplement or
generalize earlier analysis, such as econometrics, game theory, analysis of
market failure and imperfect competition, and the neoclassical model of
economic growth for analysing long-run variables affecting national income.

Neoclassical economics studies the behaviour of individuals, households, and
organizations (called economic actors, players, or agents), when they manage
or use scarce resources, which have alternative uses, to achieve desired ends.
Agents are assumed to act rationally, have multiple desirable ends in sight,
limited resources to obtain these ends, a set of stable preferences, a
definite overall guiding objective, and the capability of making a choice.
There exists an economic problem, subject to study by economic science, when a
decision (choice) is made by one or more resource-controlling players to
attain the best possible outcome under bounded rational conditions. In other
words, resource-controlling agents maximize value subject to the constraints
imposed by the information the agents have, their cognitive limitations, and
the finite amount of time they have to make and execute a decision. Economic
science centres on the activities of the economic agents that comprise
society.[134] They are the focus of economic analysis.[g]

An approach to understanding these processes, through the study of agent
behaviour under scarcity, may go as follows:

The continuous interplay (exchange or trade) done by economic actors in all
markets sets the prices for all goods and services which, in turn, make the
rational managing of scarce resources possible. At the same time, the
decisions (choices) made by the same actors, while they are pursuing their own
interest, determine the level of output (production), consumption, savings,
and investment, in an economy, as well as the remuneration (distribution) paid
to the owners of labour (in the form of wages), capital (in the form of
profits) and land (in the form of rent).[h] Each period, as if they were in a
giant feedback system, economic players influence the pricing processes and
the economy, and are in turn influenced by them until a steady state
(equilibrium) of all variables involved is reached or until an external shock
throws the system toward a new equilibrium point. Because of the autonomous
actions of rational interacting agents, the economy is a complex adaptive
system.[i]

### Keynesian economics

Main articles: Keynesian economics and Post-Keynesian economics

![John Maynard Keynes greeting Harry Dexter White, then a senior official in

the U.S. Treasury

Department](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/04/WhiteandKeynes.jpg/170px-

WhiteandKeynes.jpg)

John Maynard Keynes (right), was a key theorist in economics.

Keynesian economics derives from John Maynard Keynes, in particular his book
_The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money_ (1936), which ushered
in contemporary macroeconomics as a distinct field.[135] The book focused on
determinants of national income in the short run when prices are relatively
inflexible. Keynes attempted to explain in broad theoretical detail why high
labour-market unemployment might not be self-correcting due to low "effective
demand" and why even price flexibility and monetary policy might be
unavailing. The term "revolutionary" has been applied to the book in its
impact on economic analysis.[136]

Keynesian economics has two successors. Post-Keynesian economics also
concentrates on macroeconomic rigidities and adjustment processes. Research on
micro foundations for their models is represented as based on real-life
practices rather than simple optimizing models. It is generally associated
with the University of Cambridge and the work of Joan Robinson.[137]

New-Keynesian economics is also associated with developments in the Keynesian
fashion. Within this group researchers tend to share with other economists the
emphasis on models employing micro foundations and optimizing behaviour but
with a narrower focus on standard Keynesian themes such as price and wage
rigidity. These are usually made to be endogenous features of the models,
rather than simply assumed as in older Keynesian-style ones.

### Chicago school of economics

Main article: Chicago school of economics

The Chicago School of economics is best known for its free market advocacy and
monetarist ideas. According to Milton Friedman and monetarists, market
economies are inherently stable if the money supply does not greatly expand or
contract. Ben Bernanke, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, is among the
economists today generally accepting Friedman's analysis of the causes of the
Great Depression.[138]

Milton Friedman effectively took many of the basic principles set forth by
Adam Smith and the classical economists and modernized them. One example of
this is his article in the 13 September 1970 issue of _The New York Times
Magazine_ , in which he claims that the social responsibility of business
should be "to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase
its profits ... (through) open and free competition without deception or
fraud."[139]

### Other schools and approaches

Main article: Schools of economics

Other well-known schools or trends of thought referring to a particular style
of economics practised at and disseminated from well-defined groups of
academicians that have become known worldwide, include the Austrian School,
the Freiburg School, the School of Lausanne, post-Keynesian economics and the
Stockholm school. Contemporary mainstream economics is sometimes separated
into the Saltwater approach of those universities along the Eastern and
Western coasts of the US, and the Freshwater, or Chicago-school approach.

Within macroeconomics there is, in general order of their appearance in the
literature; classical economics, Keynesian economics, the neoclassical
synthesis, post-Keynesian economics, monetarism, new classical economics, and
supply-side economics. Alternative developments include ecological economics,
constitutional economics, institutional economics, evolutionary economics,
dependency theory, structuralist economics, world systems theory,
econophysics, feminist economics and biophysical economics.[140]

## Agreements

![Ambox

scales.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Ambox_scales.svg/50px-

Ambox_scales.svg.png)

|

This article **may beunbalanced towards certain viewpoints**. Please improve
the article by adding information on neglected viewpoints, or discuss the
issue on the talk page. _( February 2017)_

---|--- 

According to various random and anonymous surveys of members of the American
Economic Association, economists have agreement about the following
propositions by percentage:[141][142][143][144][145]

    
        1. A ceiling on rents reduces the quantity and quality of housing available. (93% agree)
    2. Tariffs and import quotas usually reduce general economic welfare. (93% agree)
    3. Flexible and floating exchange rates offer an effective international monetary arrangement. (90% agree)
    4. Fiscal policy (e.g., tax cut and/or government expenditure increase) has a significant stimulative impact on a less than fully employed economy. (90% agree)
    5. The United States should not restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries. (90% agree)
    6. Economic growth in developed countries like the United States leads to greater levels of well-being. (88% agree)
    7. The United States should eliminate agricultural subsidies. (85% agree)
    8. An appropriately designed fiscal policy can increase the long-run rate of capital formation. (85% agree)
    9. Local and state governments should eliminate subsidies to professional sports franchises. (85% agree)
    10. If the federal budget is to be balanced, it should be done over the business cycle rather than yearly. (85% agree)
    11. The gap between Social Security funds and expenditures will become unsustainably large within the next fifty years if current policies remain unchanged. (85% agree)
    12. Cash payments increase the welfare of recipients to a greater degree than do transfers-in-kind of equal cash value. (84% agree)
    13. A large federal budget deficit has an adverse effect on the economy. (83% agree)
    14. The redistribution of income in the United States is a legitimate role for the government. (83% agree)
    15. Inflation is caused primarily by too much growth in the money supply. (83% agree)
    16. The United States should not ban genetically modified crops. (82% agree)
    17. A minimum wage increases unemployment among young and unskilled workers. (79% agree)
    18. The government should restructure the welfare system along the lines of a "negative income tax." (79% agree)
    19. Effluent taxes and marketable pollution permits represent a better approach to pollution control than imposition of pollution ceilings. (78% agree)
    20. Government subsidies on ethanol in the United States should be reduced or eliminated. (78% agree)
    

## Criticisms

### General criticisms

"The dismal science" is a derogatory alternative name for economics devised by
the Victorian historian Thomas Carlyle in the 19th century. It is often stated
that Carlyle gave economics the nickname "the dismal science" as a response to
the late 18th century writings of The Reverend Thomas Robert Malthus, who
grimly predicted that starvation would result, as projected population growth
exceeded the rate of increase in the food supply. However, the actual phrase
was coined by Carlyle in the context of a debate with John Stuart Mill on
slavery, in which Carlyle argued for slavery, while Mill opposed it.[20]

Some economists, like John Stuart Mill or Léon Walras, have maintained that
the production of wealth should not be tied to its distribution.[146]

In _The Wealth of Nations_ , Adam Smith addressed many issues that are
currently also the subject of debate and dispute. Smith repeatedly attacks
groups of politically aligned individuals who attempt to use their collective
influence to manipulate a government into doing their bidding. In Smith's day,
these were referred to as factions, but are now more commonly called special
interests, a term which can comprise international bankers, corporate
conglomerations, outright oligopolies, monopolies, trade unions and other
groups.[j]

Economics _per se_ , as a social science, is independent of the political acts
of any government or other decision-making organization; however, many
policymakers or individuals holding highly ranked positions that can influence
other people's lives are known for arbitrarily using a plethora of economic
concepts and rhetoric as vehicles to legitimize agendas and value systems, and
do not limit their remarks to matters relevant to their responsibilities.[147]
The close relation of economic theory and practice with politics[148] is a
focus of contention that may shade or distort the most unpretentious original
tenets of economics, and is often confused with specific social agendas and
value systems.[149]

Notwithstanding, economics legitimately has a role in informing government
policy. It is, indeed, in some ways an outgrowth of the older field of
political economy. Some academic economic journals have increased their
efforts to gauge the consensus of economists regarding certain policy issues
in hopes of effecting a more informed political environment. Often there
exists a low approval rate from professional economists regarding many public
policies. Policy issues featured in one survey of American Economic
Association economists include trade restrictions, social insurance for those
put out of work by international competition, genetically modified foods,
curbside recycling, health insurance (several questions), medical malpractice,
barriers to entering the medical profession, organ donations, unhealthy foods,
mortgage deductions, taxing internet sales, Wal-Mart, casinos, ethanol
subsidies, and inflation targeting.[150]

In _Steady State Economics_ 1977, leading ecological economist and steady-
state theorist Herman Daly argues that there exist logical inconsistencies
between the emphasis placed on economic growth and the limited availability of
natural resources.[151]

Issues like central bank independence, central bank policies and rhetoric in
central bank governors discourse or the premises of macroeconomic
policies[152] (monetary and fiscal policy) of the state, are focus of
contention and criticism.[153]

Deirdre McCloskey has argued that many empirical economic studies are poorly
reported, and she and Stephen Ziliak argue that although her critique has been
well-received, practice has not improved.[154] This latter contention is
controversial.[155]

A 2002 International Monetary Fund study assessed the national economic growth
predictions from _Consensus Forecasts_ in the 1990s. Of the 60 different
national recessions that occurred, only 2 (3%) were predicted a year in
advance.[156]

### Criticisms of assumptions

Economics has been subject to criticism that it relies on unrealistic,
unverifiable, or highly simplified assumptions, in some cases because these
assumptions simplify the proofs of desired conclusions. Examples of such
assumptions include perfect information, profit maximization and rational
choices.[157] The field of information economics includes both mathematical-
economical research and also behavioural economics, akin to studies in
behavioural psychology.[158]

Nevertheless, prominent mainstream economists such as Keynes[159] and Joskow
have observed that much of economics is conceptual rather than quantitative,
and difficult to model and formalize quantitatively. In a discussion on
oligopoly research, Paul Joskow pointed out in 1975 that in practice, serious
students of actual economies tended to use "informal models" based upon
qualitative factors specific to particular industries. Joskow had a strong
feeling that the important work in oligopoly was done through informal
observations while formal models were "trotted out _ex post_ ". He argued that
formal models were largely not important in the empirical work, either, and
that the fundamental factor behind the theory of the firm, behaviour, was
neglected.[160]

In recent years, feminist critiques of neoclassical economic models gained
prominence, leading to the formation of feminist economics.[161] Contrary to
common conceptions of economics as a positive and objective science, feminist
economists call attention to the social construction of economics[162] and
highlight the ways in which its models and methods reflect masculine
preferences. Primary criticisms focus on failures to account for: the selfish
nature of actors (homo economicus); exogenous tastes; the impossibility of
utility comparisons; the exclusion of unpaid work; and the exclusion of class
and gender considerations. Feminist economics developed to address these
concerns, and the field now includes critical examinations of many areas of
economics including paid and unpaid work, economic epistemology and history,
globalization, household economics and the care economy. In 1988, Marilyn
Waring published the book _If Women Counted_ , in which she argues that the
discipline of economics ignores women's unpaid work and the value of
nature;[163] according to Julie A. Nelson, _If Women Counted_ "showed exactly
how the unpaid work traditionally done by women has been made invisible within
national accounting systems" and "issued a wake-up call to issues of
ecological sustainability."[164] Bjørnholt and McKay argue that the financial
crisis of 2007–08 and the response to it revealed a crisis of ideas in
mainstream economics and within the economics profession, and call for a
reshaping of both the economy, economic theory and the economics profession.
They argue that such a reshaping should include new advances within feminist
economics that take as their starting point the socially responsible, sensible
and accountable subject in creating an economy and economic theories that
fully acknowledge care for each other as well as the planet.[165]

Philip Mirowski observes that:

> The imperatives of the orthodox research programme [of economic science]
leave little room for maneuver and less room for originality. ... These
mandates ... Appropriate as many mathematical techniques and metaphorical
expressions from contemporary respectable science, primarily physics as
possible. ... Preserve to the maximum extent possible the attendant
nineteenth-century overtones of "natural order" ... Deny strenuously that
neoclassical theory slavishly imitates physics. ... Above all, prevent all
rival research programmes from encroaching ... by ridiculing all external
attempts to appropriate twentieth century physics models. ... All theorizing
is [in this way] held hostage to nineteenth-century concepts of energy.[166]

In a series of peer-reviewed journal and conference papers and books published
over a period of several decades, John McMurtry has provided extensive
criticism of what he terms the "unexamined assumptions and implications [of
economics], and their consequent cost to people's lives."[167][k]

Nassim Nicholas Taleb and Michael Perelman are two additional scholars who
criticized conventional or mainstream economics. Taleb opposes most economic
theorizing, which in his view suffers acutely from the problem of overuse of
Plato's Theory of Forms, and calls for cancellation of the Nobel Memorial
Prize in Economics, saying that the damage from economic theories can be
devastating.[168] Michael Perelman provides extensive criticism of economics
and its assumptions in all his books (and especially his books published from
2000 to date), papers and interviews.

Despite these concerns, mainstream graduate programs have become increasingly
technical and mathematical.[169]

## See also

    
        * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Emblem-money.svg/28px-Emblem-money.svg.png)Business and economics portal
    

![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a8/Office-

book.svg/30px-Office-book.svg.png) |

    
        * Book: Economics
    

---|---  
* Business ethics * Economics terminology that differs from common usage * Economic ideology * Economic policy * Economic union * Free trade * List of multilateral free trade agreements * List of economics films * List of free trade agreements * Socioeconomics * Gross National Happiness * Liquidationism (economics)

### General

    
        * Glossary of economics
    * Index of economics articles
    * Outline of economics
    

## Notes

    
        1. **^** The term _economics_ is derived from _economic science_ , and the word _economic_ is perhaps shortened from _economical_ or derived from the French word _économique_ or directly from the Latin word _oeconomicus_ "of domestic economy". This in turn comes from the Ancient Greek οἰκονομικός ( _oikonomikos_ ), "practiced in the management of a household or family" and therefore "frugal, thrifty", which in turn comes from οἰκονομία ( _oikonomia_ ) "household management" which in turn comes from οἶκος ( _ _oikos__ "house") and νόμος ( _ _nomos__ , "custom" or "law").[11]
    2. **^** Compare with Nicholas Barr (2004), whose list of market failures is melded with failures of economic assumptions, which are (1) producers as price takers (i.e. presence of oligopoly or monopoly; but why is this not a product of the following?) (2) equal power of consumers (what labour lawyers call an imbalance of bargaining power) (3) complete markets (4) public goods (5) external effects (i.e. externalities?) (6) increasing returns to scale (i.e. practical monopoly) (7) perfect information (in _The Economics of the Welfare State_ (4th ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004. pp. 72–79. ISBN 978-0-19-926497-1.).
    

• Joseph E. Stiglitz (2015) classifies market failures as from failure of
competition (including natural monopoly), information asymmetries, incomplete
markets, externalities, public good situations, and macroeconomic disturbances
(in "Chapter 4: Market Failure". _Economics of the Public Sector: Fourth
International Student Edition_ (4th ed.). W. W. Norton  & Company. 2015. pp.
81–100. ISBN 978-0-393-93709-1.).

    
        3. **^** "Capital" in Smith's usage includes fixed capital and circulating capital. The latter includes wages and labour maintenance, money, and inputs from land, mines, and fisheries associated with production.[118]
    4. **^** "This science indicates the cases in which commerce is truly productive, where whatever is gained by one is lost by another, and where it is profitable to all; it also teaches us to appreciate its several processes, but simply in their results, at which it stops. Besides this knowledge, the merchant must also understand the processes of his art. He must be acquainted with the commodities in which he deals, their qualities and defects, the countries from which they are derived, their markets, the means of their transportation, the values to be given for them in exchange, and the method of keeping accounts. The same remark is applicable to the agriculturist, to the manufacturer, and to the practical man of business; to acquire a thorough knowledge of the causes and consequences of each phenomenon, the study of political economy is essentially necessary to them all; and to become expert in his particular pursuit, each one must add thereto a knowledge of its processes." (Say 1803, p. XVI) 
    5. **^** "And when we submit the definition in question to this test, it is seen to possess deficiencies which, so far from being marginal and subsidiary, amount to nothing less than a complete failure to exhibit either the scope or the significance of the most central generalisations of all."(Robbins 2007, p. 5) 
    6. **^** "The conception we have adopted may be described as analytical. It does not attempt to pick out certain kinds of behaviour, but focuses attention on a particular aspect of behaviour, the form imposed by the influence of scarcity. (Robbins 2007, p. 17) 
    7. **^** See Agent-based computational economics
    8. **^** Interest payments are considered a form of rent on credit money.
    9. **^** See Complex adaptive system and Dynamic network analysis
    10. **^** See Chomsky, Noam (14 October 2008). "Ruling the World". _Understanding Power_. Archived from the original on 14 October 2008. on Smith's emphasis on class conflict in the Wealth of Nations.
    11. **^** Please see partial list of publications, including peer-reviewed papers and books, on McMurtry's wikipedia page, as well as links to the text of several of his peer-reviewed papers and peer-reviewed secondary references analyzing and discussing his work.
    

## References

    
        1. **^** "Economics". _Oxford Living Dictionaries_. Oxford University Press.
    2. **^** "Economics". Merriam-Webster.
    3. **^** "economics". _Oxford English Dictionary_ (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
    4. **^** Krugman, Paul; Wells, Robin (2012). _Economics_ (3rd ed.). Worth Publishers. p. 2. ISBN 978-1464128738.
    5. **^** Caplin, Andrew; Schotter, Andrew, eds. (2008). _The Foundations of Positive and Normative Economics: A Handbook_. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-532831-8.
    6. **^** "Economics of Education". The World Bank. 2007.
    7. **^** Iannaccone, Laurence R. (September 1998). "Introduction to the Economics of Religion". _Journal of Economic Literature_. **36** (3): 1465–1495.
    8. **^** Nordhaus, William D. (2002). "The Economic Consequences of a War with Iraq". _War with Iraq: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives_ (PDF). Cambridge, Massachusetts: American Academy of Arts and Sciences. pp. 51–85. ISBN 978-0-87724-036-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 21 October 2007.
    9. **^** Diamond, Arthur M., Jr. (2008). "Science, economics of". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 328–334. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1491. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    10. **^** Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication (PDF) (Report). United Nations Environment Programme. 2011.
    11. **^** Harper, Douglas (February 2007). "Online Etymology Dictionary – Economy". Retrieved  27 October 2007.
    12. **^** Free, Rhona C., ed. (2010). _21st Century Economics: A Reference Handbook_. Volume 1. SAGE Publications. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4129-6142-4.
    13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Marshall, Alfred; Marshall, Mary Paley (1888) [1879]. _The Economics of Industry_. Macmillan. p. 2.
    14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jevons, William Stanley (1879). _The Theory of Political Economy_ (second ed.). Macmillan and Co. p. XIV.
    15. **^** "GDP (Official Exchange Rate)" (PDF). World Bank. 2016.
    16. **^** Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven (2008). "Economics, definition of". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 720–722. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0442. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven (Winter 2009). "Retrospectives: On the Definition of Economics". _Journal of Economic Perspectives_. **23** (1): 221–233. doi:10.1257/jep.23.1.221. JSTOR 27648302.
    18. **^** Smith, Adam (1776). _An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations_. and Book IV, as quoted in  Groenwegen, Peter (2008). "'political economy'". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _Political Economy_. _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 476–480. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1300. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    19. **^** Say, Jean Baptiste (1803). _A Treatise on Political Economy_. Grigg and Elliot.
    20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ • Carlyle, Thomas (1849). "Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question". _Fraser's Magazine_.
    

• Malthus, Thomas Robert (1798). _An Essay on the Principle of Population_.
London: J. Johnson.  
• Persky, Joseph (Autumn 1990). "Retrospectives: A Dismal Romantic". _Journal
of Economic Perspectives_. **4** (4): 165–172. doi:10.1257/jep.4.4.165. JSTOR
1942728.

    
        21. **^** Mill, John Stuart (2007) [1844]. "On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of Investigation Proper to It". _Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy_. Cosimo. ISBN 978-1-60206-978-7.
    22. **^** Marshall, Alfred (1890). _Principles of Economics_. Macmillan and Company. pp. 1–2.
    23. **^** Robbins, Lionel (2007) [1932]. _An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science_. Ludwig von Mises Institute. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-61016-039-1.
    24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Robbins (2007), p. 16.
    25. **^** Robbins (2007), pp. 4–7.
    26. **^** • Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven G. (October 2009). "Defining Economics: The Long Road to Acceptance of the Robbins Definition". _Economica_. **76** (s1): 805–820. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.2009.00789.x.
    

• Stigler, George J. (1984). "Economics—The Imperial Science?". _Scandinavian
Journal of Economics_. **86** (3): 301–313. JSTOR 3439864.

    
        27. **^** Blaug, Mark (15 September 2017). "Economics". _Encyclopædia Britannica_.
    28. **^** Becker, Gary S. (1976). _The Economic Approach to Human Behavior_. University of Chicago Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-226-04112-4.
    29. **^** • Blaug (2017), pp. 347–349
    

• Varian, Hal R. (1987). "Microeconomics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray;
Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New
Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1.
doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3086. ISBN 9780333786765.

    
        30. **^** Buchanan, James M. (1987). "Opportunity cost". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3206. ISBN 9780333786765.
    31. **^** "Opportunity Cost". _The Economist Economics A-Z_. Retrieved  3 August 2010.
    32. **^** Montani, Guido (1987). "Scarcity". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3485. ISBN 9780333786765.
    33. **^** Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), ch. 1, p. 5 (quotation) and sect. C,"The Production-Possibility Frontier", pp. 9–15; ch. 2, "Efficiency" sect.; ch. 8, sect. D, "The Concept of Efficiency.
    34. **^** • Krugman, Paul (December 1980). "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade" (PDF). _American Economic Review_. **70** (5): 950–999. JSTOR 1805774.
    

• Strange, William C. (2008). "Urban agglomeration". In Durlauf, Steven N.;
Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second
ed.). pp. 533–536. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1769. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.

    
        35. **^** • Groenewegen, Peter (2008). "Division of labour". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 517–526. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0401. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    

• Johnson, Paul M. (2005). "Specialization". _A Glossary of Political Economy
Terms_. Department of Political Science, Auburn University.  
• Yang, Xiaokai; Ng, Yew-Kwang (1993). _Specialization and Economic
Organization: A New Classical Microeconomic Framework_. North-Holland. ISBN
978-0-444-88698-9.

    
        36. **^** Cameron, Rondo E. (1993). _A Concise Economic History of the World: From Paleolithic Times to the Present_ (second ed.). Oxford University Press. pp. 25–25, 32, 276–280. ISBN 978-0-19-507445-1.
    37. **^** • Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), pp. 37, 433, 435
    

• Findlay, Ronald (2008). "Comparative advantage". In Durlauf, Steven N.;
Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second
ed.). pp. 28–33. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0274. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.  
• Kemp, Murray C. (1987). "Gains from trade". In Eatwell, John; Milgate,
Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The
New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1.
doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2613. ISBN 9780333786765.

    
        38. **^** Brody, A. (1987). "Prices and quantities". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3325. ISBN 9780333786765.
    39. **^** Baumol, William J. (28 April 2016). "Utility and Value". _Encyclopædia Britannica_.
    40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Hicks, J.R. (2001) [1939]. _Value and Capital: An Inquiry into Some Fundamental Principles of Economic Theory_ (second ed.). London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-828269-3.
    41. **^** • Freeman, Richard B. (1987). "Labour economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2907. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Taber, Christopher; Weinberg, Bruce A. (2008). "Labour economics (new
perspectives)". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 787–791.
doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0914. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.  
• Hicks, John R. (1963) [1932]. _The Theory of Wages_ (second ed.). Macmillan.

    
        42. **^** Blanchard, Olivier (2006). "Chapter 7: Putting All Markets Together: The AS–AD Model". _Macroeconomics_ (4th ed.). Prentice-Hall. ISBN 978-0-1318-6026-1.
    43. **^** Jordan, J.S. (October 1982). "The Competitive Allocation Process Is Informationally Efficient Uniquely". _Journal of Economic Theory_. **28** (1): 1–18. doi:10.1016/0022-0531(82)90088-6.
    44. **^** Coase, Ronald (1937). "The Nature of the Firm". _Economica_. **4** (16): 386–405. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x. JSTOR 2626876.
    45. **^** Schmalensee, Richard (1987). "Industrial organization". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2788. hdl:2027/uc1.$b37792. ISBN 9780333786765.
    46. **^** • "Managerial Economics". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. 5 May 2013.
    

• Hughes, Alan (1987). "Managerial capitalism". In Eatwell, John; Milgate,
Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The
New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1.
doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3017. ISBN 9780333786765.

    
        47. **^** Machina, Mark J.; Rothschild, Michael (2008). "Risk". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 190–197. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1442. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    48. **^** Wakker, Peter P. (2008). "Uncertainty". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 428–439. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1753. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    49. **^** • Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), ch. 11, "Uncertainty and Game Theory" and [end] Glossary of Terms, "Economics of information", "Game theory", and "Regulation"
    

• Camerer, Colin F. (2003). "Chapter 1: Introduction" (PDF). _Behavioral Game
Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction_. Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-1-4008-4088-5.

    
        50. **^** Aumann, R.J. (2008). "Game Theory". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.).
    51. **^** Bernanke, Ben; Gertler, Mark (February 1990). "Financial Fragility and Economic Performance". _Quarterly Journal of Economics_. **105** (1): 87–114. doi:10.2307/2937820. JSTOR 2937820.
    52. **^** From (2008). Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). :
    

• Ross, Stephen A. _Finance_.  
• Burnside, Craig; Eichenbaum, Martin; Rebelo, Sergio. _Currency Crises
Models_.  
• Kaminsky, Graciela Laura. _Currency Crises_.  
• Calomiris, Charles W. _Banking Crises_.

    
        53. **^** Akerlof, George A. (August 1970). "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism" (PDF). _Quarterly Journal of Economics_. **84** (3): 488–500. doi:10.2307/1879431. JSTOR 1879431. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2011.
    54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lippman, S.S.; McCall, J.J. (2001). "Information, Economics of". _International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences_. _International Encyclopedia of the Social& Behavioral Sciences_. Elsevier. pp. 7480–7486. doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02244-0. ISBN 9780080430768.
    55. **^** Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), ch. 11, "Uncertainty and Game Theory" and [end] Glossary of Terms, "Economics of information", "Game theory", and "Regulation"
    56. **^** From (2008). Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). :
    

• Wilson, Charles. _Adverse Selection_.  
• Kotowitz, Y. _Moral Hazard_.  
• Myerson, Roger B. _Revelation Principle_.

    
        57. **^** Laffont, J.J. (1987). "Externalities". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 263–265. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2520. ISBN 9780333786765.
    58. **^** Blaug 2017, p. 347.
    59. **^** • Kneese, Allen K.; Russell, Clifford S. (1987). "Environmental economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 159–164. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2480. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), ch. 18, "Protecting the Environment."

    
        60. **^** Musgrave, Richard A. (1987). "Public finance". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 1055–1060. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3360. ISBN 9780333786765.
    61. **^** Feldman, Allan M. (1987). "Welfare economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 889–095. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3785. ISBN 9780333786765.
    62. **^** Blaug (2017), p. 345.
    63. **^** Ng, Yew-Kwang (May 1992). "Business Confidence and Depression Prevention: A Mesoeconomic Perspective". _The American Economic Review_. **82** (2): 365–371. ISSN 0002-8282. JSTOR 2117429.
    64. **^** Howitt, Peter M. (1987). "Macroeconomics: Relations with microeconomics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 273–276. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3008. ISBN 9780333786765.
    65. **^** Blaug (2017), p. 349.
    66. **^** • Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), ch. 27, "The Process of Economic Growth"
    

• Uzawa, H. (1987). "Models of growth". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray;
Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New
Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 483–489.
doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3097. ISBN 9780333786765.

    
        67. **^** O'Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). _Economics: Principles in Action_. Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 396. ISBN 978-0-13-063085-8.
    68. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Blanchard, Olivier Jean (2008). "Neoclassical synthesis". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 896–899. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1172. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    69. **^** Mankiw, N. Gregory (May 2006). "The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer" (PDF). Harvard University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012.
    70. **^** Fischer, Stanley (2008). "New classical macroeconomics". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 17–22. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1180. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    71. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dixon, Huw David (2008). "New Keynesian macroeconomics". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 40–45. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1184. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    72. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dwivedi, D. N. (2005). _Macroeconomics: Theory and Policy_. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 978-0-07-058841-7.
    73. **^** Freeman, C. (2008). "Structural unemployment". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 64–66. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1641. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    74. **^** Dwivedi (2005), pp. 444–445.
    75. **^** Dwivedi (2005), pp. 445–446.
    76. **^** Neely, Christopher J. (2010). "Okun's Law: Output and Unemployment" (PDF). _Economic Synopses_. Number 4.
    77. **^** Francis Amasa Walker (1878). _Money_. New York: Henry Holt and Company. p. 405. Retrieved  5 November 2017.
    78. **^** Tobin, James (1992). "Money (Money as a Social Institution and Public Good)". In Newman, Peter K.; Milgate, Murray; Eatwell, John (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Finance and Money_. Volume 2. pp. 770–771. ISBN 978-1-5615-9041-4.
    79. **^** • Friedman, Milton (1987). "Quantity theory of money". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter K. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 1. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3371. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), ch. 2, "Money: The Lubricant of Exchange"
section, ch. 33, Fig. 33–3

    
        80. **^** • Anderson, James E. (2008). "International trade theory". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 516–522. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0839. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    

• Venables, A. (2001). _International Trade: Economic Integration_.
_International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences_. pp.
7843–7848. doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02259-2. ISBN 9780080430768.  
• Obstfeld, Maurice (2008). "International finance". In Durlauf, Steven N.;
Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second
ed.). pp. 439–451. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0828. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.

    
        81. **^** • Bell, Clive (1987). "Development economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **1** (first ed.). pp. 818–826. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2366. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Blaug (2017), p. 351

    
        82. **^** Heilbroner, Robert L.; Boettke, Peter J. (2007). "Economic Systems". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Archived from the original on 26 April 2008.
    83. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Fuller, Thomas (17 September 2009). "Communism and Capitalism Are Mixing in Laos". _The New York Times_.
    84. **^** Van Brabant, Jozef M. (1991). _The Planned Economies and International Economic Organizations_. Cambridge University Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-521-38350-9.
    85. **^** Debreu, Gérard (1987). "Mathematical economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp. 401–403. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3059. ISBN 9780333786765.
    86. **^** Friedman, Milton (1953). "The Methodology of Positive Economics". _Essays in Positive Economics_. University of Chicago Press. p. 10.
    87. **^** • Boland, Lawrence A. (1987). "Methodology". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **III** (first ed.). pp. 455–458. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3083. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Frey, Bruno S.; Pommerehne, Werner W.; Schneider, Friedrich; Gilbert, Guy
(December 1984). "Consensus and Dissension among Economists: An Empirical
Inquiry". _The American Economic Review_. **74** (5): 986–994. ISSN 0002-8282.
JSTOR 557.

    
        88. **^** Quirk, James (1987). "Qualitative economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **IV** (first ed.). pp. 1–3. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3369. ISBN 9780333786765.
    89. **^** Samuelson, Paul A. (1983) [1947]. _Foundations of Economic Analysis, Enlarged Edition_. Boston: Harvard University Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-674-31301-9.
    90. **^** Hashem, M. Pesaren (1987). "Econometrics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **II** (first ed.). p. 8. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2430. ISBN 9780333786765.
    91. **^** Keuzenkamp, Hugo A. (2000). _Probability, Econometrics and Truth: The Methodology of Econometrics_. Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-521-55359-9. "...in economics, controlled experiments are rare and reproducible controlled experiments even more so..."
    92. **^** Frey et al. (1984), pp. 986–994.
    93. **^** Blaug (2017), p. 247.
    94. **^** McCullough, B.D. (September 2007). "Got Replicability? The _Journal of Money, Banking and Credit_ Archive" (PDF). _Econ Journal Watch_. **4** (3): 326–337.
    95. **^** • Kennedy, Peter (2003). "21.2 The Ten Commandments of Applied Econometrics". _A Guide to Econometrics_ (fifth ed.). MIT Press. pp. 390–396. ISBN 978-0-262-61183-1.
    

• McCloskey, Deirdre N.; Ziliak, Stephen T. (March 1996). "The Standard Error
of Regressions" (PDF). _Journal of Economic Literature_. **34** (1): 97–114.  
• Hoover, Kevin D.; Siegler, Mark V. (20 March 2008). "Sound and Fury:
McCloskey and Significance Testing in Economics". _Journal of Economic
Methodology_. **15** (1): 1–37. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.533.7658.
doi:10.1080/13501780801913298.  
• McCloskey, Deirdre N.; Ziliak, Stephen T. (20 March 2008). "Signifying
nothing: reply to Hoover and Siegler". _Journal of Economic Methodology_.
**15** (1): 39–55. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.337.4058. doi:10.1080/13501780801913413.

    
        96. **^** Whaples, R. (May 2006). "The Costs of Critical Commentary in Economics Journals". _Econ Journal Watch_. **3** (2): 275–282. Archived from the original on 29 January 2008.
    97. **^** • Bastable, C.F. (2008). "Experimental methods in economics (i)". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **II** (first ed.). p. 241. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2512. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Smith, Vernon L. (2008). "Experimental methods in economics (ii)". In
Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_.
**II** (first ed.). pp. 241–242. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2513. ISBN
9780333786765.

    
        98. **^** • Fehr, Ernst; Fischbacher, Urs (23 October 2003). "The Nature of Human Altruism". _Nature_. **425** (6960): 785–791. doi:10.1038/nature02043. PMID 14574401.
    

• Sigmund, Karl; Fehr, Ernst; Nowak, Martin A. (January 2002). "The Economics
of Fair Play". _Scientific American_. **286** (1): 82–7.
doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0102-82. PMID 11799620.

    
        99. **^** Lazear, Edward P. (1 February 2000). "Economic Imperialism". _Quarterly Journal of Economics_. **115** (1): 99–146. doi:10.1162/003355300554683. JSTOR 2586936.
    100. **^** Ashenfelter, Orley (2001). "Economics: Overview, The Profession of Economics". In Smelser, N.J.; Baltes, P.B. (eds.). _International Encyclopedia of the Social& Behavioral Sciences_. **VI** (first ed.). Pergamon. p. 4159. ISBN 978-0-0804-3076-8.
    101. **^** • Friedman, David (1987). "Law and economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **III** (first ed.). p. 144. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2937. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Posner, Richard A. (2007). _Economic Analysis of Law_ (7th ed.). Aspen. ISBN
978-0-7355-6354-4.[ _page needed_ ]

    
        102. **^** Coase, Ronald (October 1960). "The Problem of Social Cost". _The Journal of Law and Economics_. **3** (1): 1–44. doi:10.1086/466560. JSTOR 724810.
    103. **^** • Groenewegen, Peter (2008). "'political economy'". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _Political Economy_. _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 476–480. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1300. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    

• Krueger, Anne O. (June 1974). "The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking
Society". _American Economic Review_. **64** (3): 91–303. JSTOR 1808883.

    
        104. **^** McCoy, Drew R. (1980). _The Elusive Republic: Political Economy in Jeffersonian America_. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-1416-1.
    105. **^** • Cleveland, Cutler J.; Ruth, Matthius (September 1997). "When, where, and by how much do biophysical limits constrain the economic process? A survey of Georgescu-Roegen's contribution to ecological economics". _Ecological Economics_. **22** (3): 203–223. doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(97)00079-7.
    

• Daly, Herman E. (June 1995). "On Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen's Contributions
to Economics: An Obituary essay". _Ecological Economics_. **13** (3): 149–154.
doi:10.1016/0921-8009(95)00011-W.  
• Mayumi, Kozo (August 1995). "Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1906–1994): an
admirable epistemologist". _Structural Change and Economic Dynamics_. **6**
(3): 115–120. doi:10.1016/0954-349X(95)00014-E.  
• Mayumi, Kozo; Gowdy, John M., eds. (1999). _Bioeconomics and Sustainability:
Essays in Honor of Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen_. Edward Elgar Publishering. ISBN
978-1-85898-667-8.  
• Mayumi, Kozo (2001). _The Origins of Ecological Economics: The Bioeconomics
of Georgescu-Roegen_. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-23523-5.

    
        106. **^** Swedberg, Richard (2003). _Principles of Economic Sociology_. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-07439-9.
    107. **^** • Rothbard, Murray N. (1995). _Economic Thought Before Adam Smith: Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought_. **I**. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-945466-48-2.
    

• Gordan, Barry J. (1975). _Economic analysis before Adam Smith: Hesiod to
Lessius_. MacMillan. p. 3. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-02116-1. ISBN
978-1-349-02116-1.  
• Brockway, George P. (2001). _The End of Economic Man: An Introduction to
Humanistic Economics_ (fourth ed.). p. 128. ISBN 978-0-393-05039-4.

    
        108. **^** Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1954). _History of Economic Analysis_. Routledge. pp. 97–115. ISBN 978-0-415-10888-1.
    109. **^** • "Mercantilism". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. 26 August 2016.
    

• Blaug (2017), p. 343

    
        110. **^** • "Physiocrat". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. 7 March 2014.
    

• Blaug, Mark (1997). _Economic Theory in Retrospect_ (fifth ed.). Cambridge
University Press. pp. 24–29, 82–84. ISBN 978-0-521-57701-4.

    
        111. **^** Hunt, E. K. (2002). _History of Economic Thought: A Critical Perspective_. M.E. Sharpe. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-7656-0606-8.
    112. **^** Skousen, Mark (2001). _The Making of Modern Economics: The Lives and Ideas of the Great Thinkers_. M.E. Sharpe. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-7656-0479-8.
    113. **^** Blaug (2017), p. 343.
    114. **^** Deardorff, Alan V. (2016). "Division of labor". _Deardorffs' Glossary of International Economics_. University of Michigan.
    115. **^** Stigler, George J. (June 1951). "The Division of Labor Is Limited by the Extent of the Market" (PDF). _Journal of Political Economy_. **59** (3): 185–193. doi:10.1086/257075. JSTOR 1826433.
    116. **^** Stigler, George J. (December 1976). "The Successes and Failures of Professor Smith". _Journal of Political Economy_. **84** (6): 1199–1213. doi:10.1086/260508. JSTOR 1831274. Also published as The Successes and Failures of Professor Smith (PDF). _Selected Papers, No. 50_ (Report). Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
    117. **^** Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), p. 30, ch. 2, "Markets and Government in a Modern Economy", The Invisible Hand.
    118. **^** Smith, Adam (1776). _The Wealth of Nations_. W. Strahan and T. Cadell Publishers. Bk. II: ch. 1, 2, and 5.
    119. **^** Smith (1776), Bk. IV: Of Systems of political Œconomy, ch. II, "Of Restraints upon the Importation from Foreign Countries of such Goods as can be Produced at Home", IV.2.3 para. 3–5 and 8–9.
    120. **^** Smith (1776), Bk. IV: Of Systems of political Œconomy, ch. II, "Of Restraints upon the Importation from Foreign Countries of such Goods as can be Produced at Home", para. 9.
    121. **^** Malthus, Thomas (1798). _An Essay on the Principle of Population_. J. Johson Publisher.
    122. **^** Simon, Julian Lincoln (1981). _The Ultimate Resource_. Princeton University Press. ; and Simon, Julian Lincoln (1996). _The Ultimate Resource 2_. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00381-8.
    123. **^** Ricardo, David (1817). _On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation_. John Murray.
    124. **^** Findlay, Ronald (2008). "Comparative advantage". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 28–33. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0274. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    125. **^** Mill, John Stuart (1848). _Principles of Political Economy_. John W. Parker Publisher.
    126. **^** Smith (1776), Bk. 1, Ch. 5, 6.
    127. **^** • Roemer, J.E. (1987). "Marxian value analysis". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). p. 383. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3052. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Mandel, Ernest (1987). "Marx, Karl Heinrich (1818–1883)". In Eatwell, John;
Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_ (first ed.). pp.
372, 376. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3051. ISBN 9780333786765.

    
        128. **^** Backhouse, Roger E.; Medema, Steven G. (10 December 2007). _Defining Economics: the Long Road to Acceptance of the Robbins Definition_ (PDF). _Lionel Robbins's essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science, 75th anniversary conference proceedings_. pp. 209–230. also published in Backhouse, Roger E; Medema, Steve G (October 2009). "Defining Economics: The Long Road to Acceptance of the Robbins Definition". _Economica_. **76** (Supplement 1): 805–820. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.2009.00789.x. JSTOR 40268907.
    129. **^** Backhouse & Medema (2007), p. 223: "There remained division over whether economics was defined by a method or a subject matter but both sides in that debate could increasingly accept some version of the Robbins definition."
    130. **^** Clark, Barry (1998). _Political Economy: A Comparative Approach_ (second ed.). Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-95869-5.
    131. **^** Campos, Antonietta (1987). "Marginalist economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **III** (first ed.). p. 320. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3031. ISBN 9780333786765.
    132. **^** Black, R.D. Collison (2008). "Utility". In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_ (second ed.). pp. 577–581. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1781. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.
    133. **^** Hicks, J.R. (April 1937). "Mr. Keynes and the "Classics": A Suggested Interpretation". _Econometrica_. **5** (2): 147–159. doi:10.2307/1907242. JSTOR 1907242.
    134. **^** Tesfatsion, Leigh (Winter 2002). "Agent-Based Computational Economics: Growing Economies from the Bottom Up" (PDF). _Artificial Life_. **8** (1): 55–82. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.194.4605. doi:10.1162/106454602753694765. PMID 12020421.
    135. **^** • Keynes, John Maynard (1936). _The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money_. London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-57392-139-8.
    

• Blaug (2017), p. 347

    
        136. **^** • Tarshis, L. (1987). "Keynesian Revolution". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **III** (first ed.). pp. 47–50. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.2888. ISBN 9780333786765.
    

• Samuelson & Nordhaus (2004), p. 5  
• Blaug (2017), p. 346

    
        137. **^** Harcourt, G.C. (1987). "Post-Keynesian economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_. _The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics_. **III** (first ed.). pp. 47–50. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.3307. ISBN 9780333786765.
    138. **^** Bernanke, Ben (8 November 2002). "Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke". The Federal Reserve Board.
    139. **^** Friedman, Milton (13 September 1970). "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits". _The New York Times Magazine_.
    140. **^** Greenwolde, Nathanial (23 October 2009). "New School of Thought Brings Energy to 'the Dismal Science'". _The New York Times_.
    141. **^** Mankiw, N. Gregory (2014). _Principles of Microeconomics_ (7th ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-305-15605-0.
    142. **^** Alston, Richard M.; Kearl, J.R.; Vaughan, Michael B. (May 1992). "Is There a Consensus Among Economists in the 1990's?" (PDF). _The American Economic Review_. **82** (2): 203–209. JSTOR 2117401.
    143. **^** Fuller, Dan; Geide-Stevenson, Doris (Fall 2003). "Consensus Among Economists: Revisited". _The Journal of Economic Education_. **34** (4): 369–387. doi:10.1080/00220480309595230. JSTOR 30042564.
    144. **^** Whaples, Robert (November 2006). "Do Economists Agree on Anything? Yes!" (PDF). _The Economists' Voice_. **3** (9): 1–6. doi:10.2202/1553-3832.1156.
    145. **^** Whaples, Robert (September 2009). "The Policy Views of American Economic Association Members: The Results of a New Survey". _Econ Journal Watch_. **6** (3): 337–348.
    146. **^** Routh, Guy (1989). _The Origin of Economic Ideas_ (second ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. ISBN 978-1-349-20169-3.
    147. **^** Ledwith, Sara; Ciancio, Antonella (3 July 2012). "Special Report: Crisis Forces "Dismal Science" to get Real". Reuters.
    148. **^** Hellsten, Sirkku K. (2009). "Ethics, Rhetoric and Politics of Post-conflict Reconstruction How Can the Concept of Social Contract Help Us in Understanding How to Make Peace Work?" (PDF). In Addison, Tony; Brück, Tilman (eds.). _Making Peace Work_. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 75–100. doi:10.1057/9780230595194. ISBN 978-0-230-59519-4.
    149. **^** Hahn, Dan F. (2003). _Political Communication: Rhetoric, Government, and Citizens_ (second ed.). Strata. ISBN 978-1-891136-08-5.
    150. **^** Whaples (2009).
    151. **^** Daly, Herman E. (1991). "The Catechism of Growth Fallacies". _Steady-State Economics_ (second ed.). Island Press. pp. 98–128. ISBN 978-1-59726-872-1.
    152. **^** Scholvinck, Johan. "Making the Case for the Integration of Social and Economic Policy". _UN Division for Social Policy and Development_. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007.
    153. **^** • Hayo, Bernd; Hefeker, Carsten (March 2001). "Do We Really Need Central Bank Independence? A Critical Re-examination". _WWZ-Discussion Paper 01/03_.
    

• Mangano, Gabriel (1 July 1998). "Measuring Central Bank Independence: A Tale
of Subjectivity and of Its Consequences". _Oxford Economic Papers_. **50**
(3): 468–492. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.oep.a028657.  
• Heinemann, Friedrich; Ullrich, Katrin (3 November 2005). "Does it Pay to
Watch Central Bankers' Lips? The Information Content of ECB Wording" (PDF).
_ZEW - Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 05-070_.
doi:10.2139/ssrn.832905.  
• Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1998). "Policy Rules and Targets: Framing the Central
Banker's Problem" (PDF). _FRBNY Economic Policy Review_. **4** (2): 1–14.

    
        154. **^** Ziliak, Stephen T.; McCloskey, Deirdre N. (April 2004). "Size Matters: The Standard Error of Regressions in the _American Economic Review_ " (PDF). _Econ Journal Watch_. **1** (2): 331–358.
    155. **^** Hoover & Siegler (2008).
    156. **^** Loungani, Prakash (April 2000). "How Accurate Are Private Sector Forecasts? Cross-Country Evidence from Consensus Forecasts of Output Growth" (PDF). _IMF Working Paper_.
    157. **^** Rappaport, Steven (28 July 1996). "Abstraction and Unrealistic Assumptions in Economics". _Journal of Economic Methodology_. **3** (2): 215–236. doi:10.1080/13501789600000016.
    

• Rappaport, Steven (1998). "Chapter 6: Economic Models". _Models and Reality
in Economics_. Edward Elgar. ISBN 978-1-85898-575-6.  
• Friedman (1953), pp. 14–15, 22, 31  
• Boland, Lawrence A. (2008). "Assumptions controversy". In Durlauf, Steven
N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.). _The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics_
(second ed.). pp. 267–270. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0067. ISBN
978-0-333-78676-5.

    
        158. **^** Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (December 2007). "Evolutionary and Institutional Economics as the New Mainstream". _Evolutionary and Institutional Economics Review_. **4** (1): 7–25. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.454.8088. doi:10.14441/eier.4.7.
    159. **^** Keynes, J. M. (September 1924). "Alfred Marshall 1842–1924". _The Economic Journal_. **34** (135): 311–72. doi:10.2307/2222645. JSTOR 2222645.
    160. **^** Joskow, Paul (May 1975). "Firm Decision-making Policy and Oligopoly Theory". _The American Economic Review_. **65** (2, Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty–seventh Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association): 270–279, esp. 271. JSTOR 1818864.
    161. **^** England, Paula (1993). "The Separative Self: Androcentric Bias in Neoclassical Assumptions". In Ferber, Marianne A.; Nelson, Julie A. (eds.). _Beyond Economic Man: Feminist Theory and Economics_. University of Chicago Press. pp. 37–53. ISBN 978-0-226-24201-9.
    162. **^** Ferber, Marianne A.; Nelson, Julie A. (2003). "Introduction: _Beyond Economic Man_ : Ten Years Later". _Feminist Economics Today: Beyond Economic Man_. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-24207-1.
    163. **^** Waring, Marilyn (1988). _If Women Counted_. Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0-06-250933-8.
    164. **^** Nelson, Julie A. (2014). "Foreword". In Bjørnholt, Margunn; McKay, Ailsa (eds.). _Counting on Marilyn Waring: New Advances in Feminist Economics_. Demeter Press. ISBN 978-1-9273-3527-7.
    165. **^** Bjørnholt, Margunn; McKay, Ailsa (2014). "Advances in Feminist Economics in Times of Economic Crisis" (PDF). In Bjørnholt, Margunn; McKay, Ailsa (eds.). _Counting on Marilyn Waring: New Advances in Feminist Economics_. Demeter Press. pp. 7–20. ISBN 978-1-9273-3527-7.
    166. **^** Mirowski, Philip (1989). _More Heat Than Light: Economics as Social Physics, Physics as Nature's Economics_. Cambridge University Press. pp. 377–378. ISBN 978-0-521-42689-3.
    167. **^** McMurtry, John (1999). _The Cancer Stage of Capitalism_. Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-1347-4.
    168. **^** Cox, Adam (28 September 2010). "Blame Nobel for crisis, says author of 'Black Swan'". Reuters.
    

• Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (23 October 2007). "The Pseudo-Science Hurting
Markets". _Financial Times_.

    
        169. **^** • Johansson, D. (2004). "Economics without Entrepreneurship or Institutions: A Vocabulary Analysis of Graduate Textbooks" (PDF). _Econ Journal Watch_. **1** (3): 515–538. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 June 2008.
    

• Sutter, Daniel; Pjesky, Rex (May 2007). "Where Would Adam Smith Publish
Today? The Near Absence of Math-free Research in Top Journals" (PDF). _Econ
Journal Watch_. **4** (2): 230–240.

## Further reading

    
        * Anderson, David A. (2019) _Survey of Economics_. New York: Worth.[1]ISBN 978-1-4292-5956-9
    * Grinin, L., Korotayev, A. and Tausch A. (2016) _Economic Cycles, Crises, and the Global Periphery_. Springer International Publishing, Heidelberg, New York, Dordrecht, London, ISBN 978-3-319-17780-9; https://www.springer.com/de/book/9783319412603
    * McCann, Charles Robert, Jr., 2003. _The Elgar Dictionary of Economic Quotations_ , Edward Elgar. Preview.
    * Jean Baptiste Say (1821). _A Treatise on Political Economy: Or The Production, Distribution, and Consumption of Wealth_. **one**. Wells and Lilly.
    * Jean Baptiste Say (1821). _A Treatise on Political Economy; Or The Production, Distribution, and Consumption of Wealth_. **two**. Wells and Lilly.
    * Tausch, Arno (2015). _The political algebra of global value change. General models and implications for the Muslim world. With Almas Heshmati and Hichem Karoui_ (1st ed.). Nova Science Publishers, New York. ISBN 978-1-62948-899-8.
    

## External links

**Economics** at Wikipedia's sister projects

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/27px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png)Definitions from Wiktionary
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media from Wikimedia Commons
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/27px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png)News from Wikinews
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/23px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations from Wikiquote
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Texts from Wikisource
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikibooks-logo.svg/27px-Wikibooks-logo.svg.png)Textbooks from Wikibooks
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Wikiversity-logo-en.svg/27px-Wikiversity-logo-en.svg.png)Resources from Wikiversity
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Wikidata-logo.svg/27px-Wikidata-logo.svg.png)Data from Wikidata
    

Library resources about  
**Economics**

* * *

* * *
    
        * Resources in your library
    

### General information

    
        * Economics at Curlie
    * Economic journals on the web
    * Economics at _Encyclopædia Britannica_
    * Intute: Economics: Internet directory of UK universities
    * Research Papers in Economics (RePEc)
    * Resources For Economists: American Economic Association-sponsored guide to 2,000+ Internet resources from "Data" to "Neat Stuff", updated quarterly.
    

### Institutions and organizations

    
        * Economics Departments, Institutes and Research Centers in the World
    * Organization For Co-operation and Economic Development (OECD) Statistics
    * United Nations Statistics Division
    * World Bank Data
    

### Study resources

    
        * Anderson, David; Ray, Margaret (2019). _Krugman's Economics for the AP Course_ (3rd ed.). New York: BFW. ISBN 978-1-319-11327-8.
    * McConnell, Campbell R.; et al. (2009). _Economics. Principles, Problems and Policies_ (PDF) (18th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 9780073375694. Archived from the original (PDF contains full textbook) on 6 October 2016.
    * Economics at About.com
    * Economics textbooks on Wikibooks
    * MERLOT Learning Materials: Economics: US-based database of learning materials
    * Online Learning and Teaching Materials UK Economics Network's database of text, slides, glossaries and other resources
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Economics

* * *
    
        * Economic theory
    * Political economy
    * Applied economics
    

Methodology|

    
        * Economic model
    * Economic systems
    * Microfoundations
    * Mathematical economics
    * Econometrics
    * Computational economics
    * Experimental economics
    * Publications
    

Microeconomics|

    
        * Aggregation problem
    * Budget set
    * Consumer choice
    * Convexity
    * Cost
      * Average
      * Marginal
      * Opportunity
      * Social
      * Sunk
      * Transaction
    * Cost–benefit analysis
    * Deadweight loss
    * Distribution
    * Economies of scale
    * Economies of scope
    * Elasticity
    * Equilibrium
      * General
    * Externality
    * Firm
    * Goods and services
      * Goods
      * Service
    * Indifference curve
    * Interest
    * Intertemporal choice
    * Market
    * Market failure
    * Market structure
      * Competition
        * Monopolistic
        * Perfect
      * Monopoly
        * Bilateral
      * Monopsony
      * Oligopoly
      * Oligopsony
    * Non-convexity
    * Pareto efficiency
    * Preference
    * Price
    * Production set
    * Profit
    * Public good
    * Rate of profit
    * Rationing
    * Rent
    * Returns to scale
    * Risk aversion
    * Scarcity
    * Shortage
    * Surplus
    * Social choice
    * Supply and demand
    * Trade
    * Uncertainty
    * Utility
      * Expected
      * Marginal
    * Value
    * Wage
    * Publications
    

Macroeconomics|

    
        * Aggregate demand
    * Balance of payments
    * Business cycle
    * Capacity utilization
    * Capital flight
    * Central bank
    * Consumer confidence
    * Currency
    * Deflation
    * Demand for money
    * Demand shock
    * Depression
      * Great
    * DSGE
    * Effective demand
    * Expectations 
      * Adaptive
      * Rational
    * Fiscal policy
    * _General Theory_ of Keynes
    * Growth
    * Indicators
    * Inflation
      * Hyperinflation
    * Interest rate
    * Investment
    * IS–LM model
    * Measures of national income and output
    * Monetary policy
    * Money
    * Money supply
    * NAIRU
    * National accounts
    * Price level
    * PPP
    * Recession
    * Saving
    * Shrinkflation
    * Stagflation
    * Supply shock
    * Unemployment
    * Publications
    

Mathematical  
economics|

    
        * Operations research
    * Econometrics
    * Decision theory
    * Game theory
    * Mechanism design
    * Input–output model
    * Mathematical finance
    

Applied fields|

    
        * Agricultural
    * Business
    * Demographic
    * Development
    * Economic geography
    * Economic history
    * Education
    * Industrial Engineering
    * Civil Engineering
    * Environmental
    * Financial
    * Health
    * Industrial organization
    * International
    * Knowledge
    * Labour
    * Law and economics
    * Monetary
    * Natural resource
    * Economic planning
    * Economic policy
    * Public economics
    * Public choice
    * Regional
    * Service
    * Socioeconomics
    * Economic sociology
    * Economic statistics
    * Transportation
    * Urban
    * Welfare
    

Schools (history)  
of economic thought

|

    
        * Ancient economic thought
    * Anarchist
      * Mutualism
    * Austrian
    * Behavioral
    * Buddhist
    * Chicago
    * Classical
    * Disequilibrium
    * Ecological
    * Evolutionary
    * Feminist
    * Georgism
    * Heterodox
    * Historical
    * Institutional
    * Keynesian
      * Neo
      * New
      * Post
    * Mainstream
    * Malthusianism
    * Marxian
      * Neo
    * Mercantilism
    * Modern Monetary Theory
    * Neoclassical
      * Lausanne
      * Marginalism
    * New classical
      * Real business-cycle theory
    * New institutional
    * Physiocracy
    * Socialist
    * Stockholm
    * Supply-side
    * Thermoeconomics
    

Notable economists  
and thinkers  
within economics

|

    
        * François Quesnay
    * Adam Smith
    * David Ricardo
    * Thomas Robert Malthus
    * Johann Heinrich von Thünen
    * Friedrich List
    * Hermann Heinrich Gossen
    * Jules Dupuit
    * Antoine Augustin Cournot
    * John Stuart Mill
    * Karl Marx
    * William Stanley Jevons
    * Henry George
    * Léon Walras
    * Alfred Marshall
    * Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
    * Vilfredo Pareto
    * Friedrich von Wieser
    * John Bates Clark
    * Thorstein Veblen
    * John R. Commons
    * Irving Fisher
    * Wesley Clair Mitchell
    * John Maynard Keynes
    * Joseph Schumpeter
    * Arthur Cecil Pigou
    * John von Neumann
    * Alvin Hansen
    * Jacob Viner
    * Edward Chamberlin
    * Ragnar Frisch
    * Harold Hotelling
    * Michał Kalecki
    * Oskar R. Lange
    * Jacob Marschak
    * Gunnar Myrdal
    * Abba P. Lerner
    * Roy Harrod
    * Piero Sraffa
    * Simon Kuznets
    * Joan Robinson
    * E. F. Schumacher
    * Friedrich Hayek
    * John Hicks
    * Tjalling Koopmans
    * Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen
    * Wassily Leontief
    * John Kenneth Galbraith
    * Hyman Minsky
    * Herbert A. Simon
    * Milton Friedman
    * Paul Samuelson
    * Kenneth Arrow
    * Gary Becker
    * Elinor Ostrom
    * Robert Solow
    * Amartya Sen
    * Robert Lucas Jr.
    * Joseph Stiglitz
    * Richard Thaler
    * Paul Krugman
    * Thomas Piketty
    * _more_
    

International  
organizations|

    
        * Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
    * Economic Cooperation Organization
    * European Free Trade Association
    * International Monetary Fund
    * Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
    * World Bank
    * World Trade Organization
    
    * Category
    * Index
    * Lists
    * Outline
    * Publications
    

Business and economics portal

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Social sciences

* * *

Primary|

    
        * Anthropology (archaeology
    * biological
    * cultural
    * linguistics
    * social)
    * Economics (microeconomics
    * macroeconomics
    * econometrics
    * mathematical)
    * Geography (human
    * integrative)
    * History (cultural
    * economic
    * military
    * political
    * social)
    * Law (jurisprudence
    * legal history
    * legal systems
    * public law
    * private law)
    * Political science (international relations
    * comparative
    * theory
    * public policy)
    * Psychology (abnormal
    * biological
    * cognitive
    * developmental
    * personality
    * social)
    * Sociology (criminology
    * demography
    * internet
    * rural
    * urban)
    

Interdisciplinary|

    
        * Administration (business
    * public)
    * Anthrozoology
    * Area studies
    * Business studies
    * Cognitive science
    * Communication studies
    * Community studies
    * Cultural studies
    * Development studies
    * Education
    * Environmental (social science
    * studies)
    * Food studies
    * Gender studies
    * Global studies
    * History of technology
    * Human ecology
    * Information science
    * International studies
    * Linguistics
    * Media studies
    * Philosophy of science (economics
    * history
    * psychology
    * social science)
    * Planning (land use
    * regional
    * urban)
    * Political ecology
    * Political economy
    * Public health
    * Regional science
    * Science and technology studies
    * Science studies (historical)
    * Social work
    * Vegan studies
    

Other categorizations|

    
        * Humanities
    * _Geisteswissenschaft_
    * Human science
    
    * Index
    * Journals
    * Outline
    * Wikiversity
    

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

    
        * GND: 4066528-8
    * LCCN: sh85040850
    * NARA: 10640258
    * NDL: 00565428
    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economics&oldid=898269188"

Categories:

    
        * Economics
    * Economic theories
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text
    * CS1: long volume value
    * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2017
    * Articles with short description
    * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
    * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    * Use British English Oxford spelling from August 2016
    * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2017
    * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2013
    * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
    * All articles with failed verification
    * Articles with failed verification from November 2011
    * Articles needing more viewpoints from February 2017
    * Articles with Curlie links
    * Use dmy dates from June 2018
    * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * View source
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikimedia Commons
    * Wikiquote
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * Afrikaans
    * Alemannisch
    * አማርኛ
    * العربية
    * Aragonés
    * ܐܪܡܝܐ
    * অসমীয়া
    * Asturianu
    * Azərbaycanca
    * Bamanankan
    * বাংলা
    * Bahasa Banjar
    * Bân-lâm-gú
    * Basa Banyumasan
    * Башҡортса
    * Беларуская
    * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    * भोजपुरी
    * Български
    * བོད་ཡིག
    * Bosanski
    * Brezhoneg
    * Буряад
    * Català
    * Чӑвашла
    * Cebuano
    * Čeština
    * Chamoru
    * ChiShona
    * Corsu
    * Cymraeg
    * Dansk
    * Deutsch
    * Eesti
    * Ελληνικά
    * Español
    * Esperanto
    * Estremeñu
    * Euskara
    * فارسی
    * Fiji Hindi
    * Føroyskt
    * Français
    * Frysk
    * Furlan
    * Gaeilge
    * Gaelg
    * Gàidhlig
    * Galego
    * 贛語
    * गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni
    * 客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
    * 한국어
    * Հայերեն
    * हिन्दी
    * Hrvatski
    * Ido
    * Ilokano
    * Bahasa Indonesia
    * Interlingua
    * Interlingue
    * Íslenska
    * Italiano
    * עברית
    * Jawa
    * Kabɩyɛ
    * ಕನ್ನಡ
    * ქართული
    * Kaszëbsczi
    * Қазақша
    * Kiswahili
    * Kreyòl ayisyen
    * Kurdî
    * Кыргызча
    * Ladino
    * ລາວ
    * Latina
    * Latviešu
    * Lëtzebuergesch
    * Lietuvių
    * Ligure
    * Limburgs
    * Lingua Franca Nova
    * La .lojban.
    * Magyar
    * मैथिली
    * Македонски
    * Malagasy
    * മലയാളം
    * मराठी
    * მარგალური
    * Bahasa Melayu
    * Mirandés
    * Монгол
    * မြန်မာဘာသာ
    * Nederlands
    * Nedersaksies
    * नेपाली
    * नेपाल भाषा
    * 日本語
    * Norsk
    * Norsk nynorsk
    * Nouormand
    * Novial
    * Occitan
    * Oromoo
    * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    * پنجابی
    * پښتو
    * Patois
    * ភាសាខ្មែរ
    * Piemontèis
    * Tok Pisin
    * Polski
    * Português
    * Qaraqalpaqsha
    * Română
    * Runa Simi
    * Русиньскый
    * Русский
    * Саха тыла
    * ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
    * Gagana Samoa
    * संस्कृतम्
    * Sardu
    * Scots
    * Seeltersk
    * Sesotho sa Leboa
    * Shqip
    * Sicilianu
    * සිංහල
    * Simple English
    * Slovenčina
    * Slovenščina
    * Soomaaliga
    * کوردی
    * Српски / srpski
    * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    * Basa Sunda
    * Suomi
    * Svenska
    * Tagalog
    * தமிழ்
    * Татарча/tatarça
    * తెలుగు
    * ไทย
    * Тоҷикӣ
    * ತುಳು
    * Türkçe
    * Thuɔŋjäŋ
    * Українська
    * اردو
    * ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
    * Vèneto
    * Vepsän kel’
    * Tiếng Việt
    * Volapük
    * Võro
    * Walon
    * 文言
    * Winaray
    * Wolof
    * 吴语
    * Xitsonga
    * ייִדיש
    * 粵語
    * Zazaki
    * Zeêuws
    * Žemaitėška
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 22 May 2019, at 14:10 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

