

Wednesday, 12th June 2019

    
        * About
    * Disclaimer
    * Home
    * Privacy
    

![](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/LogoSmall.png)

__

    
        * Home
    * About
    * Healthcare
    * Providers
    * Reform
    

home **Healthcare, Reform** Healthcare Reform: What It Is and Why We Need It

# Healthcare Reform: What It Is and Why We Need It

__ByNikolai __Posted inHealthcare Reform

__Posted on 26th September 201722nd August 2018

![reform2 - Healthcare Reform: What It Is and Why We Need

It](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/reform2.jpg)

Healthcare reform is a big topic in America. It has been said that our
healthcare system is broken and that it does not serve the needs of the
population, especially not the lower classes. Many presidents have tried to
implement changes and make things better. Some have succeeded and others
haven't. Regardless, the system is still not what it could or should be. The
Affordable Care Act made some good changes in 2010, but several problems still
remain.

## What is healthcare reform?

Healthcare reform basically refers to a process of changing the system and how
it works to make it better for all Americans. It has many faults and problems
as it is at the moment and reform calls for changes to address them.
Healthcare reform is not something that can happen overnight or that will be
easy. The US healthcare system is controlled by private companies and not the
government, so an all over change will be challenging.

## Why do we need healthcare reform?

The reasons why we need healthcare reform in the United States is threefold.
The first big problem is the quality of healthcare and the costs. The second
problem is the accessibility of healthcare services. The third problem is bad
practices within the healthcare system.

### 1. Healthcare Quality and Costs

First of all, healthcare services can always improve. There is always
something that can be done better or more efficiently. Reform will improve the
delivery and quality of healthcare services. It will find new ways to improve
the service delivery and to improve the quality without necessarily raising
the costs. It will pay more attention to those with chronic illnesses. It will
promote better integration between different healthcare providers.

Part of improving the quality of the service is the benefits that are
included. The Affordable Care Act changed this aspect of the system by stating
that insurance companies have to give their clients essential medical
benefits. This means that the insurance must cover basics like dental care,
physician appointments, paediatrician, etc.

The costs of healthcare in America is one of the biggest issues. The costs are
so high that most Americans cannot afford to buy insurance or to pay the bills
themselves. This means that many people who really need medical attention and
whose lives would be much improved by access to good healthcare, never get it.
They wait until there is a problem that can no longer be ignored or they just
wait to die. Reform needs to address the costs and lower the fees that
Americans are currently required to pay for decent healthcare services.

![reform - Healthcare Reform: What It Is and Why We Need

It](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/reform.jpg)

### 2. Healthcare Accessibility

For a very long time, people who did not receive health insurance through
their job could not readily get healthcare. The reasons for this are because
of the cost and lack of knowledge. There are many sharks out there and if you
don't know where to find proper and legitimate healthcare insurance, you get
scammed and lose a lot of money. If your job didn't offer insurance, you
probably couldn't afford to buy it yourself or paying for your healthcare
services out-of-pocket.

Reform would make it possible for people to buy health insurance themselves at
affordable prices. It will also put in place mechanism whereby people who
don't know about healthcare insurance companies can learn about them and know
which companies are legitimate and which are not.

One last point under this heading is that reform could help small businesses
help their employees. Most small businesses do not make enough money to offer
their employees healthcare coverage. Reform could address this issue and find
a way for small businesses to be able to help their employees have access to
good quality and affordable healthcare.

### 3. Healthcare System Practices

It often happens that a healthcare insurance company refuses to give someone
coverage if they have a pre-existing condition. This means that if you have
already been diagnosed with diabetes, a healthcare insurance company will
likely not allow you to buy insurance. If they do allow you to buy insurance,
you will be paying much higher rates than anyone else. So, reform is needed to
address this issue.

Cost and accessibility were addressed in the Affordable Care Act in 2010.
Things have definitely improved since then. However, we are definitely not
where we want to be yet.

**Reform is needed on a continuous basis.** The world changes constantly and
so do the needs of the people. The way healthcare services are provided must
be adapted regularly to move with the change in the world. It is also
important that healthcare providers get proper and continuous training. Reform
can put in place better training requirements and make room for continuous
learning and better-qualified healthcare professionals.

**If you still wonder what the big deal is, consider this.** If you are
diagnosed with cancer, will you be able to get health insurance at affordable
prices? Will you be able to go to any doctor you want and have him handle all
your healthcare needs? Will your job cover your medical expenses? Chances are,
you answered 'no' to all of these questions and that is why healthcare reform
is needed. We need a change in the healthcare system that is not currently
working to keep us healthy but to make money or screw the next clinic or
doctor.

### Free Information

![](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/banner1.jpg)

### Follow Me

    
        * twitter
    * pinterest
    * ello
    * instagram
    * medium
    * tumblr
    * wordpress
    

### Recent Posts

    
        * ![Warning Signs of Gambling Addiction](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Gambling-Problems-45x45.png)
    

### Warning Signs of Gambling Addiction

31st December 2018

    
        * ![6 Benefits of Living a Healthy Life and Felling Good](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/healthy1-45x45.jpg)
    

### 6 Benefits of Living a Healthy Life and Felling Good

25th April 2018

    
        * ![Aims of Healthcare Reform and How the Changes Affects You](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/doctor1-45x45.jpg)
    

### Aims of Healthcare Reform and How the Changes Affects You

27th March 2018

    
        * ![Advice for Choosing the Right Healthcare Team](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/bn1-45x45.jpg)
    

### Advice for Choosing the Right Healthcare Team

27th February 2018

    
        * ![Responsible Medicine Use and Medicine Safety Tips](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/mm1-45x45.jpg)
    

### Responsible Medicine Use and Medicine Safety Tips

29th January 2018

    
        * ![Chronic Disease: How to Live Without Missing a Beat](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/jj2-45x45.jpg)
    

### Chronic Disease: How to Live Without Missing a Beat

22nd December 2017

    
        * ![Health 101: How to Stay Healthy All Year Long](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/water-45x45.jpg)
    

### Health 101: How to Stay Healthy All Year Long

28th November 2017

    
        * ![4 Types of Healthcare Insurance and How It Works](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/ff1-45x45.jpg)
    

### 4 Types of Healthcare Insurance and How It Works

24th October 2017

    
        * ![Healthcare Reform: What It Is and Why We Need It](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/reform2-45x45.jpg)
    

### Healthcare Reform: What It Is and Why We Need It

26th September 2017

    
        * ![6 Different Types of Healthcare Providers and What They Do](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/team-45x45.jpg)
    

### 6 Different Types of Healthcare Providers and What They Do

28th August 2017

### Advertisement

![](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/banner2.jpg)

### About NIHP

![](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/whitelogo.png)

The National Institute of Health Policy brings you all the news and advice
regarding healthcare in the United States and healthcare reform information.
We help you put your health first

### Recent Posts

    
        * ![Warning Signs of Gambling Addiction](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Gambling-Problems-25x25.png)
    

### Warning Signs of Gambling Addiction

31st December 2018

    
        * ![6 Benefits of Living a Healthy Life and Felling Good](https://www.nihp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/healthy1-25x25.jpg)
    

### 6 Benefits of Living a Healthy Life and Felling Good

25th April 2018

### Information

2900 Tavern Place, New Martinsville, WV 26155

**Email:** [email protected]

**Contact:** 304-225-8341

2017 Copyright â€¢ National Institute of Health Policy

Disclaimer | Privacy Policy

By continuing to use the site, you agree to the use of cookies. more
information Accept

The cookie settings on this website are set to "allow cookies" to give you the
best browsing experience possible. If you continue to use this website without
changing your cookie settings or you click "Accept" below then you are
consenting to this.

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

