

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Healthcare and Medicine in the United States of America

Health Insurance

The United States of America

Medicine and Healthcare

# Is it true that America has the best healthcare system in the world?

UpdateCancel

aEPYdCg oabaUlypvOfj FYQGpDshupJSjHoDawOxruaBF efYbBdsorkizrH
cBgouINsEdixnUNeShXsmyXshh

A great advertising solution to get high quality customers.

Promote your business on Quora - it's where people look for reliable
information about your industry.

LYBDIemsRqxalryZgnpZg xJaAfMmIoKrNSZebbKyu NhBDaqtETGtjgr
icQeqWubNoYkrJTaO.dNcXogyNAWma

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Answer Wiki

15 Answers

![Christopher

Fox](https://qsf.fs.quoracdn.net/-3-images.new_grid.profile_pic_default_small.png-26-679bc670f786484c.png)

Christopher Fox, Orthopedic Surgeon, spine surgeon

Answered 137w ago

Answered 137w ago * Author has 9.2k answers and 20.7m answer views

Absolutely. However we have a convoluted and patchy way of paying for it, a
litigious society, American attitudes toward health, healthcare perspective, a
lot of unhealthy habits, and unhealthy infrastructure

How we pay:

We have Medicare for the elderly and disabled. Sure they pay a premium (which
comes out of the individuals social security check) and this is supplemented
by 2.9% payroll tax. Half of this is hidden as the employee only sees 1.45%
taken out but then the employer must “match” that amount so it is really 2.9%.
Medicare pays 80% of the medicare “fee schedule” for a medically necessary
service. So the patient either pays the other 20% or buys co-insurance.
Payment from medicare is just above the cost of the hospital/physician so no
doctors really want a lot of medicare patients.

We have Medicaid for the poor. It is paid by federal and state tax dollars.
The ratio is determined by the per capita income of the state. Payment rates
to providers vary by state and are very low (lower than the provider’s cost).
Most physicians only take a Medicaid patient in an emergency. Some states run
clinics for these patients. Mostly the patients use the ER as a clinic (the
most expensive form of care, but since the Medicaid patient is not paying for
it and cannot get care elsewhere this is one of the patient’s few options).

We have insurance provided through the employer. Many employers provide
insurance and many pay most of the cost. There is often a network of
physicians and the pay for the hospitals and doctors is pretty good (though
deductibles and costs have gone up since the ACA has gone into effect)

We have privately purchased insurance policies. These tend to be quite
expensive. Prices have risen drastically since the ACA went into effect and
deductibles have risen. Families with this may have insurance in name only as
the deductible may be $10,000 and the premiums $10,000 before the insurance
pays anything.

We have the ACA exchanges. This is where you input your income, pick a policy
and find out a price. The “thought” since everyone was required to have
insurance is that the young and healthy would support the older sicker
patients. Prices are subsidized but policies are provided through private
insurers. Current trends show insurers dropping out of markets and prices
rising quickly as the young people choose to pay a tax rather than pay a
significant rate for health insurance that they probably won’t use.

Finally there are the uninsured. Works well if you don’t get sick or injured.
A serious sickness or injury can cause bankruptcy as the list price at US
hospitals is sky high.

So in conclusion, we have a mish-mash of the way we pay for healthcare. The
privately insured and the ones with employee provided insurance tend to be the
happiest, but their costs are rising now quickly to pay for the patients with
subsidies.

A litigious society:

The US is the only western society that allows for contingency based lawsuits.
If a patient thinks something was done wrong or he had a reaction to a drug he
may find a lawyer and sue. It costs the patient nothing. The lawyer takes
33–40% of any award as pay. The doctors, hospitals and drug companies must
defend these suits. That costs money.

In 2001 one of the largest malpractice carriers in the US, St.Paul, left the
market after 37 years. In 37 years they had never made money in a single year
and just could not predict the market. Personally I had 6 claims. None
resulted in a payout or settlement. Given my specialty the odds were that I
should have averaged 18 in the same period. My malpractice carrier in the
interim paid $357,000 to defend me. I paid $1,500,000 in premiums. So I guess
they made money from me, but not in the market overall.

One cannot watch TV in the US for an hour without seeing 3 ads from attorneys
about drugs or medical devices offering to sue.

American attitudes to health care:

Americans often think that if something is wrong with their health that a pill
should fix it. It cannot be that they are sedentary and 50 pounds overweight,
eat a high sugar diet and few vegetables. That is somehow not the reason they
have diabetes, hypertension and heart disease.

It cannot be that our portion sizes have grown so that an appetizer could feed
a single person. Recently I ordered Chinese take out and thought I bought
enough food for myself. There was soup, an appetizer and an entree. 3 days
later I was still eating it. The soup would have been enough.

Unhealthy Infrastructure:

The US is a large and spread out country. It is huge. Our cities have suburbs
and there are only three cities that I think the average person could go
without a car. Boston, New York and San Francisco. We don’t do mass transit
well mostly because the distances are vast. Train travel works on the East
Coast Washington to Boston corridor only. We could have more, but we already
have cars and highways.

The result is that our suburbs and cities have huge streets and distances are
long. We don’t walk anywhere much. We get little exercise because we hop in
our cars to go to the supermarket or office. It isn’t like the coast of Italy
where the lemon farmer fills his basket, goes up 750 stairs, down 750 stairs
to the market. He does this 7 times a day. There is no road just a path and
steps. I sure he could find a road that went 20 miles out of his way but the
road winds and nowhere to park to off load his crop. He probably doesn’t have
a car anyway, there just isn’t a need and the infrastructure in his town
wouldn’t support it. So every day he climbs those steps and burns calories.

In many inner cities there really is no supermarket and the US really doesn’t
do many small shops. Our inner cities are often poor and the food choices may
be really unhealthy (as in fast food).

Unhealthy Attitudes and costs:

Americans work a lot. I mean the average person gets 2 weeks vacation. We tend
to arrive home tired and cooking a meal may be tiresome. We get processed food
from a box or high calorie take out.

Another costly problem is that since some form of insurance is paying for
everything families and consumers demand costly treatments. A chemotherapy
drug that extends life 2 months but costs $75,000 is routinely demanded even
if those two months are not a very good quality of life. The insurance company
pays.

The US has great technology, great delivery systems, but poor habits and
unrealistic expectations of what medical care can do.

2.8k views * View 14 Upvoters

srBwEOpxgogUInZusyDfEgoOhQPrGBesNchdOOC DyvbikCyfBha wFxNxUoUWriGgHjmTeZFRSN
BGPAoSDnbBfq laEUHcgmopbqphJiBLSrEoevdjshj

If you enjoy city building games, Forge is a must-play.

Journey through historical ages and develop your empire in this award-winning
city building game.

PbsylVaxuLiyhTGW HZOaPNZbWKodwEeGHh xtwraafVjcUtMa
cfaaoFAopVruqfDigMeXoTfVKeoGhmaJpNoinirjeJsADWk.widcdaommBUh

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

    
        * What makes the US healthcare system so expensive? Why is the US so expensive compared to Canada?
    
    * Overall, is the US healthcare system the best in the world?  Why or why not?
    
    * What country has the best healthcare system in the world?
    
    * How can the UK honestly view their healthcare as better than that of the US?
    
    * As a European, would you prefer the US healthcare system?
    

View more

### Related Questions

    
        * My father says that America has the best healthcare system in the world. What can I say to prove him wrong?
    
    * What is the best healthcare system for the US?
    
    * Is the US healthcare system broken?
    
    * Why are some Americans so opposed to universal healthcare?
    
    * What's wrong with the US healthcare system?
    
    * Why is France's healthcare system considered the best globally?
    
    * Is the healthcare system better in China than in the USA?
    
    * What is the best healthcare system in the world? Why USA can't copy it
    
    * Is it true that America’s healthcare system is the world’s best as long as you have enough money?
    
    * What’s the deal with healthcare in America?
    

### Related Questions

    
        * What makes the US healthcare system so expensive? Why is the US so expensive compared to Canada?
    
    * Overall, is the US healthcare system the best in the world?  Why or why not?
    
    * What country has the best healthcare system in the world?
    
    * How can the UK honestly view their healthcare as better than that of the US?
    
    * As a European, would you prefer the US healthcare system?
    
    * My father says that America has the best healthcare system in the world. What can I say to prove him wrong?
    
    * What is the best healthcare system for the US?
    
    * Is the US healthcare system broken?
    
    * Why are some Americans so opposed to universal healthcare?
    
    * What's wrong with the US healthcare system?
    

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

