

Skip to main content

Google Tag Manager

![US flag](https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/images/icn-us-

flag-21px.png) Official website of the Department of Homeland Security

    
        * Get Email Updates
    * Contact Us
    * Comunicarse con Nosotros
    
    * Instagram
    * Flickr
    * Twitter
    * LinkedIn
    * YouTube
    * Email
    

Search

![US Department of Homeland Security

Logo](https://www.cbp.gov/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/logo.png)

## U.S. Customs and Border Protection

    
        * About CBP
    

![Photo of the operational components of

CBP](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/2020vision-210x148.jpg)

Who We Are

![CBP Officer Arm

Patch](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/About%20CBP.jpg)

Learn About CBP

Leadership/Organization

History

In Memoriam

![US Customs House](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/MaxiMenu-

About-CBP-uscustomshouse-210x148.jpg)

Environmental Stewardship

Document Review/Comment

NEPA

Preserving Cultural Resources

Sustainability

![US Capitol building](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/MaxiMenu-

About-CBP-CapitolCrop-210x148.jpg)

Congressional Resources

Congressional Office FAQs

Congressional Testimony

CBP Access

CBP Snapshot of Operations

A Typical Day at CBP

Vision and Strategy 2025

Performance, Accountability and Financial Reports

    
        * Newsroom
    

![CBP, CBSA Host Joint Media

Event](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/featured-

images/2017-Jan/maximenu-newsroom-media-20170118-210x148.jpg)

Media & Public

Media Releases

Advisories

Speeches/Statements

![Helicopter with Aerostat in

background](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/Menu-Newsroom-

Imagery-210x148.jpg)

Imagery

Photo Gallery

Video Gallery

![Agents escorting illegal

aliens](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/Menu-Newsroom-

Background-210x148.jpg)

Background

Stats and Summaries

Fact Sheets

![Frontline - Official Digital Publication of U.S. Customs and Border

Protection](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/frontline-menu-

cbp-1.jpg)

Publications

Frontline Digital

Reports

Forms

    
        * Travel
    

![A CBP Officer inspects a vehicle and passengers at a land border port of

entry](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/Land%20Border%20POE_0.jpg)

U.S. Citizens/LPRs

    
          * Automated Passport Control
      * Mobile Passport Control
      * Canada and Mexico Travel
      * Know Before You Go
    

![CBP Officer Inspecting

Luggage](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/International%20Visitors.jpg)

International Visitors

    
          * ESTA
      * Visa Waiver Program
      * Know Before You Visit
    

![Traveler Checking

In](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/Trusted%20Traveler%20Programs.jpg)

Trusted Traveler Programs

    
          * Global Entry
      * NEXUS
      * SENTRI
      * FAST
    
    * Trade
    

![Photo of Mini Cooper that was illegally

imported](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/ot-

minicooper-20150205.jpg)

Basic Import and Export

Importing a Car

Exporting a Car

Importer/Exporter Tips

Internet Purchases

![U.S. Single Window for

Trade](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/ot-

singlewindow-20150205.jpg)

Automation/Agency Partners

Getting Started with ACE

Upcoming ACE Outreach

PGA Integration

Innovation

![Counterfeit NFL Apparel](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/ot-

counterfeitapparel-20150205.jpg)

Key Trade Issues

Stakeholder Outreach

Priority Trade Issues

Brokers

Quota

AD/CVD

![Federal Register Notice](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/ot-

frn-20150205.png)

Rulings & Legal Decisions

eRuling Requirements

Federal Register Notices

Customs Bulletin and Decisions

Informed Compliance Publications

    
        * Border Security
    

![Photo of Border Patrol Agent looking through

Binoculars](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/bp-

maximenu-210x148.jpg)

Along US Borders

Border Patrol History

Strategic Plan

Border Patrol Sectors

![CBP officer inspects fuel tank of a

vehicle](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/Border%20Security%20OFO.jpg)

At Ports of Entry

Cargo Security

Preclearance

Protecting Agriculture

![Blackhawk Interceptors](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/oam-

blackhawk-20150324.jpg)

From the Air and Sea

Missions

Domestic General Aviation

Aircraft and Marine vessels

![Global map highlighting the United States and other central american

countries](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/featured-

images/2017-Jan/cbp-global-partnership-20170117-210x148.png)

International Initiatives

CBP Attaches

Customs Mutual Agreements

World Customs Organization

    
        * Careers
    

![CBP Officer Inspecting Rail

Cars](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/Careers.jpg)

Which Career is Right for You?

Agriculture Specialist (AGS)

Air and Marine Agent

Border Patrol Agent (BPA)

CBP Officer (CBPO)

![Female Air and Marine

agent](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/hrm-women-20151104.jpg)

Careers for Women

![USAJOBS "WORKING FOR

AMERICA"](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/photo/careers-

usajobs-20150211.jpg)

Prepare to Apply

Background Investigation

Study Guides

FAQs about Applying

![CBP explorers members in formation at Valor

Memorial](https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/featured-

images/2017-Jun/careers-explorers-210.jpg)

Outreach Programs

Hiring Persons with Disabilities

Retired Annuitant Jobs

Students and Recent Grads

Veterans

Home >> Newsroom >> Local Media Release

### Archived Content

In an effort to keep CBP.gov current, the archive contains content from a
previous administration or is otherwise outdated.

## Newsroom

    
        * Advisories
    * Media Releases
    * Photo Gallery
    * Video Gallery
    * Press Officers
    * Publications
    * Speeches/Statements
    * Spotlights
    * Stats and Summaries
    

# Undeclared Medication Results in Heavy Fines

Release Date:

April 26, 2010

**Andrade, Calif**. - U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers working
pedestrian operations at the Andrade, Calif., Port of Entry had a busy weekend
intercepting undeclared medication and levying fines in excess of $14,000 for
the violations in three separate incidents.

The first seizure occurred on Friday when a 66-year-old female U. S. citizen
from Pinehurst, Idaho, applied for entry into the U. S. When asked by a CBP
officer what she was bringing from Mexico, the subject declared medication and
presented a white pharmacy bag. The officer examined the medication and
noticed one of the pill bottles had been opened. A closer inspection revealed
there was more medication in the bottle (984 pills) than indicated so the
subject was referred to the secondary inspection area. The medication was
seized and the traveler was penalized $11,780. She signed a promissory note
and was released without further incident.

The second incident occurred on Saturday when an 89-year-old female U.S.
citizen from Sun City, Ariz., applied for entry into the U. S., declaring
medication and other miscellaneous items. When asked numerous times if she had
anything else to declare, the subject responded she had nothing further to
declare. Upon a subsequent search of her purse, officers found two undeclared
bottles of _Carisoprodol_ (100 pills) and Valium (90 pills). The subject
admitted she was told by the pharmacist in Mexico to hide the pills inside her
purse. The medication was seized and the subject was penalized $2,000. She
paid the penalty and was released.

The final incident occurred later Saturday when a 51-year-old female U. S.
citizen from Idaho Falls, Idaho, applied for entry into the U. S., declaring
medication and other items. After observing the subject appearing nervous, the
officer opened the medication bottles and noticed the seals had been tampered
with. The officer referred the traveler to the secondary inspection area where
officers discovered the pill bottles marked as _Tramadol_ actually contained
_Phentermine_ (100 pills). The medication was seized and a $2,000 penalty was
assessed. She paid the penalty and was released.

Andrade Port Director Ray Nagy said it is important for travelers to know the
requirements before passing through ports of entry such as Andrade and there
is a wealth of information available to educate the public on the CBP website:
www.cbp.gov.

"We believe a well informed traveler will have a safe, more enjoyable,
relaxing experience," he said. "Therefore, it is advised travelers familiarize
themselves with the 'Know Before You Go' section of the CBP website before
traveling out of the country.

"The website provides useful information about necessary documentation to
prove citizenship and information about allowed and prohibited items," he
said. "I strongly suggest travelers read it."

Nagy also said it is imperative for travelers to understand there is a price
to pay for not following the rules by failing to declare or attempting to
smuggle medications, agriculture products, alcohol and other items.

"In these cases there was misconception and misinformation, which is
unfortunate," he said. "Bottom line, travelers face stiff civil penalties or
possible criminal prosecution for failing to declare items at an U.S. port or
entry. Always declare everything acquired abroad. Lack of knowledge is not an
acceptable excuse."

_U.S. Customs and Border Protection is the unified border agency within the
Department of Homeland Security charged with the management, control and
protection of our nation's borders at and between the official ports of entry.
CBP is charged with keeping terrorists and terrorist weapons out of the
country while enforcing hundreds of U.S. laws._

Last modified:

February 9, 2017

Tags:

Archive Media Releases

![Click to expand and share this page on social

networks](/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/images/social/icon_share.png)Share
This Page.

![Facebook

Icon](https://www.cbp.gov/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/images/social/icon_facebook.png)
![Twitter

Icon](https://www.cbp.gov/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/images/social/icon_twitter.png)
![LinkedIn

Icon](https://www.cbp.gov/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/images/social/icon_linkedin.png)
![Tumblr

Icon](https://www.cbp.gov/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/images/social/icon_tumblr.png)
![Mailto

Icon](https://www.cbp.gov/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/images/social/icon_mailto.png)

## **CBP Public Affairs**

**Contact Information for Media:**  
Phone: | (202) 344-1780  
Email: | CBP Media Relations  
All Other Inquiries: | (202) 325-8000

    
        * About CBP
    * Newsroom
    * Travel
    

![U.S. Department of Homeland

Security](/profiles/cbp_gov/themes/cbp_gov_theme/logo.png)

    
        * Trade
    * Border Security
    * Careers
    
    * Accessibility
    * Accountability
    * DHS Components
    * FOIA
    * Forms
    * Inspector General
    * No FEAR Act
    * Privacy
    * Site Policies
    * The White House
    * USA.gov
    * Plug-ins
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

