
    
        * Education
    
      * Reference
    
        * Dictionary 
        * Investing 101 
        * The 4 Best S&P; 500 Index Funds 
        * World's Top 20 Economies 
        * Stock Basics Tutorial 
        * Options Basics Tutorial 
        * Economics Basics 
      * Topics
    
        * Stocks 
        * Mutual Funds 
        * Options 
        * Tech 
        * ETFs 
        * Bonds/Fixed Income 
        * Commodities
    
    * Markets
    
      * News
    
        * Watchlist 
        * Company News 
        * Market/Economy News 
      * Popular Stocks
    
        * Apple (AAPL) 
        * Tesla (TSLA) 
        * Amazon (AMZN) 
        * AMD (AMD) 
        * Facebook (FB) 
        * Netflix (NFLX)
    
    * Simulator
    
      * Simulator
    
        * Create an Account 
        * Join a Game 
      * My Simulator
    
        * My Game 
        * Create a Game
    
    * Your Money
    
      * Personal Finance
    
        * Credit 
        * Budgeting/Saving 
        * Taxes 
        * Retirement 
        * Mortgage 
        * Insurance 
        * Small Business 
        * Wealth Management 
      * Reviews & Ratings
    
        * Broker Reviews 
        * Charles Schwab Review 
        * E*TRADE Review 
        * Robinhood Review
    
    * Advisors
    
      * Financial Advice
    
        * Advisor Insights 
        * Investopedia 100 
      * For Financial Advisors
    
        * Join Advisor Insights 
        * Your Practice
    
    * Academy
    
      * Popular Courses
    
        * Investing for Beginners 
        * Become a Day Trader 
        * Trading for Beginners 
        * Technical Analysis 
      * Courses by Topic
    
        * All Courses 
        * Trading Courses 
        * Investing Courses 
        * Financial Professional Courses
    

Submit

    
        * Login
    * Advisor Login
    * Newsletters
    

Insurance

    
        * Auto Insurance
    * Home Insurance
    * Life Insurance
    * Disability Insurance
    * Health Insurance
    * Long-Term Care Insurance
    * Liability Insurance
    

Insurance Health Insurance

# 6 Reasons Healthcare Is So Expensive in the U.S.

##

    
        * FACEBOOK 
    * TWITTER 
    * LINKEDIN
    

By Lita Epstein

Updated May 4, 2019

Healthcare in the U.S. is about twice as expensive as it is in any other
developed country. If the $3 trillion U.S. healthcare sector were ranked as a
country, it would be the world’s fifth largest economy, according to _Consumer
Reports_. The cost of this huge financial burden for every household because
of lost wages, higher premiums, taxes and additional out-of-pocket expenses is
more than $8,000.

Even with all this money being spent on healthcare, the World Health
Organization ranked the U.S. 37th in healthcare systems, and The Commonwealth
Fund placed the U.S. last among the top 11 industrialized countries in overall
healthcare.

Why is the U.S. paying so much more for care and not appearing at the top of
the rankings? Here’s a look at six key reasons the U.S. is failing to provide
adequate health care at reasonable prices.

### 1. Administrative Costs

The number one reason our healthcare costs are so high, says Harvard economist
David Cutler, is “the administrative costs of running our healthcare system
are astronomical. About one-quarter of healthcare cost is associated with
administration, which is far higher than in any other country.”

One example Cutler brought up in a 2010 discussion on this topic with National
Public Radio was the case of the 1,300 billing clerks at Duke University
Hospital, which has only 900 beds. Those billing specialists are needed to
determine how to bill to meet the varying requirements of multiple insurers.
Canada and other countries with a single-payer system don’t require this level
of staffing to administer healthcare.

### 2. Drug Costs

Another major difference in health costs between the U.S. and every other
developed nation is the cost of drugs. In most countries, the government
negotiates drug prices with the drug makers, but when Congress created
Medicare Part D, it specifically denied Medicare the right to use its power to
negotiate drug prices. The Veteran's Administration and Medicaid, which can
negotiate drug prices, pay the lowest drug prices. The Congressional Budget
Office has found that just by giving the low-income beneficiaries of Medicare
Part D the same discount Medicaid recipients get, the federal government would
save $116 billion over 10 years. Think of what the savings might be if all
Medicare recipients could benefit from Medicaid-negotiated drug prices.

### 3. Defensive Medicine

Yet another big driver of the higher U.S. health insurance bill is the
practice of defensive medicine. Doctors are afraid they will get sued, so they
order multiple tests even when they are certain they know what the diagnosis
is. A 2010 Gallup survey estimated that $650 billion annually could be
attributed to defensive medicine. Everyone pays the bill on this with higher
insurance premiums, co-pays, and out-of-pocket costs, as well as taxes that go
toward paying for governmental healthcare programs.

### 4. Expensive Mix of Treatments

U.S. medical practitioners also tend to use a more expensive mix of
treatments. According to a 2014 report by the OECD, when compared with other
developed countries, for example, the U.S. uses three times as many
mammograms, two-and-a-half times the number of MRIs and does 31% more Cesarean
sections. This results in more being spent on technology in more locations.
Another key part of the mix is more people in the U.S. are treated by
specialists, whose fees are higher than primary-care doctors when the same
types of treatments are done at the primary-care level in other countries.
Specialists command higher pay, which drives up the costs for everyone.

### 5. Wages and Work Rules

Wages and staffing also drive up costs in healthcare. Specialists are
commanding high reimbursements, and the over-utilization of specialists
through the current process of referral decision-making drives health costs
even higher. The National Commission on Physician Payment Reform was the first
step toward fixing the problem; based on its 2013 report, the commission
adopted 12 recommendations for changes to get control over physician pay. The
Commission has gone on to work with Congress to find a way to implement some
of these recommendations, although tangible policy outcomes have not yet
followed.

### 6. Branding

“There is no such thing as a legitimate price for anything in healthcare,”
says George Halvorson, the former chairman of health maintenance organization
Kaiser Permanente. “Prices are made up depending on who the payer is.”

Providers who can demand the highest prices are the ones who create a brand
everyone wants. “In some markets, the prestigious medical institutions can
name their price,” says Andrea Caballero, program director at Catalyst for
Payment Reform, a nonprofit that works with large employers to get some
control on health costs.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has pushed back to some degree against the high
costs created by branding. In central Florida, for example, one of the top
brands is Florida Hospital. In 2018, ACA policies offered by Humana did not
include services provided by this brand. Similar types of contract
negotiations knocked out top hospitals in other locations. It remains to be
seen whether this will cause those hospitals to reduce prices to get those
patients back.

### The Bottom Line

Most other developed countries control costs, in part, by having the
government play a stronger role in negotiating prices for healthcare. Their
healthcare systems don’t require the high administrative costs that drive up
pricing in the U.S. As the global overseers of their country's systems, these
governments have the ability to negotiate lower drug, medical equipment and
hospital costs. They can influence the mix of treatments used and patients’
ability to go to specialists or seek more expensive treatments.

So far in the U.S., there has been a lack of political support for the
government taking a larger role in controlling healthcare costs. The
Affordable Care Act focused on ensuring access to healthcare but maintained
the status quo to encourage competition among insurers and healthcare
providers. This means there will be multiple payers for the services and less
control over negotiated pricing from providers of healthcare services.

Compare Popular Online Brokers

Provider

Name

Description

Advertiser Disclosure

×

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which
Investopedia receives compensation.

### Related Articles

![](//:0)

Lifestyle Advice

### How U.S. Healthcare Costs Compare to Other Countries

![](//:0)

Sectors & Industries Analysis

### 7 Economic Reasons Healthcare Is Broken in the U.S.

![](//:0)

Health Insurance

### What If Obamacare Is Repealed?

![](//:0)

Health Insurance

### Why People with Good Health Insurance Go into Medical Debt

![](//:0)

Retirement Planning

### Why Retiree Expats Adore Ecuador

![](//:0)

Tax Laws & Regulations

### Trump's Tax Reform Plan Explained

Partner Links

### Related Terms

Trumponomics

Trumponomics is a term for the economic policies of President Donald Trump.

more

How Mergers and Acquisitions Work

Mergers and acquisitions (M&A;) is a general term that refers to the
consolidation of companies or assets through various types of financial
transactions.

more

Accountable Care Organizations

Accountable care organizations are provider networks designed under the
Affordable Care Act to improve cost efficiency and quality of medical
treatment.

more

Health Insurance

Health insurance is a type of insurance coverage that pays for medical and
surgical expenses that are incurred by the insured.

more

Catastrophic Illness Insurance

Catastrophic illness insurance covers expenses for major health conditions
such as heart attack, stroke or cancer, but does not cover routine care.

more

Medicaid

Medicaid is a government-sponsored insurance program for individuals and
families whose income is insufficient to cover health-related services.

more

    
        * Terms
    * News
    * Tutorials
    * About Us
    * Advertise
    * Contact
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    * Careers
    
    * #
    * a
    * b
    * c
    * d
    * e
    * f
    * g
    * h
    * i
    * j
    * k
    * l
    * m
    * n
    * o
    * p
    * q
    * r
    * s
    * t
    * u
    * v
    * w
    * x
    * y
    * z
    

Investopedia is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

    
        * The Balance
    * Lifewire
    * TripSavvy
    * The Spruce
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

