

Discover Thomson Reuters

FinancialGovernment SolutionsLegalReuters News AgencyRisk Management
SolutionsTax & AccountingBlog: Answers OnInnovation @ Thomson Reuters

Directory of sites

Login

Contact

Support

    
        * Business
    
    * Markets
    
    * World
    
    * Politics
    
    * TV
    * More
    

![Flag of United States](//static.reuters.com/resources_v2/react/release/jp-

upgrade-fe903ae1/3aae9fd5da3557fba61d6444cb943643.png)

United States

Health News

March 13, 2018 / 9:07 PM / a year ago

# U.S. health spending twice other countries' with worse results

Lisa Rapaport

5 Min Read

(Reuters Health) - The U.S. spends about twice what other high-income nations
do on health care but has the lowest life expectancy and the highest infant
mortality rates, a new study suggests.

More doctor visits and hospital stays aren't the problem. Americans use
roughly the same amount of health services as people in other affluent
nations, the study found.

Instead, health spending may be higher in the U.S. because prices are steeper
for drugs, medical devices, physician and nurse salaries and administrative
costs to process medical claims, researchers report in JAMA.

"There's no doubt that administrative complexity and higher drug prices both
matter - as do higher prices for pretty much everything in U.S. healthcare,"
said lead study author Irene Papanicolas of the London School of Economics and
the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health in Boston.

"These inefficiencies are likely the product of a number of factors including
a reliance on fee-for-service reimbursement, the administrative complexity of
the U.S. health care system and the lack of price transparency across the
system," Papanicolas said by email.

For the study, researchers examined international data from 2013 to 2016
comparing the U.S. with 10 other high-income countries: the U.K., Canada,
Germany, Australia, Japan, Sweden, France, Denmark, the Netherlands, and
Switzerland.

In 2016, the U.S. spent 17.8 percent of its gross domestic product (GDP) on
healthcare. Other countries' spending ranged from a low of 9.6 percent of GDP
in Australia to a high of 12.4 percent of GDP in Switzerland.

A large part of this was administrative costs, which accounted for 8 percent
of GDP in the U.S., more than double the average of 3 percent of GDP.

At the same time, the U.S. spent an average of $1,443 per person on drugs,
compared with an average of $749 per person across all of the countries in the
study.

U.S. spending was also higher for imaging and for many of the most common
medical procedures like knee replacements, surgical cesarean births, and
surgeries to repair or unclog blood vessels.

If the U.S. did less imaging and fewer of 25 common procedures, and lowered
prices and the number of procedures to levels in the Netherlands, it would
translate into a savings of $137 billion, Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel of the Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania writes in an accompanying
editorial.

"Regardless of what is done with the money, it would be more valuable than
paying high prices for a large number of CT and MRI scans, up to a third of
which may be deemed unnecessary and carry radiation risks, and many expensive
but not necessary surgical procedures," Emanuel writes.

Life expectancy in the U.S. was the lowest, at 78.8 years, the study also
found. In the other countries, life expectancy ranged from 80.7 to 83.9 years.

Infant mortality rates were highest in the U.S., with 5.8 fatalities out of
every 1,000 live births. For other countries, the average infant mortality
rate was 3.6 fatalities for every 1,000 live births.

Some individual U.S. states, however, have outcomes on par with other high-
income countries. For example, life expectancy in Hawaii, Minnesota and
Connecticut were similar to other high-income countries, while life expectancy
was much worse in states like Mississippi.

Inequalities in innovation, costs and outcomes may be reasons the U.S. lags
behind other high-income countries, Stephen Parente of the University of
Minnesota writes in an accompanying editorial.

"Although some states and regions throughout the U.S. serve as excellent
laboratories for best practices, these parts of the U.S. system need to be
shared with greater equity so that underperforming U.S. regions can and will
demand better care," Parente writes.

One limitation of the study is that researchers lacked information on the
quality of care across all of the countries.

"It is quite challenging to disentangle the share of international differences
in spending driven by differences in the quantity of care used and differences
in the prices paid for that care, given how difficult it is to measure quality
and intensity of care," Katherine Baicker, author of a separate editorial and
dean of the Harris School of Public Policy at the University of Chicago, said
by email.

SOURCE: bit.ly/2GqjXuH JAMA, online March 13, 2018.

Our Standards:The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.

0 : 0

    
        * narrow-browser-and-phone
    * medium-browser-and-portrait-tablet
    * landscape-tablet
    * medium-wide-browser
    * wide-browser-and-larger
    * medium-browser-and-landscape-tablet
    * medium-wide-browser-and-larger
    * above-phone
    * portrait-tablet-and-above
    * above-portrait-tablet
    * landscape-tablet-and-above
    * landscape-tablet-and-medium-wide-browser
    * portrait-tablet-and-below
    * landscape-tablet-and-below
    
    * Apps
    * Newsletters
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Guidelines
    * Cookies
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy
    
    *     *     *     *     *     * All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.
    

© 2019 Reuters. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

