
    
        * __
    * Sections __
    * __
    * Home
    

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

    
        * Try 1 month for $1
    * Username
    * Sign In
    

* * *
    
          * My Post __
      * My Reading List __
      * Account Settings __
      * Newsletters & alerts __
      * Gift subscriptions __
      * Contact us __
      * Help desk __
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    
    * Accessibility for screenreader
    

Economic Policy

# Big pharmaceutical companies are spending far more on marketing than

research

Add to list

In my list

By Ana Swanson

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Ana Swanson

Reporter

Bio **Follow**

February 11, 2015

Prescription drugs are a massive market: Americans spent $329.2 billion on
prescription drugs in 2013. That works out to about $1,000 per person in the
U.S., as John Oliver pointed out in his show on Sunday night.

Oliver also mentioned that nine out of 10 big pharmaceutical companies spend
more on marketing than on research. León Markovitz of Dadaviz found and
graphed those figures from healthcare research firm GlobalData in the graphic
below. The amounts spent on sales and marketing are shown in orange, while the
amounts spent on research and development are in blue.

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/JgIET4dru8HMRuoUzcTy41Tjvx4=/480x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/D7JJHUKSBU6VNMMRYUTKU2OWA4.png)  
Dadaviz

The biggest spender, Johnson & Johnson, shelled out $17.5 billion on sales and
marketing in 2013, compared with $8.2 billion for R&D.; In the top 10, only
Roche spent more on R&D; than on sales and marketing.

Most of this marketing money is directed at the physicians who do the
prescribing, rather than consumers. As Oliver pointed out, drug companies
spent more than $3 billion a year marketing to consumers in the U.S. in 2012,
but an estimated $24 billion marketing directly to health care professionals.

Oliver closed his segment with a hilarious spoof commercial that urges
patients to ask their doctors how pharmaceutical marketing might be
influencing them.

"Ask your doctor today if he's taking pharmaceutical company money. Then ask
your doctor what the money is for," the narrator says. "Ask your doctor if
he's taken any money from the companies who make the drugs he just prescribed
for you. Then ask yourself if you're satisfied with that answer."

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Ana Swanson Ana Swanson covered the economy, trade and the Federal Reserve for
The Washington Post. She left The Post in August 2017. Follow __

Market Watch

Dow 26,048.51

Today 0.05%

S&P 2,885.72

Today 0.03%

NASDAQ 7,822.57

Today 0.01%

Last Updated:5:23 PM 06/12/2019

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

