

Please enable JavaScript in order to get the best experience when using this
site.

    
        * Site Navigation
    * Page Content
    

Menu

![State Government

Victoria](https://prodstaticdhhs.azureedge.net/assets/img/bhc/logo/vicgov.jpg)
![Better Health Channel

Logo](https://prodstaticdhhs.azureedge.net/assets/img/bhc/logo/header_logo.png)

Caret

    
        * ![](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg)
    

## Health.vic

Victoria's hub for health services and business

    
        * ![](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg)
    

## DHHS

A gateway to the strategies, policies, programs and services delivered by the
Department of Health & Human Services.

    
        * ![](/-/media/bhc/images/configurations/websitelinks/so-icon.png)
    

## Seniors Online

Victorian government portal for older people, with information about
government and community services and programs.

Show search toolbar

Contrast Sign Up Login

Search

Type a minimum of three characters then press UP or DOWN on the keyboard to
navigate the autocompleted search results

## Navigation

Home Close Menu

    
        * Conditions and treatments
    

Conditions and treatments

    
          * Allergies
    

Allergies

    
            * Allergic reaction to packaged food
    
      * Anxiety
    
      * Arthritis
    
      * Asthma
    
      * Behavioural conditions
    
      * Birth defects
    
      * Blood and blood vessels
    
      * Bones muscles and joints
    

Bones muscles and joints

    
            * Foot care - podiatrists
    
      * Brain and nerves
    
      * Cancer
    
      * Complementary and alternative care
    
      * Dementia
    
    * Healthy living
    

Healthy living

    
          * Alcohol
    
      * Babies and toddlers (0-3)
    
      * Children (4-12)
    
      * Drugs and addictive behaviours
    
      * Environmental health
    
      * Family Violence
    
      * Older people in hospital – Get well soon
    
      * Health checks
    
      * Healthy Eating
    

Healthy Eating

    
            * Nutrition for life
        * Mens nutrition for life
    
      * Healthy mind
    
      * Healthy pregnancy
    
      * Immunisation
    
    * Services and support
    

Services and support

    
          * Aged care services
    
      * Alcohol and drug services
    
      * LGBTI support
    
      * Carers, caring and respite care services
    
      * Child, family and relationship services
    
      * Disability services
    
      * Emergency, crisis and support services
    
      * End of life and palliative care services
    
      * Hospitals, surgery and procedures
    
      * Mental health services
    
      * Planning and coordinating healthcare
    
      * Pregnancy and birth services
    
    * A-Z
    

A-Z

    
          * Conditions and treatments
    
      * Healthy living
    
      * Services and support
    
      * Videos
    
      * Service profiles
    
    * Blog
    

Blog

    
          * Blog authors
    
      * Topics
    
    * Podcast
    

Podcast

    
          * Influenza - Dr Brett Sutton & Prof Kanta Subbarao
    
      * Trauma - Anne Leadbeater OAM & Dr Rob Gordon
    
      * template
    
    * Other sites
    
      * ![Victorian government logo](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg?h=40&la=en&w=40&hash=79CE01A630E1AA53311E4E5CC5EF63A14A2238AF) Health.vic ![Victorian government logo](/-/media/health/images/configurations/websitelinks/vicsquarefw.jpg?h=40&la=en&w=40&hash=79CE01A630E1AA53311E4E5CC5EF63A14A2238AF) DHHS ![SO-Icon](/-/media/bhc/images/configurations/websitelinks/so-icon.png?h=40&la=en&w=40&hash=18D3EE73AEF43B451A2DC1ED4543A346A19BD4DF) Seniors Online
    
    * Sitemap
    *     *     * My Health Life
    * Facebook
    * Googleplus
    * Twitter
    * Youtube
    * Rss
    
    * Conditions and treatments
    * Healthy living
    * Services and support
    * A-Z
    * Blog
    * Podcast
    

![](/-/media/bhc/images/placeholder/print-bhc.jpg)

Back to Babies and toddlers (0-3)

    
        * Home
    * Healthy living
    * Babies and toddlers (0-3)
    * Premature babies
    

# Premature babies

    
        * Share (show more)
    
    * Download PDF
    * Listen (show more)
    

Listen

    
        * More (show more)
    
      * Email
    
      * Print
    

Tags:

    
        * Babies and toddlers (0-3)
    * Babies and toddlers (0-3) - Newborn babies
    

### Summary

    
        * The causes of premature labour aren't fully understood, so prediction and prevention are difficult.
    * The chances of survival for premature babies depend on the degree of prematurity and their birth weight.
    * Premature babies who survive are at risk of a range of mild to severe disabilities, including visual impairment, developmental delay and learning difficulties.
    

In Australia, around eight per cent of babies are born prematurely (before 37
weeks gestation) every year. Most babies who are premature are born between 32
and 36 weeks gestation, and almost all of these babies grow up to be healthy
children.

Sadly, some babies die as a result of being born too early because their
organs are too immature to function properly outside the womb.

It is difficult to predict which pregnancies will end prematurely. Most often,
no specific cause is found for premature births. We know of a few risk
factors, but the mechanics behind premature labour remain a mystery, so it is
difficult to prevent.

## Risk factors for premature birth

Some reasons for premature birth remain unknown. However, there are a few
maternal risk factors, including:

    
        * High blood pressure
    * Diabetes
    * Severe illness
    * Smoking
    * Twin or multiple pregnancy
    * Previous premature birth.
    

## Delaying premature labour

If a mother goes into labour prematurely, sometimes the birth can be delayed
with certain treatments.

As long as the baby is growing normally and the placenta is working properly,
every extra day a baby can spend inside the mother's womb increases the chance
of survival, particularly if there is time to give the mother steroids. Giving
the mother steroid injections before the birth can improve the baby's lung
maturity and chances of surviving.

## The chance of survival for premature babies

The chance of survival depends on the baby's degree of prematurity and birth
weight. A full-term pregnancy is said to last between 37 and 42 weeks.

Two thirds of babies born at 24 weeks gestation who are admitted to a neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) will survive to go home. Ninety eight per cent of
babies born at 30 weeks gestation will survive.

## Complications for premature babies

In general, babies who are born under 36 weeks' gestation will be admitted to
a neonatal unit. Very preterm babies (under 30 weeks' gestation) and those who
require help with breathing will need to be cared for in a NICU.

Larger preterm babies who do not develop breathing problems will be cared for
in a special care nursery.

Some of the complications for a premature baby might include:

    
        * Lung disease - premature babies often need oxygen via a ventilator or in an incubator until their lungs are fully matured.
    * Feeding difficulties - premature babies are often unable to suck and need to be fed via a tube into the stomach until the sucking and swallowing reflex is developed.
    * Temperature control difficulties - the 'temperature control centre' in a premature baby's brain is immature. Babies are therefore cared for under special overhead heaters or in enclosed incubators until they are mature enough to be cared for in a normal cot.
    * Apnoea - this is when the baby's breathing stops for a short period of time. Breathing is controlled by a part of the brain called the respiratory centre, which is immature in premature babies.
    * Bradycardia - is a slowing down of the heart rate, usually caused by apnoea.
    * Jaundice - the skin takes on a yellow colour, due to a compound in the blood called bilirubin, which breaks down red blood cells. A premature baby's liver is too immature to process the bilirubin properly, so phototherapy lights are used.
    

## Disabilities for premature babies

In general, the risk of premature babies having severe disabilities depends on
their degree of prematurity and the severity of illness they experienced
following birth.

Around one third of babies born at 24 weeks will develop a significant
disability such as intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, blindness or
deafness.

Minor disabilities, such as reading or learning problems, usually do not show
up until school age. Babies born close to full term usually have no long-term
health problems as a result of their early birth.

## Where to get help

    
        * Your doctor
    * Your obstetrician
    * Maternity hospital staff
    

## Things to remember

    
        * The causes of premature labour aren't fully understood, so prediction and prevention are difficult.
    * The chances of survival for premature babies depend on the degree of prematurity and their birth weight.
    * Premature babies who survive are at risk of a range of mild to severe disabilities, including visual impairment, developmental delay and learning difficulties.
    

References

    
        * Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2011. _Australia’s mothers and babies 2009_ , Perinatal statistics series no. 25. Cat. no. PER 52. More information here.
    * ANZNN (Australian and New Zealand Neonatal Network), 2011. _Report of the Australian and New Zealand Neonatal Network 2007_. More information here.
    

## Send us your feedback

    
        * Rate this website
    * Your comments
    * Questions
    * Your details
    

### 1/4 How would you rate this website?

    
        * Excellent
    * Good
    * Average
    * Fair
    * Poor
    

Next Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

    
        * Rate this website
    * Your comments
    * Questions
    * Your details
    

Please note that we cannot answer personal medical queries.  
If you are looking for health or medical advice we recommend that you:

    
        * talk to your doctor or pharmacist
    * dial triple zero (000) in an emergency
    * ring NURSE-ON-CALL Tel. 1300 60 60 24.
    

### 2/4 Your Comments

Tell us who you are Select an option Health consumer Health professional
Others

Enter your comments below (optional)

Next Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

    
        * Rate this website
    * Your comments
    * Questions
    * Your details
    

### 3/4 Questions

What are you here to do? Looking for information on Improving general health
and wellbeing Better relationships A specific health condition and its
treatment Children’s health Food, nutrition and healthy recipes Medication
Exercise or fitness Others

Did you find what you were looking for?

    
        * Yes
    * No
    

Next Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

    
        * Rate this website
    * Your comments
    * Questions
    * Your details
    

### 4/4 Your details

Postcode

Email Address

Submit Now Cancel

## Send us your feedback

### Thank you. Your feedback has been successfully sent.

## More information

### Babies and toddlers (0-3)

The following content is displayed as Tabs. Once you have activated a link
navigate to the end of the list to view its associated content. The activated
link is defined as Active Tab

    
        * Babies and toddlers basics
    * Newborn babies
    * Feeding your baby
    * Growth and development
    * Behaviour and learning
    * Healthy eating
    * Care and wellbeing
    * Health conditions and complaints
    * Sleep
    * Safety
    * Grief and trauma
    

#### Babies and toddlers basics

    
        * Baby bath - bathing (video)
    

Detailing on bathing from the Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Baby bath - preparation and safety (video)
    

Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Baby bath - skin care (video)
    

Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Childhood immunisation
    

Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious
childhood infections...

    
        * Children and health services
    

There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services
for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria...

    
        * Early support for a child with disabilities
    

For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as
early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term
effects of the disability...

    
        * Immunisation – deciding which vaccines you need
    

Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influence by your health,
lifestyle, age and occupation...

    
        * Maternal and child health services
    

Your local maternal and child health service will be a great source of support
after your baby is born...

    
        * No Jab No Play
    

No Jab No Play – from 1 January 2016, all parents/guardians seeking to enrol
their child at an early childhood service in Victoria must provide evidence
that the child is fully immunised for their age...

    
        * Parenting services
    

Parenting is one of the most important tasks we undertake but it doesn't
always come naturally...

#### Newborn babies

    
        * Baby bath - bathing (video)
    

Detailing on bathing from the Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Baby bath - preparation and safety (video)
    

Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Baby bath - skin care (video)
    

Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Jaundice in babies
    

If your baby is full-term and healthy, mild jaundice is nothing to worry about
and will resolve by itself within a week or so...

    
        * Newborn bloodspot screening
    

Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a newborn bloodspot screening test
to identify those at risk of rare, but serious, medical conditions...

    
        * Phenylketonuria (PKU)
    

PKU is an inherited disorder that prevents the normal breakdown of a protein
found in some foods...

    
        * Phototherapy at Home
    

Jaundice is very common in newborns, so it’s nothing to be too worried about.
Treatment is very easy and safe. It all happens using blue light from a
special blanket that you wrap your baby in. The...

    
        * Premature babies
    

Sometimes premature labour can be delayed to increase a baby's chance of
survival...

    
        * Sudden unexpected death in infants (SUDI and SIDS)
    

You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe
sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke...

    
        * The Maternal and Child Health phone app
    

The Maternal & Child Health app (MCH) provides reliable maternal and child
health (MCH) information that families can use every day...

#### Feeding your baby

    
        * Asthma - pregnancy and breastfeeding
    

Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as
it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma
is well managed...

    
        * Baby care - weaning
    

Be guided by your baby and let them set the pace when weaning and introducing
solid foods...

    
        * Bottle feeding - nutrition and safety
    

Breastmilk or commercial infant formula is necessary for all babies less than
12 months...

    
        * Breastfeeding
    

Breastfeeding positioning and attachment come naturally to some babies and
mothers, but many need time and practice to get it right...

    
        * Breastfeeding and travel
    

Breastmilk protects your baby from illness and infection, so it is the safest
drink for your baby while travelling...

    
        * Breastfeeding and work
    

You can successfully combine breastfeeding with work if you have support from
your employer, colleagues and family...

    
        * Breastfeeding and your diet
    

Breastfeeding women need to eat regularly and include a wide variety of
healthy foods in their diet...

    
        * Breastfeeding - dealing with mastitis
    

Mastitis affects some breastfeeding women and may be caused by blocked milk
ducts or a bacterial infection...

    
        * Breastfeeding - dealing with nipple problems
    

Your nipples may be sensitive in the first few days after birth, but nipple
pain is not a normal part of breastfeeding...

    
        * Breastfeeding - deciding when to stop
    

It is up to you and your baby to decide when breastfeeding should stop...

    
        * Breastfeeding - expressing breastmilk
    

Expressing breast milk by hand is a cheap and convenient method...

    
        * Breastfeeding - when to start
    

Breastfeeding within the first hour after birth allows your baby to behave
instinctively and breastfeed with little intervention...

    
        * Food for babies - tucker talk tips
    

Before six months, breastmilk or formula is the only food and drink that your
baby needs...

    
        * Lactose intolerance
    

Symptoms of lactose intolerance include bloating, gas, abdominal pain and
diarrhoea...

#### Growth and development

    
        * Child development (1) - newborn to three months
    

Infants in the first eight weeks have no control over their movements and all
their physical activity is involuntary or reflex...

    
        * Child development (2) - three to six months
    

Young babies still have a notion that the whole of life is happening inside
themselves, and they are 'making it all happen'...

    
        * Child development (3) - six to nine months
    

Fun activities, such as shaking or banging objects, helps a baby understand
they have an effect on the world...

    
        * Child development (4) - nine to 12 months
    

At nine months your baby is moving around by crawling or pulling along with
their arms. Safety is very important now. Your baby is also 'talking' with
recognisable sounds and may even say simple words...

    
        * Child development (5) - one to two years
    

Between the age of one and two, your toddler understands they are a completely
separate person from you...

    
        * Child development (6) - two to three years
    

Parents can be tricked into thinking our toddlers are more grown up than they
really are...

    
        * Children's feet and shoes
    

A child learning to walk receives important sensory information from the soles
of their feet, and shoes can make walking more difficult...

    
        * Growth charts for children
    

Babies and young children do not usually grow in a perfectly smooth way, but
instead grow in 'bursts'...

    
        * Teeth development in children
    

Teething symptoms are common in children and can be managed without
medications...

    
        * The Maternal and Child Health phone app
    

The Maternal & Child Health app (MCH) provides reliable maternal and child
health (MCH) information that families can use every day...

    
        * Toilet training
    

When toilet training your toddler, praise every little success and remain calm
about accidents...

#### Behaviour and learning

    
        * 10 tips for managing sibling rivalry
    

Teach your children to sort out minor differences themselves... 10 tips for
managing sibling rivalry...

    
        * 10 tips to raise an optimistic child
    

Be a positive role model ... 10 tips to raise an optimistic child...

    
        * Anxiety and fear in children
    

You can help your child overcome anxiety by taking their fears seriously and
encouraging them to talk about their feelings...

    
        * Children and shyness
    

If your child's shyness is especially debilitating, you may like to consider
professional help from a counsellor or psychologist...

    
        * Children and sibling rivalry
    

Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the
same sex and close together in age...

    
        * Discipline and children
    

Disciplining your child means teaching them responsible behaviour and self-
control...

    
        * Dummies
    

Dummy sucking should stop before school age to avoid teeth or mouth
problems...

    
        * Left-handedness
    

If your child is naturally left-handed, don't try to force them to use their
right hand...

    
        * Tantrums
    

When a young child is having a tantrum, it is because the emotional (limbic
system) part of the brain is dominating the child's behaviour...

    
        * Thumb and finger sucking
    

Finger or thumb sucking should stop before school age to avoid mouth
problems...

    
        * Toddlers and fussy eating
    

If you restrict yourself to a narrow range of foods, your child will notice
and copy your wariness...

    
        * Toddlers and mealtime manners
    

Some toddlers do most of their eating on the run, refusing to sit down at the
table at all...

#### Healthy eating

    
        * Baby care - weaning
    

Be guided by your baby and let them set the pace when weaning and introducing
solid foods...

    
        * Breakfast
    

Children who skip breakfast may lack sufficient vitamins and minerals
including iron, calcium, zinc and vitamin B2...

    
        * Childcare and healthy eating
    

Childcare centres should provide healthy meals for your children...

    
        * Children's diet - fruit and vegetables
    

If you eat and enjoy fruit and vegetables every day, your child may eventually
follow your lead...

    
        * Eating tips for babies
    

First foods for babies can be prepared easily and cheaply at home without
salt, seasonings and sweeteners...

    
        * Eating tips for children (3) - older toddlers
    

Offer children the same foods as the family, with a variety of textures and
flavours for balanced nutrition...

    
        * Eating tips for young toddlers
    

Children have a natural ability to sense when they are hungry and when they
are full...

    
        * Soft drinks, juice and sweet drinks - children
    

Encourage children to drink and enjoy water. Sweet drinks such as juice,
cordial and soft drinks may cause health problems for children if consumed in
large amounts...

    
        * Toddlers and fussy eating
    

If you restrict yourself to a narrow range of foods, your child will notice
and copy your wariness...

    
        * Toddlers and mealtime manners
    

Some toddlers do most of their eating on the run, refusing to sit down at the
table at all...

#### Care and wellbeing

    
        * Baby bath - bathing (video)
    

Detailing on bathing from the Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Baby bath - preparation and safety (video)
    

Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Baby bath - skin care (video)
    

Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital...

    
        * Childhood immunisation
    

Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious
childhood infections...

    
        * Children and health services
    

There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services
for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria...

    
        * Child safety in the car
    

Taking care to restrain children correctly while travelling in a car is the
best way to prevent injuries...

    
        * Dental checks for young children
    

Children should have an oral health check by the time they turn two...

    
        * Immunisations - vaccinations in Victoria, Australia (video)
    

Vaccinations are encouraged for all individuals living in the state of
Victoria, Australia. The immunisation program in Victoria may be different
than other countries, and individuals who have moved...

    
        * Melissa's story (video)
    

Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old...

    
        * No Jab No Play
    

No Jab No Play – from 1 January 2016, all parents/guardians seeking to enrol
their child at an early childhood service in Victoria must provide evidence
that the child is fully immunised for their age...

    
        * Phototherapy at Home
    

Jaundice is very common in newborns, so it’s nothing to be too worried about.
Treatment is very easy and safe. It all happens using blue light from a
special blanket that you wrap your baby in. The...

    
        * The Maternal and Child Health phone app
    

The Maternal & Child Health app (MCH) provides reliable maternal and child
health (MCH) information that families can use every day...

    
        * Travelling with children
    

If your child is old enough, involve them in planning a trip so they can get
excited about it...

#### Health conditions and complaints

    
        * Asthma in childhood - triggers (video)
    

Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's
asthma to flare up...

    
        * Back pain in children
    

Children with back pain may grow into adults with chronic bad backs, so it is
important to encourage sensible back care...

    
        * Bedwetting
    

Bedwetting is a problem for many children and punishing them for it will only
add to their distress...

    
        * Bronchiolitis
    

Bronchiolitis is a common chest infection in babies under six months of age...

    
        * Colic
    

Caring for a crying baby with colic can be stressful, so take some time out to
calm down...

    
        * Constipation and children
    

A healthy diet, plenty of fluids, exercise and regular toilet habits can help
relieve constipation in children...

    
        * Cradle cap
    

Cradle cap is not contagious and it is not caused by poor hygiene or bad
parenting...

    
        * Croup
    

Croup is a viral infection of the throat and windpipe that causes noisy
breathing, a hoarse voice and a harsh, barking cough...

    
        * Fever - children
    

Fever is a way in which the body fights infection. A fever is not dangerous
and does not always indicate a serious illness...

    
        * Gastroenteritis in children
    

Gastroenteritis or Gastro can be dangerous for very young babies. Gastro is
common in young children and spreads easily. Gastro is a bowel infection which
causes diarrhoea (runny or watery poo) and...

    
        * Nappy rash
    

Most babies get nappy rash at some stage, no matter how well they are cared
for...

    
        * Phototherapy at Home
    

Jaundice is very common in newborns, so it’s nothing to be too worried about.
Treatment is very easy and safe. It all happens using blue light from a
special blanket that you wrap your baby in. The...

    
        * Roseola infantum
    

Roseola is a mild viral infection with associated fever and rash that affects
babies and young children...

#### Sleep

    
        * Baby care - moving from cot to bed
    

Some children are unsettled the first few nights in a 'big bed'. Try to be
patient, loving and reassuring...

    
        * Sleep and your baby
    

Sleeping habits are learned, so try to set up a bedtime routine for your baby
as soon as you can...

    
        * Sleep - children and naps
    

A child needs a daytime nap until they are around two and a half to three
years of age...

    
        * Sleep - children and nightmares
    

Your child may have only a few scary dreams a year, or be troubled by
nightmares much more often...

    
        * Sudden unexpected death in infants (SUDI and SIDS)
    

You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe
sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke...

#### Safety

    
        * Animals and child safety
    

Children should always be closely supervised near animals and taught how to
behave safely around pets...

    
        * Babies and safety
    

Most injuries to babies do not occur by chance - many are predictable and
largely preventable...

    
        * Baby care - moving from cot to bed
    

Some children are unsettled the first few nights in a 'big bed'. Try to be
patient, loving and reassuring...

    
        * Baby furniture - safety tips
    

Even if your baby furniture meets every safety standard and recommendation,
your child still needs close supervision...

    
        * Bicycle safety and children
    

As they grow and develop, and with the help of adults, children become
increasingly aware of how they can manage their own safety and become safer
road and bicycle users...

    
        * Burns and scalds - children
    

Most hot tap water scald injuries to children happen in the bathroom...

    
        * Child safety and injury prevention
    

By making a few practical changes to your home, you can dramatically reduce
the risk of injury to your child...

    
        * Child safety – at home
    

The best way to reduce the risk of injury to children is to remove a
potentially dangerous item or add a safety product...

    
        * Child safety in the car
    

Taking care to restrain children correctly while travelling in a car is the
best way to prevent injuries...

    
        * Family violence and children
    

Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional
and behavioural problems...

    
        * Farm safety – children
    

Children who live on farms are at greater risk of injury and death than their
parents or other farm workers...

    
        * Hot weather and child safety
    

Babies and children can quickly lose body fluids in hot weather, which can
lead to dehydration...

    
        * Playgrounds and child safety
    

Play environments can be safe and beneficial for your child. With proper
planning, you can make sure your child gets plenty of playtime activity...

    
        * Poisoning and child safety
    

Call the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26 immediately if you suspect
your child has been poisoned or given the wrong medicine or the wrong dose of
medicine...

    
        * Road and traffic safety for children
    

As they grow and develop, and with the help of adults, children become
increasingly aware of how they can manage their own safety, and become safer
road users...

    
        * Sudden unexpected death in infants (SUDI and SIDS)
    

You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe
sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke...

    
        * Water safety for children
    

Toddlers are most at risk of drowning because they are mobile and curious but
don't understand the danger of water...

#### Grief and trauma

    
        * Child Protection Service
    

Child Protection provides child-centred, family-focused services to protect
children from harm caused by abuse within the family...

    
        * Death of a baby
    

Miscarriage, stillbirth or neonatal death is a shattering event for those
expecting a baby, and for their families. Grief, relationship stresses and
anxiety about subsequent pregnancies are common in...

    
        * Sudden unexpected death in infants (SUDI and SIDS)
    

You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe
sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke...

    
        * Trauma and children - newborns to two years
    

Babies and toddlers can be as affected by trauma as any other family member...

    
        * Trauma and children – tips for parents
    

Tell your child the facts about a distressing or frightening experience using
language they can understand...

    
        * Trauma and children - two to five years
    

Preschoolers may not have the words but will show their distress at traumatic
events through changes in behaviour and functioning...

### Related Information

    
        * No Jab No Play
    

No Jab No Play – from 1 January 2016, all parents/guardians seeking to enrol
their child at an early childhood service in Victoria must provide evidence
that the child is fully immunised for their age...

    
        * Vitamin K and newborn babies
    

With low levels of vitamin K, some babies can have severe bleeding into the
brain, causing significant brain damage...

    
        * Newborn bloodspot screening
    

Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a newborn bloodspot screening test
to identify those at risk of rare, but serious, medical conditions...

    
        * Phenylketonuria (PKU)
    

PKU is an inherited disorder that prevents the normal breakdown of a protein
found in some foods...

    
        * Maternal and child health services
    

Your local maternal and child health service will be a great source of support
after your baby is born...

Home

### Related information on other websites

    
        * Mercy Health - Breastmilk Bank.
    * Women's & Children's Health Care Network - Neonatal Services.
    

### Support Groups

    
        * Austprem Inc
    * Life's Little Treasures
    * Parent-Infant Research Institute, Infant Clinic
    * Victorian Infant Collaborative Study
    

## Content Partner

This page has been produced in consultation with and approved by: Royal
Women's Hospital

![Royal Women's

Hospital](/-/media/bhc/images/contentmodules/contentpartner/logo-rwhc.png)

Last updated: August 2014

Page content currently being reviewed.

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information
about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or
support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to
replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The
information and materials contained on this website are not intended to
constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy,
product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always
seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and
answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular
therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in
their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health &
Human Services shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the
materials contained on this website.

![Nurse-on-call 1300 60 60

24](/-/media/bhc/images/contentmodules/contenttiles/nurse-on-

call.jpg?h=243&la=en&w=300&hash=8D0122F321B660968822162FD96442D744E8AC54)

### NURSE-ON-CALL

Provides immediate, expert health advice from a registered nurse. Call 1300 60
60 24

NURSE-ON-CALL

Service Search

### Service Search

Find services near you

Service: Select a service Aboriginal Health Clinic Aboriginal Health Worker
Acupuncture Adolescent Mental Health Services Adult Mental Health Services
Adult-community education Aged care assessment Aged Care information-referral
Aged Care Transport Aged Residential Care Air ambulance Alexander technique
therapy Anaesthesiology - Pain Medicine Aromatherapy Audiology Bereavement
counselling Biorhythm services Blood donation Blood transport Bowen therapy
Cancer Support Groups Cardiology Cardiothoracic surgery Carer support Case
management for older persons Cemeteries & Fees Cemetery operation Child
protection-child abuse report Childrens play programs Chinese herbal medicine
Chiropractic Chronic Disease Management Clinical Genetics Clinical
Pharmacology Community bus Community Cancer Services Community Hours Cranio-
Sacral Therapy Cremation Crisis counselling Crisis-emergency accommodation
Culturally tailored health promotion Culturally tailored support groups Death
service information Delivered meals Deputising Service Dermatology Diabetes
Educator Diagnostic Ultrasound Dietetics Disability advocacy Disability aids -
equipment Disability Care Transport Disability case management Disability
information-referral Disability support packages Disability supported
accommodation Drug and-or alcohol counselling Drug and-or alcohol support
groups Early childhood intervention Education information-referral Emergency
Department Emergency medical Employment placement and-or support Endocrinology
Endodontic Exercise Physiology Family day care Family planning Family Violence
Family violence counselling Feldenkrais Financial assistance Financial
counselling Financial information-advice Flying doctor service Food Relief-
food-meals Food safety Foster care Friendly visiting Funeral services
Gastroenterology Gastroenterology - Hepatology General dental General Mental
Health Services General Practice/GP (doctor) General Practice-GP Generalist
counselling Genetic counselling Geriatric medicine Gynaecological Oncology
Gynaecology Health advocacy-Liaison service Health counselling Health
information-referral Hearing aids - equipment Hepatology Higher education
Holiday programs Home care-housekeeping assistance Home maintenance and repair
Home Medicine Review Home Nursing Homelessness support Homoeopathy Hospital
Hospital Services Housing information-referral Hydrotherapy Hypnotherapy
Immunisation Immunology - Allergy Infectious diseases Inpatients Integrated
Family Services Intensive care medicine Juvenile Justice Kindergarten-
preschool Kinesiology Kinship Care Legal advocacy Legal information-advice-
referral Library Long day child care Magnetic Resonance Imaging Magnetic
therapy Martial arts Massage therapy Material aid Maternal - child health
Maternity & Newborn Services Mediation Medical Oncology Medical Research
Meditation Mental health advocacy Mental health information-referral Mental
Health Services Migrant Health Clinic Music Therapy Myotherapy Naturopathy
Needle - Syringe exchange Neonatology - Perinatology Nephrology Neurology
Neurosurgery Nuclear Medicine Nurse lead Clinic Nurse Practitioner lead Clinic
Nursing Nutrition Obstetrics Obstetrics - Gynaecology Occasional child care
Occupational Medicine Occupational therapy Ophthalmology Optometry Oral
medicine Oral surgery Orthodontic Orthopaedic surgery Osteopathy Outpatients
Outreach Service Outside school hours care Paediatric Cardiology Paediatric
Clinical Genetics Paediatric Clinical Pharmacology Paediatric Dentistry
Paediatric Dermatology Paediatric Endocrinology Paediatric Haematology
Paediatric Immunology Allergy Paediatric Infectious diseases Paediatric
intensive care medicine Paediatric Medical Oncology Paediatric Medicine
Paediatric Nephrology Paediatric Neurology Paediatric Nuclear Medicine
Paediatric Rehabilitation Medicine Paediatric Rheumatology Paediatric Sleep
Medicine Paediatric Surgery Paediatric Thoracic Medicine Palliative Medicine
Pathology - Clinical Chemistry Pathology - General Pathology - Genetics
Pathology - Haematology Pathology - Immunology Pathology - Microbiology
Patient transport Periodontic Personal alarms-alerts Personal care for older
persons Personal fitness training Pharmacy Physical activity group Physical
activity programs Physical fitness testing Physiotherapy Pilates Placement
Protection Planned activity groups Plastic - Reconstructive Surgery Playgroup
Podiatry Primary education Problem gambling counselling Prosthetics -
Orthotics Prosthodontic Psychiatry Psychology Public Health Medicine Public
rental housing Quit program Radiation oncology Reflexology Refugee Health
Clinic Rehabilitation Medicine Reiki Relationship counselling Relaxation
therapy Respite care Rheumatology School nursing Secondary education Sexual
assault counselling Sexual health Shiatsu Sleep Medicine Social Support Social
Work Speech pathology-therapy Spiritual Counselling Sporting club Support
groups Surgery - General Telephone Counselling Thoracic medicine Toy library
Training - vocational education Translating Services Trauma counselling
Urogynaecology Urology Vascular surgery Veterans Services Victims of crime
counselling Victorian Cardiac Rehabilitation Directory Vocational
Rehabilitation Western herbal medicine Womens Health Clinic Yoga Youth drop
in-assistance-support

Location:

Type a minimum of three characters then press UP or DOWN on the keyboard to
navigate the autocompleted search results

_Use my location_

### Recent Activity

3 people have watched a video today

    
        * ## Health topics
    
      * Conditions and treatments
      * Healthy living
      * Services and support
      *     * ## Explore
    
      * Recipes
      * Healthy pantry
      * Videos
      * Consumer medicine information
      * Multilingual health information - Health Translations Directory
    * ## About
    
      * About us
      * Accessibility
      * Content partners
      * Privacy
      * Terms of use
      * Contact us
    * ## Connect with us
    
      * Facebook
      * Twitter
      * YouTube
    

Page last reviewed: 30 Aug 2014

https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/health/healthyliving/premature-babies

    
        * https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/about/privacy
    

Privacy Statement

    
        * https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/about/terms-of-use
    

Copyright Notice

    
        * https://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au:443/about/terms-of-use
    

Disclaimer Notice

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health & Human
Services, State Government of Victoria, Australia

© Copyright State of Victoria 2018.

Back to Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

