

Advanced features of this website require that you enable JavaScript in your
browser. Thank you!

# Extended Comments for Students

## My 6 word autobiography: Seeking ways to make a difference. This blog

provides more information packed comments than possible in blog comments. I'm
not an expert in any field but interested in many. Content is open to
correction if needed.

# Menu

Skip to content

    
        * Home
    

![](http://rossmannellcomments.edublogs.org/files/2015/05/cropped-2013-0511-Sunrise-

on-a-misty-morning-Background-04-2hitgsx.jpg)

# Comparing Population Densities of Australia, Canada, Great Britain, New

Zealand and U.S.A.

May 8, 2013 â€¢ rossmannell â€¢ 11 Comments

### For the Mr. Avery and Class "Our World Our Numbers post"...

### Our World, Our Numbers on: Population and Area

# **Of Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, New Zealand and U.S.A., which

country is largest by population density?**

## Seeing a post looking at people and land area, I wondered how the

population densities of Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, New Zealand and
U.S.A. might compare.

## Population density is how many people there are for every square kilometre

or mile of land area in a country. We take the population of a country and
divide by the land area.

## **Which country has the highest population density?**

## ![](http://rossmannellcomments.edublogs.org/files/2013/05/Flag-United-

Kingdom-1a7s96i-1024x511.jpg)

Schools and students have permission to use this graphic for non-commercial,
educational purposes.

# **The United Kingdom**

## Let's look at the order of the countries according to the information I

used to find the answer.

## **Area**

## 1. U.S.A. (9,826,675 square kilometres)

## 2. Canada (9,984,670 square kilometres)

## 3. Australia (7,692,024 square kilometres)

## 4. New Zealand (268,680 square kilometres)

## 5. United Kingdom (243,610 square kilometres)

##

## **Population**

## 1. U.S.A. (314,000,000)

## 2. United Kingdom (62,640,000)

## 3. Canada (34,480,000)

## 4. Australia (23,000,000)

## 5. New Zealand (4,466,424)

##

## **Population Density**

## 1. United Kingdom (257.13 people per square kilometres)

## 2. U.S.A. (31.95 people per square kilometres)

## 3. New Zealand (16.62 people per square kilometres)

## 4. Canada (3.45 people per square kilometres)

## 5. Australia (2.99 people per square kilometres)

## I was asked to supply a chart (graph). This column graph has been inserted

to show relative population densities, including Japan mentioned in the
comment section.

.

![](https://rossmannellcomments.edublogs.org/files/2013/05/2013-Chart-for-

Blog-Post-r2nuyi-2567b4i.jpg)

Schools and students have permission to use this graphic for non-commercial,
educational purposes.

## Can you see the smallest country by area has the highest population

density? (N.B. Adding Japan changed this slightly as it became the third
smallest country by area yet had the highest population density.)

## We must remember, when looking at Canada and Australia and their low

population densities, Canada has large parts of the country in Arctic regions
and Australia has large areas of desert. Below is a link I made comparing
Great Britain and Australia. It gives information about Australia and its
land.

## http://rossmannellcomments.edublogs.org/2013/05/06/great-britain-and-

australia-compared-for-our-world-our-numbers/

Posted in Australia, Geography, Maths, New Zealand, Our World, Its Nations and
Continents and tagged Area, Australia, Canada, Great Britain, New Zealand,
population, population density, U.S.A. on May 8, 2013 by rossmannell.

### Post navigation

Â« Great Britain and Australia compared for Our World, Our Numbers A Letter
From Albert Einstein (fictional) for Mrs. Yollis and class Â»

## 11 thoughts on "Comparing Population Densities of Australia, Canada, Great

Britain, New Zealand and U.S.A."

    
        1. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

Anonymous

February 28, 2014 at 10:12

This really helped me with my project

Reply â†“

    
          1. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

Anonymous

November 20, 2017 at 17:58

Same.PS Could you include a graph maybe???

Reply â†“

    
            1. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

rossmannell

Post authorNovember 21, 2017 at 23:04

I have inserted a chart (column graph) showing relative population densities.
I hope it helps.

Reply â†“

    
        2. ![](http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/e7b2baa2f3f86443b80f6f65e1879f95?s=48&d=mystery&r=G)
    

Anonymous 2

November 25, 2016 at 15:35

This helped with my geography work, thanks ðŸ™‚

Reply â†“

    
          1. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

rossmannell

Post authorNovember 26, 2016 at 21:45

You're welcome.

Reply â†“

    
        3. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

Anonymous

December 4, 2016 at 08:20

Amazingly helpful, thank you for your efforts ðŸ™‚

Reply â†“

    
        4. ![](http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/51ab8eac37ae03085510b9466bb5f46b?s=48&d=mystery&r=G)
    

Amanda

December 4, 2016 at 08:23

May I ask where Japan ranks? Am thinking that Japan is a similar land size to
the UK?

Reply â†“

    
          1. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

rossmannell

Post authorJanuary 7, 2017 at 19:34

My apologies for the delay, Amanda. The second half of the year and especially
November and December are very busy times for me. Here is the data for Japan
(as according to Wikipedia)â€¦

Japan's area - 377 900 Square kilometres  
Japan's Population - 127 million approx. at 2015  
Population density - 336.07 people per square kilometre placing it above UK.

The density is calculated by dividing the population by area.

Hope this isn't too late if you needed the information.

Reply â†“

    
        5. ![](http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/f9725428750836ad0488448d41f6ede3?s=48&d=mystery&r=G)
    

Dinah

February 8, 2018 at 15:05

Ha ha thanks. Who else is here because they got assigned "Making Connections:
Issues in Canadian Geography, 3rd edition"? Well I did and this is where I
went to look ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚

Reply â†“

    
        6. ![](http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/1b4ea94595f8505273e4d28d1c0259da?s=48&d=mystery&r=G)
    

josh

May 18, 2018 at 11:17

Thanks helped a lot

Reply â†“

    
        7. ![](http://edublogs.org/wp-content/default-avatar-48.png?r=G)
    

Anonymous

June 2, 2018 at 20:26

This is really cool!

Reply â†“

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published.

Comment

Name

Email

Notify me of followup comments via e-mail

### Search

Search for:

### Subscribe by Email

Completely spam free, opt out any time.

Please, insert a valid email.

Thank you, your email will be added to the mailing list once you click on the
link in the confirmation email.

Your Email

Leave this field blank

Please prove that you are not a robot.

![](http://rossmannellcomments.edublogs.org/wp-content/mu-plugins/subscribe-

by-email-edublogs/assets/images/ajax-loader.gif)

### Blogroll

    
        * Education Matters
    * Exploring Ideas: How to and why
    * Google+
    * My You Tube Channel
    * Ross's Writing Blog (G)
    * Website (basic only)
    

### Recent Posts

    
        * Veterans / Remembrance Day - November 11
    * Equinox down south
    * Volcanic MIneral Samples from Hawaii & New Zealand
    * Wombats and Other Marsupials
    * Rocks, Minerals and Fossils
    * Some Aussies Finding a New Home
    * Packages and the BioBlitz
    * Some of my favourite sounds
    * Global Grade 3 and National Fossil Day
    * A Closer Look at MAPS!
    

### Blog Statistics

### **Clustrmap**

##### **Start: March 26, 2015**

![Locations of visitors to this page](http://www3.clustrmaps.com/stats/maps-

no_clusters/rossmannellcomments.edublogs.org--thumb.jpg)

#### **Page Views to March 25, 2015**

### **126759**

### **National Visits**

###### from Feb 2013 ![Flag

Counter](http://s06.flagcounter.com/count/HLZd/bg_FFFFFF/txt_000000/border_CCCCCC/columns_3/maxflags_200/viewers_0/labels_1/pageviews_0/flags_1/)

### Archives

    
        * November 2017 (1)
    * September 2017 (1)
    * May 2017 (1)
    * November 2016 (2)
    * October 2016 (1)
    * November 2015 (1)
    * October 2015 (3)
    * July 2015 (1)
    * May 2015 (4)
    * April 2015 (1)
    * March 2015 (3)
    * February 2015 (1)
    * November 2014 (1)
    * August 2014 (1)
    * July 2014 (1)
    * June 2014 (2)
    * May 2014 (2)
    * April 2014 (6)
    * March 2014 (10)
    * February 2014 (2)
    * January 2014 (1)
    * December 2013 (1)
    * November 2013 (3)
    * October 2013 (6)
    * September 2013 (1)
    * July 2013 (7)
    * June 2013 (12)
    * May 2013 (16)
    * April 2013 (7)
    * March 2013 (25)
    * February 2013 (2)
    * December 2012 (2)
    * November 2012 (3)
    * October 2012 (9)
    * September 2012 (7)
    * August 2012 (2)
    * July 2012 (4)
    * June 2012 (13)
    * May 2012 (49)
    

Register Log in

Powered by WordPress

Powered by WordPress | Hosted by Edublogs | Protected by CloudFlare

Skip to toolbar

    
        * ![](https://edublogs.org/files/2012/06/logo-adminbar-17skm7t.png)
    
      * Edublogs Home
      * Help and Support
      * The Edublogger
      * Community
      * Get A Blog!
    
    * Log in
    * Search
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

