

Skip to content

Menu

The Brain Bank North West

Science in the City

Menu

        
                  * About
          * Events
        

# What can science add to the abortion debate?

April 16, 2013December 4, 2012 by The Brain Bank North West

Few topics generate such a passionate division in opinion as abortion and
ultimately there is no easy answer when choosing between an unborn child's
right to life and a woman's right to freedom over her own body. However, after
reading about the uproar caused by the tragic death of Savita Halappanavar, I
knew I wanted to add my own voice to this debate.
![](https://i1.wp.com/thebrainbank.scienceblog.com/files/2012/12/life.jpg?resize=236%2C160)Which
left me pondering the following question: what can a science blog bring to the
table when tackling a heated moral debate like this?

The answer, I believe, is something few mainstream sources address: the
development of the brain and consciousness (as we understand it) in the
growing fetus.

![](https://i1.wp.com/thebrainbank.scienceblog.com/files/2012/12/Sperm-

egg.jpg?resize=192%2C130)Of course if you are of the opinion that 'life begins
at the moment of conception' the emergence of consciousness is probably a moot
point. However, according to recent statistics more than 60% of UK adults and
18-35 year-olds in the republic of Ireland are pro-choice. This means that,
under certain circumstances, they accept abortion as a viable option, raising
a particularly difficult question. Assuming abortion, in theory, is
acceptable, is there a point during the pregnancy when it becomes unacceptable
and how do we decide where to draw this line?

Current UK legislation states that an abortion must be carried out during the
first 24 weeks of pregnancy. However, guidelines also state that the procedure
should ideally be performed before 12 weeks. Current legislation bases its
'upper limit' on the survival rate of premature babies, which is significantly
reduced prior to 24 weeks (Percentage of babies successfully discharged from
hospital after premature birth at 24 weeks: 33.6%, 23 weeks: 19.9%, 22
weeks:9.1%).

Almost 90% of UK abortions are performed within the first 12 weeks of
pregnancy. During this time there is no scientific doubt that the developing
fetus is incapable of any form of conscious awareness. The fetal brain does
not begin to develop until 3-4 weeks into the pregnancy, at which point it is
little more than a hollow tube filled with dividing neurons. Between weeks 4
and 8 this neural tissue grows forming the major divisions of the adult brain
(forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain and spinal cord). By 8 weeks recognisable
facial features have developed and the cerebral cortex separates into two
distinct hemispheres. By the end of the first trimester (12 weeks) nerve cells
are beginning to form rudimentary connections between different areas of the
brain. However, these connections are sparse and incapable of performing the
same functions as an adult brain. So by 12 weeks, although the fetus is
certainly starting to look like a little human, the neural circuits
responsible for conscious awareness are yet to develop.

The first trimester is also the time when around three quarters of spontaneous
miscarriages occur. Miscarriages are possible throughout the pregnancy and are
much more common than most people realise. One in eight women who are aware of
their pregnancy experience a miscarriage, with many more occurring before the
woman is even aware she has fallen pregnant.

As the complexity of the fetal brain grows, forming structures similar to
those we recognise in the adult, so the does the fetus' ability to experience
and respond to its environment. Indeed, studies have shown that from 16 weeks
the fetus can respond to low frequency sound and by 19 weeks will withdraw a
limb or flinch in response to pain. An observer would certainly think these
responses look very much like the start of conscious awareness. However,
during these early days the neural pathways responsible for converting senses
to conscious experiences have yet to develop. This means what we are seeing
are just reflexes, probably controlled entirely by the developing brainstem
and spinal cord.

In fact, we know that the brain structures necessary for conscious experience
of pain do not develop until 29-30 weeks, while the conscious processing of
sounds is only made possible after the 26th week. Even when the fetal brain
possesses all its adult structures, scientists are cautious to assume it
posesses what we refer to as 'consciousness'. This is mainly because the low
oxygen levels and a constant barrage of sleep-inducing chemicals from the
placenta ensure that, until birth, the foetus remains heavily sedated.

Ultimately, although science cannot and should not try and answer the moral
questions behind abortion, it can give us some amazing insights into how the
brain develops. It seems that, in the womb, a fetus is unlikely to ever
experience traditional consciousness. However, we do know that from the time
neural pathways are in place (the last weeks before birth) the fetus can form
rudimentary memories. Meaning that after birth it can show a preference for
its mother's voice and other sounds and smells experienced in the womb - yes,
newborn babies show a liking for the smell of amniotic fluid.

Therefore, although the 'upper limit' on abortion remains relatively
arbitrary. Its current position at 24 weeks appears to fit well with both
premature birth survival rates and, in terms of neural development, a time
before any major connections are in place. Making it, in my eyes, as pretty
good point at which to draw this line.

Post by: Sarah Fox

### Share this:

        
                  * Facebook
          * LinkedIn
          * Twitter
          * Categories Sarah Fox Post navigation
        

Toys for Girls and Boys

Ketamine: from drug of abuse to anti-depressant.

### 129 thoughts on "What can science add to the abortion debate?"

        
                  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/72721f896805e2b4f1f400af1a60ce57?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

THEMAYAN

December 4, 2012 at 9:22 pm | Reply

If you were wrong concerning your use of the statement "This means what we are
seeing are just reflexes, probably controlled entirely by the developing
brainstem"  
if you were speak to the parents of these unborn babies who read this article
and took you at your word. What would you say to them? Would it be something
sorry, my bad?

Unborn babies can feel pain  
Scientific evidence reveals that unborn babies do, indeed, feel pain  
Robert J. White, M.D., PhD., professor of neurosurgery, Case Western
University

The evidence of fetal pain  
With the advent of sonograms and live-action ultrasound images, neonatologists
and nurses are able to see unborn babies at 20 weeks gestation react
physically to outside stimuli such as sound, light and touch. The sense of
touch is so acute that even a single human hair drawn across an unborn baby's
palm causes the baby to make a fist.

Did you know that this 20-week-old unborn child can feel pain?  
Surgeons entering the womb to perform corrective procedures on tiny unborn
babies have seen those babies flinch, jerk and recoil from sharp objects and
incisions.

“The neural pathways are present for pain to be experienced quite early by
unborn babies,” explains Steven Calvin, M.D., perinatologist, chair of the
Program in Human Rights Medicine, University of Minnesota, where he teaches
obstetrics.

Medical facts of fetal pain  
Anatomical studies have documented that the body’s pain network—the spino-
thalamic pathway—is established by 20 weeks gestation.

• “At 20 weeks, the fetal brain has the full complement of brain cells present
in adulthood, ready and waiting to receive pain signals from the body, and
their electrical activity can be recorded by standard electroencephalography
(EEG).”  
— Dr. Paul Ranalli, neurologist, University of Toronto

• An unborn baby at 20 weeks gestation “is fully capable of experiencing pain.
… Without question, [abortion] is a dreadfully painful experience for any
infant subjected to such a surgical procedure.”

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 5, 2012 at 11:07 am | Reply

Hi THEMAYAN, thanks for your comment, it's always nice to see people doing
their research before commenting!

So a couple of brief points:

The physical response you see to a painful stimuli such as a pin prick to a
limb can be mediated entirely by lower brain structures. Interestingly,
infants born with birth defects meaning that they never develop a cortex will
respond to pain in largely the same manner as intact infants, this includes
withdrawal of the limb and in some cases displaying facial expressions
indicative of pain (similar responses can also be seen in some brain dead
adults). However given their defect it is highly unlikely that their conscious
experience of pain is equivalent to ours (indeed experience is probably not
even the correct word).

My research always comes from peer reviewed papers, however I do not always
link back to these since unfortunately many are not available for public
access. (My assertion that a infant under 24 weeks is unlikely to experience
pain as we know it is taken from this review article
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19112406) which states 'Cortical processes
occur only after thalamocortical connections and pathways have been completed
at the 26th gestational week').

However I'm quite certain that this is a work in progress, as is the beauty of
scientific research we are constantly learning more and broadening our
understanding.

The Doctor you quote has written his own interesting review article, which
unfortunately I cannot fully access. However in the abstract he does not
assert that the fetus feels pain, just that it is capable of responding to
painful stimuli, which is not the same thing.
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15171500) This is an important issue in
his field (fetal surgery), since even without a conscious experience of pain,
the neurotransmitters released in response to a 'painful' stimuli (released by
lower brain structures), could still influence future brain development.

Also to note that 'having a full compliment of brain cells' is irrelevant to
the ability to perceive pain, indeed perception is linked better with how
these are connected and how they communicate (interestingly the manner by
which fetal neurons communicate is different from that of an adult, they
actually rely heavily on different neurotransmitters than those used in the
adult brain).

The final point I will make, which was something which I found particularly
interesting and did not know before I began researching this article, is that
the fetus remains under heavy sedation in the womb, therefore even if
structures were in place to form a conscious awareness of pain, it is likely
that these are numbed and will not respond in the same manner as an awake
adult.

However I agree that this is very important research, and something we cannot
afford to be complacent with. So certainly further studies are necessary in
the future to give us more information.

I hope you found researching this topic as interesting as I did! Many thanks
again for your comment.

Sarah

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cebaa5d53f159494ceea512b1fd55fd9?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Steve Kellmeyer

December 6, 2012 at 4:38 am | Reply

The child may not be able to feel pain as we do, but that doesn't tell us it
cannot experience pain at all.

Why are we taking chances on that?

Your comments about spontaneous abortion don't seem to follow. To say that a
child can die doesn't tell us anything about how it is living.

To say that a child is heavily sedated also doesn't tell us anything. Is it
morally acceptable to kill those under sedation, whether heavy or light,
simply because they are both sedated and inconvenient?

Scientific facts about development are lovely, but they tell us nothing about
moral decisions.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 6, 2012 at 9:47 am | Reply

Hi Steve, thanks for your comment

Does it not? It depends on your definition of 'experience' a creature with
only a couple of neurons can respond to pain by moving away, but there is
little doubt that it is not consciously aware of this experience, even a
single cell can move away from 'danger'. I don't dent that we must tread
carefully when discussing 'upper time limits', however we also do not want to
deny the rights of and perhaps ruin the life of a sentient human being over
something which may be little more than a red herring? Keep in mind that
setting a blanket legislation undoubtedly contributed to the trigic death of
Savita Halappanavar.

That said…Uk statistics show that 90% of abortions are carried out before the
first trimester (and I assume these statistics are pretty reliable since
abortion is legal in this country so most those performed will be in an
official medical establishment, where records will be kept). Guidelines state
that an abortion should be carried out before 12 weeks, any wich are conducted
between 12 and 24 are for important medical reasons. Thus the vast majority of
abortions are conducted before there is any doubt that the fetus can hold any
kind of awareness.

Yes this is as far as science can go with this debate, it can simply provide
the facts (which are important when considering legislation). However, it is
up to society to decide on the morality of the issue

I assume anyone who aligns themselves with the pro-life argument will never
opt for an abortion, however if your leanings are pro-choice you do not wish
to force your beliefs on other sentient human beings, you just wish for the
opportunity to choose your own path. Current legislation allows for this,
would it be better to allow a outspoken minority (according to statistics) to
force their wishes on people they do not know, living through situations they
probably have never experienced themselves? - but as I said my moral
standpoint is irrelevant to the content of this post, since I have no wish to
argue over this matter here, there are others who can do that much more
successfully than myself!

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/19c5c5ee86a287105396d480505aafab?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

cloonmore

December 8, 2012 at 4:13 pm

thebrainbank wrote: "Keep in mind that setting a blanket legislation
undoubtedly contributed to the trigic death of Savita Halappanavar."

That's an interesting statement to read on an ostensible science blog, penned
by the would-be proponent of the "scientific view." The only fact that seems
indisputable in the Savita affair is that the widespread dissemination of
precisely this unscientific view has directly led to the current hysteria. So
please provide the evidentiary basis for your statement that "a blanket
legislation undoubtedly contributed" to SH's death.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 11, 2012 at 10:06 am

Hi cloonmore

Many thanks for your comment.

Until the inquiry and post mortem are completed the medical facts surrounding
this particular case cannot be verified. However, I wonder if the current
'hysteria' may not really be hysterical at all, rather a collection of
rational minded people fighting an unjust blanket legislation, which values
the 'rights' of an unborn foetus (even one who doctors say will not survive)
over those of the woman carrying that foetus. The simple facts which we do
know (assuming news reports are accurate) are: 1) the doctors assessment at
the time of her being admitted to hospital were that she was suffering a
miscarriage and that the foetus would not survive, 2) she was in poor health
and this deteriorated over her stay in hospital. Although, the question still
remains as to whether a termination may have saved her life, the fact that
this wasn't even an option seems illogical.

I will be interested to learn what the inquiry into this incident reveals
however, I still believe that whatever the circumstances turn out to be the
case has raised a very valid point: that there are circumstances where such
'blanket' laws may need to be amended, certainly when a woman's life is at
risk.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/083862d204b41365d062557820dfbf13?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ken O'Kelley

December 12, 2012 at 3:53 am

Pardon the pun but you guys are killing me with this sentient being rhetoric.
This is just another attempt at making the killing of a human being
acceptable. So that we're all using the same definition:

Sentient:  
1: responsive to or conscious of sense impressions  
2: aware  
3: finely sensitive in perception or feeling

Are all elderly persons sentient depending upon their health situations? Are
those who are comatose sentient?

Also, you have based your premise of personhood on that of sentience. I argue
that sentience is not the definition of personhood. The definition of
personhood is when a human being is created and a human being is created at
conception.

Science does not help you in this argument. It hasn't helped you for at least
150 years.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/72721f896805e2b4f1f400af1a60ce57?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

THEMAYAN

December 6, 2012 at 6:21 am | Reply

"However I’m quite certain that this is a work in progress, as is the beauty
of scientific research we are constantly learning more and broadening our
understanding."

Fair enough, but instead of playing fast an loose with things that are not
empirically confirmed, isn't it better to take the side of caution since a
human fetus is incapable of using words like 'no please stop, your hurting
me!?

On a philosophical note, maybe there is a reason why a baby recoils from prick
of a sharp object, or shows facial expressions of pain when geting pulled
apart limb from limb. Maybe this is natures way of trying to tell us
something. I am a big fan of science. It is scientism that worries me.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e7463ae09fc1c37264317d2f7e43844?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

George

November 16, 2016 at 7:04 am | Reply

All of science is a work in progress. I'm curious just what you think
"empirically confirmed means".  
" In science, "fact" can only mean "confirmed to such a degree that it would
be perverse to withhold provisional assent."-Stephen Jay Gould.  
Its a fact that the neural substrates for pain simply aren't present at 24
weeks. It's not impossible that fetuses don't feel pain…sure. Its also not
impossible that your couch feels pain.  
Not sure why you bring up scientism. Science is a means of investigating and
describing the empirical/objective (not metaphysically privileged objectivity
mind you) world; the methodology doesn't do everything. It does not establish
our sense of art. I don't think one can construct a moral framework by using
science. Can neuro-science answer beyond reasonable doubt whether fetuses at
various stages feel pain? If fetuses are conscious. If fetuses have emotions.
I think it can. I think it has. Other branches of knowledge have the ability
to even adequate address those questions let alone answer them.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e7463ae09fc1c37264317d2f7e43844?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

George

November 16, 2016 at 7:11 am

If my comment goes through moderation…"don't" should follow "knowledge" in the
last sentence. "at 20 weeks" should precede before "don't feel pain in second
paragraph.

With that being said I hope my comment doesn't go through moderation. I
already regret posting it. If I could delete it I would delete (not edit) the
entire comment.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e7463ae09fc1c37264317d2f7e43844?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

George

November 16, 2016 at 7:31 am

I just realized that I was responding to a four year old comment as well. _All
the more reason to not let any of my comments on this post go through
moderation._

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e7463ae09fc1c37264317d2f7e43844?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

George

December 16, 2016 at 5:01 am

yuck. looks like my comment went through. checked the site just now to
confirm. Since it went through, I may as well correct it. Too many double
negatives. In "not impossible that fetuses don't feel pain", the "don't"
should be omitted.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c1aa8d34c3d9b99d2f972cb17175aa51?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

B

May 17, 2019 at 9:28 pm

I think it's fine, years later people are still reading this. So it's good
that posted. People reading this who try to argue with emotional nonsense
rather than logic or science are simply never going to understand. You cannot
educate somebody who refuses it. You can't teach someone who thinks their
emotions and feelings trump facts. Aside from that, this is the exact data I
was looking for and was interested in. Years after this post, in 2019, we are
facing a serious crap show and I'm glad my husband and I both jumped ahead of
it and got sterilized a few months ago.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9f883b370a56e9d3de4a3e7358a1152d?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

alienredqueen

November 5, 2015 at 8:04 pm | Reply

You are a research rock star! I appreciate your scientific approach to this
issue. Lord knows we sometimes need to balance science and emotion, and this
issue is one I have come to the conclusion that there is no "good" answer.
This is definitely one issue where there isn't black and white, because as
much as I like to stand for those who can not stand for themselves, I simply
can not justify taking away rights from one to give to another. A woman needs
to know she is more than just an incubator once she gets pregnant. As to
people using abortion as "birth control," I'm sure there are some, but we can
not take away a CHOICE for all women because of a few people's poor behavior
or choices. (I live in a red state and it's amazing to me how much overlap
there is between the people who use this argument to viamently defend their
"right to bear arms" in the wake of a shooting, and the people who
conveniently "forget" this argument when it comes to women's rights to choose.
)  
Also, people like to put the "it's a woman's responsibility to make sure she
doesn't get pregnant" idea out there. I feel like saying "Not counting
instances of rape and incest, why, yes, yes it is. Which also means it's OUR
responsibility and CHOICE to decide what to do if we DO get pregnant. Fuck on
off back to the fifties…"  
Sorry, this is a sore spot with me. I can't help but imagine a handmaid's tale
type deal where women are forced to carry babies to term because we have less
rights than a brood mare.  
This is all my long winded way of saying, while I know many people will choose
emotion over science, I hope this sort of information in your article reaches
more people and makes them realize that we can be logical about this to an
extent.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/feef18acc36e3055e9f8f7541b88b976?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

GibblyGoo

July 22, 2015 at 1:27 pm | Reply

The same sort of thing happens when animals are killed in even the most humane
ways, which is why there are many instances of people who have poked a dead
animal or even cut their heads off entirely yet their body still jerks and
moves sometimes in reaction to external stimuli. It is simply because there is
residual electricity left flowing through the nervous system and that is how
it is programmed to react. It is classifiable as pain? Yes, because that is
how the nervous system feels pain- but do they have the capacity to process
that pain? No, because their brain is dead by that point.

You could get more reasonably angry at stabbing a worm than this, because
living worms at least have enough of a functioning brain to process that they
are in pain.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/60fe14dfec06dac45473711544a0e6c3?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

ilovelucy

April 26, 2017 at 4:34 am | Reply

"The sense of touch is so acute that even a single human hair drawn across an
unborn baby’s palm causes the baby to make a fist."

That is literally a reflex. Babies have it for some time after birth. That's
why if you put your finger in a baby's palm, it grabs it. Like when the doctor
taps your knee.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/37851118a2692241bf59857d26bc2fc6?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

T. F. Allen

June 4, 2019 at 4:38 am | Reply

Feel is a broad term, but used here incorrectly in my opinion, as "feel" has
the implication of consciously processing, and as he pointed out, which can
easily be found on any academically accepted source, the part of the brain and
its connections that support conscious thought does not begin to develop until
after 24 weeks.

So, making this the cut off in every state would likely be an easy go,
especially if you point out these facts.

Here is a list of academically accepted sources I compiled on the subject.  
https://www.infuriatingfacts.com/2018/01/loyal-links-abortion.html

        
                  2. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/96fcf65f04b4a3bd1c4af39244536c6d?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Samss

December 5, 2012 at 3:10 am | Reply

TheMAYAN has said in the orginal article responding to stimuli does not equal
feeling.  
So either you did not read the article or you are an idioit

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/72721f896805e2b4f1f400af1a60ce57?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

THEMAYAN

December 5, 2012 at 9:07 am | Reply

No, I read the article, and even quoted the poster who's words were not as you
say……  
"responding to stimuli does not equal feeling" what he actually said was “This
means what we are seeing are just reflexes, (probably) controlled entirely by
the developing brainstem” This is an assumption, and I put emphasis on the
word "probably"

I cited a verifiable citation that disputes this notion, which included data
that was produced by someone who had credentials and experience in the field.
The poster does not cite any credentials nor did he provide any source
material, and secondly Samss, if your going to call someone an idiot, at least
first be able to spell the word idiot correctly. There are not 3 letters of I
in the word idiot as yo spelled it "idioit"

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/853ced6a17018a4fa96508a6c6bb22d4?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Madgodloki

April 15, 2015 at 7:04 am | Reply

“responding to stimuli does not equal feeling” what he actually said was “This
means what we are seeing are just reflexes, (probably) controlled entirely by
the developing brainstem” This is an assumption, and I put emphasis on the
word “probably”  
Well what we are seeing are definitely just reflexes, Its illogical to think
conception is when life begins, Think of tubal pregnancies the damn thing is
technically conceived and then implants itself somewhere wrong and kills the
mother.  
Well lets flip all this on its head you put a lot of emphasis on "what if the
baby is conscious" So i'm going to say I know for a fact 100% that the
pregnant woman is sentient and I know they've put in quite a bit of time in
the world, Once you're past 18 you've basically got tenure before then you're
the responsibility of your adult before you leave the birth canal you're not
even a developed human. Why would you take the chance letting a woman die for
stupid legislation? Just so you know baby dies too. Thanks to you making the
choices for people. You 100% will kill people in this manner. Is that more
moral just cause you can look the other way and call someone a slut or a
sinner and say they deserve the punishment? Is that really a decision you
think that you can impose on people, what does it matter if you can tell the
infant later that you're the reason its here instead of some other baby if
you're then telling that infant what it can and can't do while its alive, Its
like "welcome to the world jackass, now get in line so I can tell you what to
do next" When did women everywhere decide that some guy gets to decide what
they create? Or that some other woman can decide for them? Since when does
liberty mean "No choice"?

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/53c2a0bc949905030fe56c8f4f5df1b6?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Lil

July 20, 2015 at 11:17 am | Reply

I think conception is an appropriate beginning point for life. It is
genetically and biologically it's own entity with it's own growth and
development. If someone was left in a severe coma that required life support
but would be assure that they would regain full consciousness - you'd be
assured that they would be kept on life support.  
Cases where the mother's life is at stake, severe disability of the child or
in the case of rape are exceptions rather than the rule.  
I don't think babies deserve to die because they are 'unwanted'.  
Otherwise, it makes sense to me that unborn life should be respected and
valued. There are a lot of people who would love to adopt kids and I wish the
laws were less strict in this regards.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/feef18acc36e3055e9f8f7541b88b976?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

GibblyGoo

July 22, 2015 at 1:33 pm

Then you should also swear off cleaning products and killing off any bacteria
that happens to enter your body, or jelly fish, or worms, or insects- because
they are all living things equally deserving of life too that share the same
cognitive ability- if not even more than a fetus does at certain points of
gestation.

You're also not allowed to scratch your skin because that's killing your skin
cells that your body created- the developmental equivalent of a couple day old
baby.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0c7a82bfa2b604665dc2547ed751e58e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

N

October 27, 2018 at 12:09 pm | Reply

Right on! It is beyond me how people can be so hypocritical. They shit on
actual existing human beings and then expect you to understand their fake
passion for a clump of cells. Ask most of these same people how they feel
about welfare and they show their ignorance even more.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0c7a82bfa2b604665dc2547ed751e58e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

N

October 27, 2018 at 12:13 pm | Reply

And don't forget semen! I know many men who kill millions of tiny little
babies every day! We must create legislation to hold them accountable for
their dispicable behavior!

        
                  3. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/083862d204b41365d062557820dfbf13?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ken O'Kelley

December 5, 2012 at 7:57 am | Reply

I have a question for you Sarah Fox. If you were relaxing in your home and a
man walked in to your home to kill you would you desire someone to come and
try and save you from your murderer? I am very serious with my questioning and
I am not asking this willy nilly. I will ask it again: If you, Sarah Fox, were
being attacked and threatened with death would you desire someone to come to
your aid? I will ask the reader the same. Would you want someone to help you
if you were being murdered?

If you answer "yes" you would want someone to come to your aid then aren't we
obligated to assume that the child in the womb desires the same? Every pro
abortion argument emphasis the mother who is already living.

Nearly all abortions are done for some "other" reason other than the risk of
the life of the mother so I ask again - who is the advocate for the child? Who
is rescuing the child from the Doctor who would kill it? Who is attempting to
rescue the baby?

Regarding Science and when life begins allow me to quote Dr.Donna J. Harrison,
M.D., and president of the American Association of Pro Life Obstetricians and
Gynecologists:

"Since the mechanism by which mammals reproduce has been known for at least
the last 150 years, any biologist in the world can tell you that a mammal’s
life begins when the sperm from the father unites with the egg from the
mother. This process is called fertilization, and when the DNA from the father
and mother have combined, the egg is called a fertilized egg, or zygote. When
the zygote splits into two cells, it is called a two-celled embryo. When it
splits into four cells, it is called a four-celled embryo, etc. The definition
of “embryo” is “the youngest form of a being.”

If this being is nourished and protected, it will proceed uninterrupted
through the developmental stages of embryo, fetus, newborn, toddler, child,
teen, adult and aged adult: one continuous existence. This being never
develops into a pig, a frog or a tree, but only into a human. This being is
therefore, by definition, a living human being.

This fact is very inconvenient for those who want to treat embryonic and fetal
human beings as property. The real argument in the abortion debate is whether
or not this human being is a “person,” with all the legal rights and
protections of “personhood.”

Those who traffic in human tissue argue that he or she is not. This is the
same argument used in the Dred Scott decision in which the Supreme Court of
the United States declared that black Americans, though human, are not
“persons” under the law.

As long as “personhood” is denied to human beings in their embryonic and fetal
stages, the holocaust of abortion will continue."

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 5, 2012 at 11:13 am | Reply

Hi Ken

Many thanks for taking time to comment!

I hope you can appreciated that I have tried very hard not to comment on the
philosophical and moral questions involved in this debate in this post (these
issues are undoubtedly covered much more eloquently than I could manage by
other, more qualified bloggers).

Therefore the desire behind this article was simply to cover the development
of the fetal brain. A topic I found very interesting to research, and I hope
you also find interesting to read.

Therefore I apologise, for not giving you a detailed reply here, however I
hope you understand that my personal opinion on the morality of the debate,
and the argument of ('when life begins') is largely irrelevant to this post.

Sarah

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/083862d204b41365d062557820dfbf13?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ken O'Kelley

December 5, 2012 at 8:11 pm | Reply

Hello Sarah and thanks for the kind reply. I'm glad to stay on point with the
science and this is why I posted the Dr.'s words. What did you think of them?

The science argument is not on the side of the one who would kill human life
in the womb. Science has proven that the life of a human being begins at
conception. The sperm is not Sarah. The egg is not Sarah. When the sperm of
your father unites with the egg of your mother then we have the one and only
Sarah. All of the DNA which makes Sarah the human Sarah that posted here is
present at conception. Correct?

So without day 1 then Sarah can't get to day 2. Without day 2 then Sarah can't
get to day 2000….and onwardly you go. A person's life can be measured in
seconds, days, months, and years, and so day 1 of your unique existence began
at conception. To kill you at day 1 is to kill you at day 20, 478 of your
existence.

The zygote is a human being. It is not in the form that it is in at 90 years
of age but it is wholly human. The fetus is not as it is at 90 years of age
but it is wholly human. The baby, the adolescent, the 20 something, the 30
something……and so on are not as they are at 90. We are continually changing
from day one until death. Science proves this.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 6, 2012 at 12:06 am | Reply

Hi Ken

You make an interesting argument, however I disagree with a number of your
points:

Firstly I like to think 'Science' is and should remain neutral to the ethics
of abortion (i.e. science does not put forward any 'argument' about whether it
is right or wrong to terminate a pregnancy, it simply provides the facts, we
then make up our own minds).

Also I argue that the sperm and egg are very much Sarah, had a different sperm
or egg been involved I may actually be Frank….So it's amazing to note that a
part of me was actually present in my mothers womb back in the 50's (since
women are born with their full compliment of egg cells).

Also I think you must be more specific with your definition of life, as I
stated the sperm and egg both have equal potential to become a fully developed
human, and indeed sperm can move and make decisions based on simple biological
signals (fun fact of the day, sperm are attracted the the chemical scent of
'lilly of the valley' and will actually move towards this)….they certainly
seem 'alive', they move, make rudimentary decisions and will ultimately die.

So although the embryo is the first point where both paternal and maternal DNA
become one, without the precursors none of this would have been possible.

Also a meeting of sperm and egg does not necessarily lead to the development
of human life, the uterus is a harsh unforgiving environment, and technically
the embryo and mother are in a constant battle for nutrients, so many
pregnancies end in miscarriage (many more than we realise since this will
often occur before a woman even realises she is pregnant).

However as I mentioned earlier the ultimate judgement is a moral one, an
embryo does have the potential to form a new human, but so does an individual
sperm and egg….however few people would truly agree with the 'Monty Python -
every sperm is sacred' idea.

Science cannot answer these questions, that is up to society.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/74b67662b75673ea592503975ef8dd9c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Science Teach

April 17, 2015 at 8:05 pm

A quick note and curious to hear your opinion, Sarah…. I often make the
analogy that a zygote/embryo/fetus has not a mutualistic relationship with its
mother, but in fact often a parasitic. As a result, the fetus is dependent
upon its host for oxygen, nutrients, and waste removal. From a science
perspective, can something meet the definition of life, if it can not perform
respiration, metabolism, and excretion on its own?

The other analogy zygote/embryo, in any other location of your body would be
referred to as a tumor. Obviously, a zygote can't grow in breast tissue, but
initially, prior to differentiation, how similar is it to a tumor?

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9356b690a0274d2aa25beac2df05b95b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Alex Peter

December 5, 2012 at 4:09 pm | Reply

"If you answer 'yes' you would want someone to come to your aid then aren’t we
obligated to assume that the child in the womb desires the same?"  
No we aren't, because at least in the first 12 weeks, that organism growing
inside the womb doesn't have the mental capacity required for thoughts and
desires.

Your initial analogy with the intruder seeking to murder the person inside is
wrong, because it refers to an aware and sentient being, while a fetus isn't
any of that. Any moral and ethical concerns (in order to be taken seriously)
must refer to sentient beings. You don't speak about the morality of cutting
bread or crushing eggs or throwing rocks, do you? Why not? Because bread, eggs
and rocks are not sentient.

What anti-choice people like you try to do, is to obligate real sentient
beings (pregnant women) to make sacrifices and take health risks against their
will for the "benefit" of non-sentient organisms (fetuses). This is plainly
immoral and unethical of you. And, ironically, people like you try to present
themselves as occupying the moral high-ground.

"The real argument in the abortion debate is whether or not this human being
is a 'person', with all the legal rights and protections of 'personhood'…This
is the same argument used in the Dred Scott decision in which the Supreme
Court of the United States declared that black Americans, though human, are
not 'persons' under the law."  
No, this isn't the same argument. Black Americans are/were sentient beings,
therefore they are/should have been considered persons under the law. Which,
obviously, isn't the same argument as what I previously presented above. And
speaking of legal rights and personhood, why is it that a baby only receives
an offical id at birth and not during the gestation period? Why do we have
birth certificates but not conception certificates?

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/083862d204b41365d062557820dfbf13?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ken O'Kelley

December 5, 2012 at 7:55 pm | Reply

Firstly, you avoided the question Peter. Secondly, if you answer, yes, you
would want someone to rescue you then the only difference in day 10,386 of
your existence vs. day 1 of your existence is that at day 10,386 you are able
to speak and give a reply. So because you did not have a voice at day 1 I
spoke up for you and fought for your life. You're very welcomed because you
were fearfully and wonderfully made.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9356b690a0274d2aa25beac2df05b95b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Alex Peter

December 5, 2012 at 10:51 pm | Reply

To your particular question with the home intruder, the answer is yes. But, as
I said before, your analogy is incorrect. To the implied question of whether I
would have wanted somebody to obligate my mother not to abort me, the answer
is NO. I'm grateful to her for giving me life, but if she wouldn't have wanted
me, then I understand and accept it, and I wouldn't want to be born because
the state or someone like you forced her. Does that answer your question?

The difference between day 10,386 and day 1 of existence is huge, assuming you
consider day 1 to be the day of conception. The difference is exactly that
between a sentient being and a clump of cells. And this difference MATTERS.

And I was "fearfully and wonderfully made"? I don't understand what you mean
here, but it sounds like religious nonsense to me.

"So because you did not have a voice at day 1 I spoke up for you and fought
for your life."  
You think you're helping, but you're not. You're just oppressing. So, you
won't get any thanks from me for your 'services'.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0c7a82bfa2b604665dc2547ed751e58e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

N

October 27, 2018 at 12:32 pm | Reply

A clump of cells is not a person. Get a grip. Maybe focus on being decent to
an existing person and stop trying to make choices for someone else. A lot of
actual women will die if its left up to ignorant people like you. You digust
me because you are a hypocrite.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d0b601af20a74558c5b9b57d2c3fddef?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

jennyct

April 9, 2015 at 4:13 pm | Reply

Realistically, a baby 'doesn’t have the mental capacity required for thoughts
and desires' related to anything but food and comfort. Development is an
ongoing process, as is sentience. But who is to say that a non-sentient human
does not deserve life?

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/410fb9a3979aeae5bc811115770fa8d3?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Melanie

April 16, 2015 at 11:02 am | Reply

Alex,  
Awesome post. I agree with you 110%.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c3c859c1634db39099614a567d26d89c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

corey scott

February 23, 2015 at 10:27 am | Reply

I hate guys commenting on these issues because to be frank you don't carry the
baby. You don't form the attachment until the baby is born. I hate seeing pro
life guys out on the street being very wordy. It's not right. If a woman is
considering an abortion it's already hard enough for her and to have a guy
criticise her. Someone that's never ever gonna experience the feeling of
having to consider an abortion how annoying. I'm 11 weeks pregnant myself and
I would never consider an abortion but for some people no matter how hard the
choice an abortion is there only option. And who are we to say any different.
And omg shut up you are so frustrating

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/410fb9a3979aeae5bc811115770fa8d3?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Melanie

April 16, 2015 at 11:37 am | Reply

I'm going to continue with my post to you.  
So Ken, you claimed "Nearly all abortions are done for some 'other' reason
other than the risk of the life of the mother." I love when people use this
argument. This leads me right to my second point.  
2) Why do you think a woman would want an abortion? I'll help you out. Some
women want to get an abortion after they became pregnant from being raped,
since they don't want to be reminded of their rapist every day. Some women
can't afford to properly care for another child, and they don't want the
children they already have to go hungry. Some might want to continue on with
their education so that they will one day be able to support their family with
a good job. But the best part is that none of that matters, because women have
a right to take care of their body as they wish. And this leads me to my next
point.  
3) It's funny how it's always men who have this pro-life belief. It's funny
because you will never have to carry a child, so of course you don't mind
telling someone else to do it. If you don't have a uterus, you need to keep
your mouth shut and your fingers off your keyboard, because if you don't, i
promise you, one day you will get punched in the face.  
4) There are so many children in foster care that need homes. How about you
try taking care of those first before you try to force people to make more.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/53c2a0bc949905030fe56c8f4f5df1b6?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Lil

July 20, 2015 at 11:23 am | Reply

Hi Melanie,

I'd just like to point out that there are plenty of prolife women out there.  
Do you have the right to "do whatever you want with your body" even if it
kills another? Abortion is not like a tattoo or a piercing and can have
consequences medically and psychologically for women.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f63aed8ff9d8bd48b95eb08c9a1b89b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Stuart Hildreth

May 10, 2016 at 9:01 pm | Reply

Haha, so can having a baby.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d9cfff180970617d5bf7bbf2a3ad9f17?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

ov suvajac

May 11, 2016 at 8:18 pm

The simple fact is that a fetus is just a stage in the road from egg and sperm
to person. Abortion is another form of birth control (not the best or safest,
but that's not the discussion). If all of the existing research was proven
wrong and someone conclusively showed that in fact 20 week fetuses are
complete humans after all, and are sentient and truly feel pain then this
conversation would take a different turn. In all seriousness do the pro-lifers
really think that those who believe in science and those who are pro-choice
are just out to kill babies?

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9f883b370a56e9d3de4a3e7358a1152d?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

alienredqueen

November 5, 2015 at 8:08 pm | Reply

All due respect, sir but what we very much DO know the experience and pain of
the woman carrying a child she may not want. Why is it okay to put her through
that but not "chance" what a fetus may or may not feel? As to science being on
the side of people who would kill a fetus in womb… science is not on any
"side." As Sarah already pointed out, science seems to indicate that a fetus
in the first trimester can experience very little in the form of pain as we
know it. Additionally, I'd like to re-iterate my stance that it's all very
well and good for men to issue an opinion on this subject because it can
never, EVER happen to them personally…deep down they know if MEN's rights were
the ones at issue here and the roles of biology were reversed, you would be
able to get an abortion at Walmart.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fb64e11e5399164023786aafbec3287c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Rexene Olson

March 9, 2016 at 2:27 am | Reply

Here is some food for thought: The Bible definitively states when life
begins…."Many people think that a human being is created at the time of
conception but this belief is not supported by the bible. The fact that a
living sperm penetrates a living ovum resulting in the formation of a living
fetus does not mean that the fetus is a living human being. According to the
bible, a fetus is not a living person with a soul until after drawing its
first breath.

After God formed man in Genesis 2:7, He “breathed into his nostrils the breath
of life and it was then that the man became a living being”. Although the man
was fully formed by God in all respects, he was not a living being until after
taking his first breath.

In Job 33:4, it states: “The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty gives me life.”

Again, to quote Ezekiel 37:5&6, “Thus says the Lord God to these bones:
Behold, I will cause breath to enter you, and you shall live. And I will lay
sinews upon you, and will cause flesh to come upon you, and cover you with
skin, and put breath in you, and you shall live; and you shall know that I am
the Lord."

In one simple quote, Sister Joan Chittister, O.S.B. sums up the hypocrisy of
many in the 'pro-life' movement: "I do not believe that just because you're
opposed to abortion, that that makes you pro-life. In fact, I think in many
cases, your morality is deeply lacking if all you want is a child born but not
a child fed, not a child educated, not a child housed. And why would I think
that you don't? Because you don't want any tax money to go there. That's not
pro-life. That's pro-birth. We need a much broader conversation on what the
morality of pro-life is."

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c1286c2a574b4b62b591ceb5ca7109ec?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Christina

June 13, 2017 at 11:43 am | Reply

"I have a question for you Sarah Fox. If you were relaxing in your home and a
man walked in to your home to kill you would you desire someone to come and
try and save you from your murderer? I am very serious with my questioning and
I am not asking this willy nilly. I will ask it again: If you, Sarah Fox, were
being attacked and threatened with death would you desire someone to come to
your aid?"

Ken, I am neither pro choice nor pro life. What I am is a person who believes
in an individuals rights and the law. The law says, in many states in the USA
at least that defense of self or a third party is acceptable if someone dies
while others are trying to protect themselves or another person. In your
question to Sarah you ask would she not want someone to help her. This would
require thought, a voice, and a cry for help or at the very least the
knowledge that someone needed that help for you to step in. For the most part
its asked for by the individual or actually witnessed by someone else that
makes a choice to step in when someone isn't able to ask for help and because
it is we have laws on the books to allow for that.  
I realize that you feel you need to be a voice for those children that will be
affected by abortion. Just because we are aware of an issue such as abortion
doesn't mean defense of a third party applies to us under the law. You can
only be a voice to that child if you are a witness to it's intended harm in
exactly the same way you would be protected if you were a witness to Sarah's
harm.  
In almost every state there are fetal harm laws on the books. In some states,
legislation has increased the criminal penalties for crimes involving pregnant
women. These laws have focused on the harm done to a pregnant woman and the
subsequent loss of her pregnancy, but not on the rights of the fetus.  
These laws were enacted because thinking and moral people recognized the
woman's right to try and carry her child to term as a matter of choice. Which
is actually an individual right we have. All 50 states recognize and include a
womans right to end her pregnancy as well as make room in their fetal harm
laws for medical procedure including abortion that are not prosecuted.

For many many years now we have had laws on the books that allow for us to
take the life of another person who is classified by a court or particular set
of criteria as no longer sentient enough to sustain life on their own without
intervention. meaning they have no quality of life as applied to life liberty
and the pursuit of happiness and the freedoms of expression, choice etc.
Usually this comes at the expense of others so morally we have made laws to
protect the other individuals that have to become involved in the slavery to
this incapacitated person through physical care and or financial burden. If a
husband or a parent has the right to end a life then and the freedom to make
the choice then, why not before a fetus actually has brain enough to be
considered sentient? If you fight for their life you have to realize that a
woman's body is really no different than a feeding tube or an oxygen machine.  
As for the fetus being a unique individual how true is that really? If I get
50 percent of my dna from my mother and 50 percent of my dna from my father
how much of that dna is unlike theirs and completely my own separate from
them? And if suddenly nature steps in and makes me an identical twin then I am
not unique at all structurally. Nor is an identical twin an act of will by
consenting adults. If you think about dna or pregnancy there is nothing unique
or individual about it. What makes us individuals is our sentience and
morality. Our choices is what separates us from our parents. Which is why our
laws up until recently have always been based on those that are outside the
womb and living and breathing.

We have 400,000 children in foster care in the USA right now that are not
being cared for by their parents that are wards of the states. 100,000 of them
are adoptable but haven't been. Many of them will age out of the system and
end up in the streets or jail. And almost all of them struggle with life
because they really don't know how to approach it because they were kept and
not taught in a way that loving parents would teach or family interaction
would. We have over a million abortions being performed a year. Everyone
screams adoption and yet we have children living on the streets that aren't in
the foster system and children in the foster system waiting to be adopted that
never will be. Shall we go back to orphanages like other countries still have?
Who pays for all that while people complain about social programs like welfare
and medicaid while they cut our spending on elder care? I mean elderly are
sentient why are they so expendable when they can speak and still dream but we
don't fight for them with the laws available like we fight for an unborn being
that nobody can actually ask if they really want to be brought into this mess
we call society in the first place. So if you want life then don't turn off
your brain damaged spouse, child or mother, jail those that try to commit
suicide and fail while your at criminalizing a woman's right to choose that
should be none of your personal business where privacy is concerned.

I for one want to keep my individual right to choose and privacy and
expression and im willing to bet there are moments that even you gets angry
about others invading your individual space to make choices or keep things to
yourself and if there is even one topic that someone is infringing on your
personal liberties like bosses wanting your medical or drug tests or anything
of the kind then just remember you can't have it both ways.

.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0c7a82bfa2b604665dc2547ed751e58e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

N

October 27, 2018 at 12:20 pm | Reply

A clump of cells is not a person. Get a grip. Maybe focus on being decent to
an existing person and stop trying to make choices for someone else. A lot of
actual women will die if its left up to ignorant people like you. You digust
me because you are a hypocrite.

        
                  4. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/87239cee8a3b0233db265a9b63de448b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Judith Weis

December 5, 2012 at 1:46 pm | Reply

I am surprised that in your scientific analysis, you refer to a fetus as an
"infant." That's not accurate and just feeds into the arguments of the
antiabortion people.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 5, 2012 at 2:06 pm | Reply

Thank you,

you are correct (simply a mistake) it has been rectified. - wish there was
another word for fetus, I feel a bit repetitive

Sarah

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/72721f896805e2b4f1f400af1a60ce57?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

THEMAYAN

December 5, 2012 at 3:41 pm | Reply

If we are going to get technical, then it should called a human fetus.  
Would you rather I refer to you as a lady, or a prokaryote?

I do agree with you about anti abortionist though. They seem to be the only
people who do not believe in child sacrifice, oops I mean fetal sacrifice.

        
                  5. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2e243ce9f4636ba8100acd3c6aef2b57?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ronado

December 6, 2012 at 6:25 am | Reply

When dealing with abortion issues we should always put the woman who is
carrying the baby first. What she is going through should determine the
decision that is taken, science withstanding.

        
                  6. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1aca328aca7496928126eb6ac5b5f5a9?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Skulander

December 7, 2012 at 8:29 pm | Reply

Medical authorities tell us that pain doesn't set in before 24 weeks, long
after most abortions are done. To pretend otherwise it intellectually
dishonest. Futhermore, let's remember that 90% of abortions are done during
the 1st trimester: at this early stage the decision belongs to the pregnant
woman, to no one else.

I believe this private decision shouldn't be made by a 3rd party, antichoice
folks, the government, the church, etc. There are lots of reasons why an
abortion might be necessary and no one is entitled to impose their beliefs on
others.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/083862d204b41365d062557820dfbf13?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ken O'Kelley

December 8, 2012 at 6:04 pm | Reply

Then to be consistent, so long as someone kills someone outside of the womb
and it does not cause them pain, then it is acceptable. It is abundantly clear
by science that at conception a human being is formed. To kill it is to kill a
human being. If you believe it is acceptable to kill a human being inside the
womb so long as it does not experience pain then , again, it should acceptable
to kill one outside of the womb for the same reason.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 11, 2012 at 1:21 pm | Reply

Is this consistent? There is certainly a difference between killing a sentient
human being, with memories of their past, aspirations for the future and an
understanding of the present and terminating the development of a 'non-
sentient' collection of developing cells (albeit one with the potential to
become a sentient human being). I would certainly argue that I would rather
not be killed now, however I would not care if I had not been born, there is a
vast difference between these two concepts.

Also I don't think 'science' actually does make the distinction between what
is human and what is not, this is more a philosophical argument. - does a full
complement of human genetic material meet the requirement for being human?
Then any one of our cells could fulfil this requirement. Perhaps the necessary
factor is the ability to develop into a fully functioning human? Then any one
of our sex cells could fulfil this role. Or perhaps it's a combination of
both, but is this not still rather arbitrary?

I worry comparing murder of a sentient adult with termination of a pregnancy
is not the best way to view this issue?

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/083862d204b41365d062557820dfbf13?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ken O'Kelley

December 12, 2012 at 9:44 am | Reply

Hello Sarah. My reply post to this went up the page to some other post that
you made. So I wanted to come back and try again. I had written that the idea
of "sentient persons" is just another attempt at making the killing of a human
being acceptable.

So that we’re all using the same definition:

Sentient:  
1: responsive to or conscious of sense impressions  
2: aware  
3: finely sensitive in perception or feeling

Are all elderly persons "sentient" depending upon their health situations? Are
those who are comatose sentient?

Also, you and Alex Peter have based your premise of personhood on that of
sentience. I argue that sentience is not the definition of personhood. The
definition of personhood is when a human being is created and a human being is
created at conception.

Science does not help you in this argument. It hasn’t helped you for at least
150 years.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

thebrainbank

December 14, 2012 at 9:47 am

Once again I must politely disagree with you here. However, I also want to
note that it is clear we address this issue from quite different moral
standpoints and since morality is a very personal concept I must say that I am
in no way opposed to your opinion, I simply don't share it.

I believe that every aspect we define as constituting the 'self' emerges from
the brain, therefore once the brain fails to function, or before it begins
functioning the self does not exist and the individual cannot be thought of as
sentient.

There is of course a challenge associated with those who had sentience but
lost it through either accident or disease (note that we must be sure that
this is certainly the case, since amazingly some vegetative patients are
indeed conscious but unable to communicate with the outside world:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-20268044).Once again in my opinion the life
of people in this condition should be treated as they (when they were in sound
mind), or their family would have wanted. I strongly believe that if I reach a
point in my life where I cease to be myself, through mental illness or
disease, that I should have the option of ending my life or if necessary
having someone else do this for me. One of our other bloggers recently wrote a
very heartfelt post on the 'right to die' which you may find interesting
(http://thebrainbank.scienceblog.com/2012/09/10/right-to-die-is-it-ever-
justified-a-scientists-perspective/)

Finally as I have pointed out before, the argument of when person-hood begins,
thus when human rights are given is a very old argument, tackled more in
philosophical circles than scientific. All science can and does contribute is
knowledge of how the system (in this case a developing embryo) works. We make
the final decisions and laws, based on our own morality.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d9cfff180970617d5bf7bbf2a3ad9f17?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

ov

July 23, 2013 at 8:54 pm

There is no argument that can be made to cause Ken to reflect on scientific
evidence. He has chosen the premises on which he bases his arguments and is
thus doomed to fallacious arguments based on these premises. You can't win
arguing with Ken anymore than you can teach a donkey to fly. There just are no
tools for the job.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/410fb9a3979aeae5bc811115770fa8d3?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Melanie

April 16, 2015 at 11:18 am

Ken, sweetheart, you are not an intelligent person.  
1) the connection between sentience and personhood has been proven by
scientists that have gone to medical school and have had years of training.
Since you haven't done either of these things (and i'm actually considering if
you even graduated high school with the things you're saying), nobody cares if
you have a different definition of sentience, because you clearly have no clue
what you're talking about. I saw this 5 year old the other day that was
telling his mom that the clouds were actually made of 100s of butterflies. Do
you think his mom stopped what she was doing, called the New York Times and
reported her son's brilliant discovery? No. And do you know why? Because her
son has not learned anything about science or reality yet, and because
scientists have already proven, through years of research, what clouds are
actually made of. Are you capable of understanding this analogy?  
2) I'll put the next one on one of your other ridiculous posts.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5d207888feeae3e16d24cadf71ace787?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

tori

September 1, 2015 at 1:10 pm | Reply

My question is a fetus in the womb can not feel or know that they are about to
be killed or terminated. But is it not the same as for someone in a coma and
medically sedated. They are also unaware and won't feel it, yet they have
memories and a past present and future that's supposed to make it okay. Now
for my stance on abortion no I don't feel anyone should have the right to
decide for anyone else in the cases of; health risks (cause her to die), or
rape (i could understand this if you feel carrying, labor, giving birth, and
adoption is not at all an option although that innocent child didn't hurt you
not to mention every where you look there us this or that couple who can't
conceive and would love and cherish ot) because I agree 100 percent that
should be her choice, but it can be argued that if you should have the right
to make the choice to terminate it because you got raped (they had sexual
intercourse against your will or permission) the child fetus what ever you
would call it did not decide or ask to be made in the process and just because
they have no brain activity so to speak memory fully developed brain previous
life or the ability to speak and say no (a child carried full term 9 months
can't even speak or say no it must be taught and learned. Same for everything
else including but not limited to eating and drinking. So to classify a fetus
as a parasite would be like classifying a child 1 month old a bum and lazy
because they do nothing for them selves eat day drink change wash ect. But as
for MY stance like I said on abortion if not medically suggested or raped.,
but instead was having sex and got pregnant I don't feel its right or okay to
say fuck it i don't give a shit I want to be selfish and not give up my body
or I want to accomplish this with my life first what ever the excuse I feel
those are wrong if you willingly made the decision to go have sex, birth
control & or protection used or not whether it was affective or not. We all
get taught that the only ? way to ensure no pregnancy would be to not have
sex…. , so step the fuck up and deal with the consequences of their actions.
Now after tg child is born if decide to give it up for adoption, sign over the
rights, or keep love and take care and responsibility for it!!!!! Again I'm
not a doctor, I recently graduated high School in a very small town, Greene
county is full of people who could save themselves issues in the end by just
staying abstenant, instead of babies having babies

        
                  7. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e720345b24aa4a0568680f6e2e9e6ced?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Alice Fusco

March 23, 2014 at 8:04 pm | Reply

Thank you for the excellent piece, Sarah. Your science is strong and current.
It saddens me to see how strongly the anti-choice folks resist learning any
credible science. And how they don't care about fully developed humans. Any
time we have religious ideology dictating medical decisions or denying
scientific truths, we tread a very dark path, indeed.

        
                  8. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b158c440aa3d37fe2a8d4cb4f4e9d1f1?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Janelle

April 26, 2014 at 5:46 pm | Reply

Thank you for this refreshing view on abortion, Sarah. It is difficult to
block out any moral and thus personal opinions when viewing the termination of
a human fetus but I am fascinated by how little we truly know and understand
about the concept of "life" and what exactly defines it based on conception
and fetal development.

I am especially intrigued by the topic of whether or not human fetuses "feel"
and "react" to pain during the early stages of development. I read an article
online "Stages of Prenatal Development" published by Kendra Cherry and
accessible at in which she states that "The brain and central nervous system
also become responsive during the second trimester." this is to say that even
though a fetus may resemble a fully developed "tiny human" - (for lack of a
better description) with a heartbeat and most of its vital organs (sans
distinct sex organs) during the second trimester - there is no proof that its
actions and reactions are functional as the brain is not fully functioning at
this stage. This means that even though cells might flinch when presented with
a disturbance or "pain", it could simply be due to their instinctive nature
and not due to the fetus "feeling" discomfort.

I do not wish to offend anyone or go against any opinions whether pro-life or
pro-choice; I simply wish to thank you for your valuable blog entry and
comment that it has really inspired me to due further research into this
topic.

        
                  9. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c53b839329514d904b3781eb782508d2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Rose

November 9, 2014 at 7:34 am | Reply

Consciousness does not just suddenly arise at 26 weeks, it is an ongoing
process for the neuronic connections to be made in the cortex. It starts at 12
weeks when the neurons start penetrating the subcortical plate but the
connections are not fully made till the 26th week . Does that mean at 19 weeks
it is not conscious at all? We can not say for sure. Since it is slowly
gaining consciousness how can we put a marker up and say it is ok to kill the
fetus when it is a little conscious? It is not possible to really say when it
is enough of a person to let it live. And the sedation of the womb has
absolutely nothing to do with its personhood. That is like saying it is ok if
I have an operation and someone deliberately kills me under anesthesia. There
is no reason why we need to abort healthy fetuses after the first trimester.
Pregnancy tests exist, an when we are sexually active we should use them
monthly! Even if we use birth control. The earlier a woman aborts the more
humane.

        
                  10. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/92bf026d702496f56008607a775cc4a5?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Andy

January 6, 2015 at 2:27 am | Reply

Wonderful article. So glad to have come across this. My partner and I recently
lost one of our unborn twins before 5 months. I had been reduced to tears
trying to imagine whether their was any pain involved, imagining breathing
difficulties…it is reassuring to know that there is little chance the poor
blighter could actually feel or assess anything at all. This article has eased
my pain and sadness greatly. Not completely, but hugely. Thank you

        
                  11. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/48b0677a3d3458a1f1ea246f927c0295?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Autumn Harms

January 16, 2015 at 11:47 pm | Reply

So, yall should be glad that your mothers didn't want an abortion. Meaning the
prochoice people. Sorry, but just because some guy who has MD in front of his
name ,or something else, says that babies aren't alive or cant feel pain, does
that make it true? somehow I cant help but think that 'how the heck do we know
if this baby can feel pain?'. Honestly, what if every fetus naturally responds
differently than fully developed humans. it is wrong to abort unless there
will be a death during pregnancy or delivery. If you cant handle the
pregnancy, then you should have been more responsible. I completely agree with
Ken on this one.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7fd05dc41ecf9ef32e3fe0f13f6730a7?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Erinations

December 3, 2015 at 8:01 am | Reply

Actually, my mother had the option of aborting me as I was a) born out of
wedlock and my father was still a married man, having just separated from his
wife but not yet legally divorced.

My father wanted me aborted, actually. Of course, I would simply be a burden.
My mother was dirt poor as well, no education, no clue how to raise a child.
What changed my father's mind was that I was a girl. My father has two older
sons, way older, and so my mother planned to leave him and keep me, believing
I would be her only source of love in this world and she went on to have me,
only to find my father in the delivery room with her.

There are times in my life that have been so dreadful, I wish I had been
aborted, for then I wouldn't save felt such pain as I did/do during life, for
I wouldn't have lived and wouldn't have known the life that awaited for me.

But yes, I am still pro-choice. Because forcing someone to have an abortion
when they're happy with their pregnancy is just as bad as forcing someone to
not have an abortion when they're unhappy and know they can't support the
child the way it needs.

The problem is? I don't have a happily ever after. My mother has no clue how
to provide for me emotionally and physically, my father ignores my existence
as if I had been aborted unless I do something that he can brag about to his
colleagues.

"If you can't handle a pregnancy, then you should've been more responsible."
Pregnancy should be treated as a gift, but here you prove it to be a
consequence, you contradict and prove it to be something terrifying.

I am only a sample of one of the many lives who could of been aborted, where
abortion was in consideration but wasn't followed through. If my life is as
bad as it is, unable to receive any sort of form of love from someone who was
in their late twenties when they had me, I refuse to imagine how life would be
for one who was put into that horrid thing one would call a foster system.

Women should always be given a choice for abortion. If a 27 year old woman
couldn't handle the responsibilities of another human life despite wanting it,
then most certainly women in their teens can't raise the next generation. They
are still children, we are still children. Science doesn't define the argument
for abortion, but rather subjective opinions. E

        
                  12. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/03b4b7ec9abff54916dfad648f75b281?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

John

May 6, 2015 at 6:26 pm | Reply

There is no moral question. It's a purely scientific one.

The fetus is either a sentient human being and therefore should be afforded
all the rights and protections of the law of the land or it's a collection of
sells and abortion is no more a moral grey area than bursting a zit. The
woman's right to choose shouldn't come into it since someone's life trumps her
desire not to be pregnant.

The question is at one point and again we need to be 100% certain in my view
that the fetus isn't a sentient human being since getting it wrong leads to
the murder of somone so reading what Sarah Fox said I think the age should be
put back to 12 weeks.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dfe5f0f90db938821607b9209b2b967f?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Perion Cedric

November 2, 2016 at 3:58 pm | Reply

I have some questions for you that I think will make the debate clearer.

What is exactly a person ? A sentient human being ? But how did you came to
this conclusion ? Is it even possible to prove a definition ?

How did you came to know persons have rights and moral worth ? Can you give a
purely deductive argument to justify this or do you just believe it by faith ?

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

November 2, 2016 at 6:23 pm | Reply

A Chairde -  
The matter of showing human Worth, from a secular point of view, follows
hereunder. It is not clever to hope that Nature does not mirror robust
religion. However, looking into the mirroring process does demand discipline
(lots of it).  
Asking what is a human is not clever either. Every story has a beginning, a
middle and an end. Our beginning is at conception, after which we only need
water, oxygen, food and warmth. With morals hard-wired into our DNA, we grow
into the consciousness we now have, whilst others drop into and out of this.
Big deal.  
Go dté sibh slán - Liam

14] Our metaphysical Footprint

Free Thinking has Boundaries: One is quite free to compose views on the value
of life, even if no moral or ethical code is accepted. As the myriad of
personal and societal codes vary, let us all here think outside the box,
momentarily. In 2013, a pre-human species of hominid (Homo naledi) was found
(2.5m years old). Bone fragments suggested ritual (the idea of Worth) -
thought unique to humans. Scientists can describe, not explain, natural
phenomena, like Worth – or Gravity. An apple may be observed to fall: the pull
on it is utterly critical to all planetary motion. Where could we ask eg why
this force is maintained?

Thinking freely has Boundaries: Whatever about hominids, Man always had a
sense of ‘good and bad’ and wondered or, by his/her especial choice, not
wondered. Anyway, to keep a balance in Nature, our Worth will likely be summed
up one day. Not following basic algebra, the process will cover eg where a
triggered ‘Warrior’ gene operates. Otherwise, if given to Parkinson’s
patients, Parmipexole can lead to compulsive gambling. What we do is
influenced by an environmental and evolutionary imperative. How we do it
reflects human Worth – related eg to vast, undetermined workings in our neural
networks.

At lower, subatomic levels, quantum particles exist, of no diameter. They can
occupy multiple places at once (‘entangled’). Shape-shifting particles can
split and combine with others, gaining greater mass than the sum of the parts.
[1+1 ≠ 2, so ⇒ festina lente.] The principles of quantum mechanics apply to
everyday objects - as well as to atomic-scale particles. In 2010, an object
large enough to be visible to the naked eye was put into a mixed quantum state
so that it was both moving and not moving.

The unfathomable complexities of our neural networks and quantum mechanics
require strict subjectivity (ever more clearly beyond us) in gauging Worth. We
can measure an individual’s standing with objective laws – “one man’s meat is
another man’s poison”. However, we cannot begin to imagine judging his/her
subjective Worth – let alone our own – though conscience will normally play
some part in this latter.

Further to reflect infinite complexity: the human microbiome – separate from
our body and consciousness – has a substantive impact on our cognitive
function and fundamental behavioral patterns. Without trillions of microbes,
our underlying neurochemistry would be profoundly altered. Investigation is
opening up on genetic behavioral influences, once thought by many to be
understood. Research Scientists, however, do not deduce certainty from
uncertainty (humility is a characteristic).

Just thinking has Boundaries: 13.7 billion years ago, from 10–43 to 10–36
seconds following the Big Bang, the Universe entered the Grand Unification
Epoch, when the earliest elementary particles (and antiparticles) appeared. In
the next instant, with cosmic inflation, the Universe underwent a rapid,
exponential expansion. A hot, dense quark-gluon plasma of elementary
particles, which remained after this, was distributed across the universe. In
the Quark Epoch, 10–12 to 10–6 seconds from the beginning, quarks, electrons
and neutrinos formed and the Universe cooled to below 10 quadrillion degrees.

Quarks and antiquarks annihilated each other upon contact. A surplus of quarks
(about one for every billion pairs) survived, ultimately forming matter.
Temperatures fell to c3,000 degrees (as hot as the Sun). Protons (which
comprise two up-quarks and one down-quark) captured electrons, neutralizing
their electric charge. With electrons bound to atoms, the Universe became
transparent to light. Gravity amplified slight irregularities in the density
of regions of primordial gas. They became denser, even as the Universe
continued rapidly to expand. Small, dense clouds of cosmic gas collapsed under
their own gravity. They became hot enough to start nuclear fusion between
hydrogen atoms, forming the first stars.  
Beyond Boundaries: Each of the estimated 100 bn Galaxies contains 100s of bns
of Stars, of varying composition. It takes 46 bn light years to reach the edge
of the Visible Universe. In the dense, hot (15moC) and complex early stellar
conditions, Hydrogen and Helium came about. In dying Stars – Red Giants – the
energy released by nuclear reaction opposed stellar collapse under gravity.
With the Hydrogen all gone, the inevitable collapse raised temperatures to
100moC, allowing Carbon to form. Then, at even higher temperatures (over
shorter periods), nuclear reactions formed other elements. [Beetle Juice, or
Betelgeuse, is a Red Star where the physics of energy-in and energy-out
confounds analysis.]

About 73% of all matter is Hydrogen and 25% Helium: the remaining 2% makes up
the rest of the Visible Universe. Black Holes of stellar matter form when very
massive stars collapse and die. General Relativity predicts that a
sufficiently compact mass will deform Spacetime to form a Black Hole. Without
an apparent source, Dark Matter (over 3/4 of all matter) is invisible. It
reacts to gravity, causing galactic structures to form. An elliptical galaxy
is formed when smaller galaxies merge, their stars and Dark Matter mixing and
mingling. An Astrophysical Journal paper suggests that, because the Dark
Matter outweighs everything else, it molds a newly forming elliptical galaxy,
guiding the growth of the central Black Hole. Dark Energy (comprehension yet
again defied) causes galaxies to fly apart towards Critical Density, after
which the Universe cannot collapse back on itself in a Big Crunch. Rather will
it continue until galaxies are alone in Space – with atoms slowly reacting to
form the stable silver nucleus – before once again dissipating into radiation.
But then, Dark Energy might first change behaviour, like 6 bn years ago, when
the rate of expansion increased. Dark Energy is everywhere, including in you,
the reader.

Personal Boundaries: All the atoms in your, the reader’s body, date from a few
seconds after the beginning of time and – indeed – your being (and its
reasoning capacity) was inherent in the original radiation. You are the result
of an infinite set of infinite (unfathomable) complexities, the result of
infinitely intelligent composition, under an infinitely complex web of laws,
maintained for a purpose: not a chance that you are some lowly chance event
(as in o/∞%). The laws of probability (or any others) – as observed – should
not be conflated with any inevitability in overarching design. Our knowledge
of Nature’s laws is (you may now infer) limited. It took hundreds of years and
scientific careers and many thousands of volumes of abstruse Mathematics,
Physics and Chemistry to bring us to where we are.

Breaching the Boundaries: Using human logic eg to speak of ‘cause and effect’,
is to pit limited capacity against limitless, infinite unknowns. It is not
enough to say our responsibility for how we act, our Worth, is proportionate
to our intellectual capacity and our efforts to gain and give expression to an
understanding of ‘why?’. We might, however, rationally say that this approach
is evidence of a segment of metaphysical reality. And that we shall,
hopefully, forward our ultimate, lasting footprint, our Metaphysical Footprint
(our real Worth, opaque to human view), into a reality within the Infinite.

The Infinite Author of an Infinite Universe never had to start time. It is
reasonable say that we are living in a blink of a series of events which never
started and will never end. Astrophysicists have modelled both what preceded
the Big Bang and where everything is headed within the timescale of this
present Universe. This short note does not begin to address the complexities
of your, the reader’s, world but aims to show that you and I have always been
an intricate, essential part of this Universe-without-end, with an infinity
attaching to all things. Society recognises broad parameters for good and bad.
We may expect that these will normally feature in our individual measure of
Worth, when this is ultimately established.

We can examine ethical issues at any level. There will always be some who say
they are responsible to nothing, except themselves. They may refuse to
recognise the humanity of eg a child who is to be killed. They exist, of
course, in two realities – the physical and the metaphysical. One day, with
the Footprint they have fashioned, they will be in only one reality – the
latter – a necessarily unchanging reality.

        
                  13. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff7bed7f4419fe044c37d8c5476102d2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

anon

May 28, 2015 at 7:54 am | Reply

http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/10/magazine/10Fetal-t.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0

        
                  14. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/934007702095c450c1570a103974aa48?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

safe abortion

June 2, 2015 at 11:31 am | Reply

well this a hard topic to debate on because I am especially intrigued by the
topic of whether or not human fetuses “feel” and “react” to pain during the
early stages of development. but to my opion am sure they do feel it but
because we can not see that while the pregnancy is being ended we assume they
dont feel pain

        
                  15. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff43541afadd197c15df181e26a5aedf?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ma.Jeralyn Dickerson

June 25, 2015 at 7:13 am | Reply

We should never forget only fetuses know what they feel inside the womb not
the scientist nor the mother and not all the things in this world can be
answer by the science.Weather the fetuses can feel pain or not. The conscience
of killing someone is matter.  
Sorry my english is my second language so my grammar is not that good.

        
                  16. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/69fbb2345992fa4fb447b685a61dc376?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Korou

July 26, 2015 at 12:16 pm | Reply

I'd just like to say, thanks very much for taking the time to write this
article and for answering comments. I've been looking for someone to explain
this to me for some time. Very useful in some debates I'm involved in at the
moment.

        
                  17. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0136d628bb292b8788e73f395375417?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Anne Hopkins

August 21, 2015 at 6:11 pm | Reply

Sara, I complement you not just on your concise, logical presentation of
scientific facts, but (perhaps more importantly) on your poise, patience, and
style of responding to critics of your post. You set an excellent example for
all bloggers trying to set the tone for civil discourse in the emotionally-
charged abortion debate. I plan to include a link to your post in an upcoming
blog post in the United States.

Thank you.

Blue Skies,

        
                  18. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f90297a2abf496fbd032252f4dcbfa4e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Meh

October 7, 2015 at 8:54 am | Reply

I'm not against abortion as far as medical and scientific reasoning is
concerned, but I am against human stupidity. We have to remove that at the
fetal level, so that people who make dumb choices in life don't get to make a
choice about playing with a life they conceived.

Its interesting really we go on about animal rights, feminist rights, voters
rights, gun rights etc… yet pull a fancy one on the whole abortion argument.
It's really not as hard as cleaning toilets for a living folks.

        
                  19. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c944ac571c6537b94d2543a4869e389b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Ron Mallett

December 2, 2015 at 11:24 am | Reply

Sarah, to be honest I think your research is totally irrelevant to the
abortion debate. I can see your aim is to create some theories/facts that make
murder easier to rationalise but I'm afraid you are missing the point.

The only scientific fact that matters in any rational discussion is that
abortion kills a potential life. Barring accidents and miscarriage the
majority of foetuses WILL survive and DEVELOP and be born. What abortion does
is only to steal everything the victim would have become and experienced. You
take every birthday, every christmas, every school-yard crush, the
exhilaration of winning their first job, their honeymoon, the chance to be a
parent, a grandparent, every opportunity to be right, wrong and everything in
between, any chance to create and enjoy the creativity of others. Everything.

I live in a country that sadly has embraced abortion as a mainstream form of
contraceptive. In a country of 20 million on average there are less than 400
adoptions a year and more than 90, 000 publically funded abortions . Who knows
how many potential scientists and artists have been torn apart and incinerated
for the sake of convenience? Who knows how many potential nobel prize winners
never got the chance to live?

How many dead skin cells on the back of your hand have ever gone on to do
anything like that?

        
                  20. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a1f16a81fc4ca4799cbebc4014f2b3ef?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Iggy

December 3, 2015 at 2:05 pm | Reply

Gonna solve this here simply.

Unless the anti abortion people here are also vegan and only buy from local
clothing and grocery stores please.. go away…how can you be so pro life when
killing animals for food and clothing is conpletley fine and not considered
murder as well. Or child enslavement for most imported products like clothing
and even chocolate. Double standards much? Thank you.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2cd814e9a4c4b48110b7c1363c40416c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Valerie W

December 12, 2015 at 10:38 am | Reply

I am mostly vegan, and I think that argument goes BOTH WAYS!  
I think it is certain that the unborn can't feel any sort of discomfort in  
the first 12 weeks of pregnancy-that does not make abortion ok, but it does  
take the "pain" argument out of the equation.  
After that time, I think the issue gets murky.  
When a fetus recoils from a sharp instrument, I don't think ANYONE can  
say for sure that no discomfort is being felt!  
It was not that long ago that doctor's thought BORN babies could not  
feel pain, and routinely did invasive procedures on them with NO anesthesia!  
The truly moral thing to do in situations like this would be to give the  
unborn the BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT after 12 weeks by greatly restricting  
abortions, and limiting them to only the most extreme cases after 20  
weeks.  
If, as was stated, 90% of women have abortions in the first 12 weeks, I really  
DON'T understand why the pro-abortion lobby is SO ADAMANT about  
having unrestricted abortions until 24 weeks or later!!

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0136d628bb292b8788e73f395375417?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Anne Hopkins

December 14, 2015 at 3:56 pm | Reply

Re the comment by Valerie W: "… I really DON’T understand why the pro-abortion
lobby is SO ADAMANT about having unrestricted abortions until 24 weeks or
later!!" Valerie, you are not alone. So many people form this opinion without
sincere pursuit of the facts. If anyone is truly interested in understanding
why women wait until late in a pregnancy to make an abortion decision, please
consider the information in the award-winning documentary "After Tiller." Here
is a review I wrote of that film that summarizes the important points.
http://advocatesaz.org/2015/12/14/movie-night-after-tiller/

I am not, by the way, pro-abortion -- nobody "wants" an abortion. But, a woman
is the only person qualified to make a decision to have the procedure.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2cd814e9a4c4b48110b7c1363c40416c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Val

January 4, 2016 at 4:03 pm | Reply

I read your article and saw the trailer about the movie.  
I have not seen the full film yet.  
The person who murdered Dr. Tiller it was COWARDLY and DESPICABLE!  
I ALSO hate hearing about ANIMALS BEING BURNED ALIVE!  
I said in my original comment that I think abortion after 20 weeks should be
"restricted to the most extreme cases", not TOTALLY banned.  
Some cases described there, with severe brain injuries, or a painful disease
that will cause death within a few years after birth, sound like 2 such
"extreme examples".  
If causing "premature birth" were TRULY necessary to save a mother's life
(even if that met that the baby would die), I think that would ALSO be
justified.  
I DON'T agree with you that abortions after 20-weeks (or possible not even
after 12 weeks) should be allowed for social/economic reasons.  
Sorry, but the Catholic girl you mentioned had waited 25-WEEKS already, could
wait a BIT LONGER and give her baby up for adoption!  
Only DISTORTED thinking could lead her to think KILLING A HEALTHY baby at that
stage is BETTER than giving him/her up for adoption!  
As for child abuse, I think the attitude that is is "ok" to kill in mid and
late term pregnancies could well lead to moral-confusion and INCREASE child
abuse!  
Many countries in Europe (such as France), who are considered pretty
progressive, restrict abortions similar to the way I've described and seem to
get along just fine!  
The possibility of "sentience" in mid pregnancy and the PROBABILITY of it in
later pregnancy outweighs  
a women's DESIRE-even STRONG DESIRE- to "not be pregnant"!  
By the way, I think it is important for me to add that I am SECULAR, I HEAVILY
FAVOR the use of contraception (and think it should be FREE for everyone), I
favor UNIVERSAL HEALTHCARE, 6-months PAID maternity leave for everyone,
DAYCARE SUBSTUDIES for most parents, and INCREASING the economic safety net!

        
                  21. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a9d2fcecc859100cc89359afee889440?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

gcneyhiden

December 30, 2015 at 2:58 pm | Reply

How can you argue w people who don't want to know about biology or evolution
but seek religious "live saving brownie points" no matter that they have to be
so invasive in other peoples lives to accomplish this rude behavior. these
people don't know and probably will deny the existence of a long tail on early
human fetuses. These religious cub scouts probably couldn't pick out a human
fetus from a chicken fetus, but they expect the right to determine family
planning and women's health issues, not only their own but people they don't
know. Its totally absurd. All you blind fundamentalists out there…embryonic
development is a window to our evolution. It proves our unique connection to
the world that you degrade and you say doesn't even exist. That is reason
enough on ethical grounds to have laws that save us from your ignorance.

        
                  22. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a9d2fcecc859100cc89359afee889440?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

gcneyhiden

December 30, 2015 at 3:18 pm | Reply

A fetus isn't an individual being until its separated from the mother, OK. I
love the way many pro-lifers say they are for small Govt and in the same
breath want to go down this weird road of giving full person rights to
fetuses, THAT ARE NOT INDIVIDUAL Humans YET. Are we going to pass laws that
say a pregnant woman cannot eat this, drink that, restrain from certain
activities that may harm the child? Are we going to start forcing women who go
to fertility clinics to carry all six or seven fetal implants. really. Are we
going to have govt agencies or private church organizations that will do the
monitoring of the mom's to be to insure the safety of the unborn person. the
fact is..the mind of a person is their most important human feature, its what
makes us different. its also the very thing the religious fundamentalist don't
want us to use.

        
                  23. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/503d4d873be0c55aa8b3b0a365bb3a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

lorraine shelstad

January 4, 2016 at 7:48 am | Reply

A study in Finland regarding suicide in women saw an increase in suicide after
a miscarriage or an abortion. http://www.bmj.com/content/313/7070/1431

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2cd814e9a4c4b48110b7c1363c40416c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Val

January 4, 2016 at 7:51 pm | Reply

Good point to consider when so many say over and ever how much "safer"
abortion is than childbirth!

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0f63aed8ff9d8bd48b95eb08c9a1b89b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Stuart Hildreth

May 10, 2016 at 9:21 pm | Reply

Miscarriage and abortion should not be limited together for a study.

        
                  24. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/eb84569174846618ee9140dbde349fd0?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Gabriel

January 19, 2016 at 9:17 am | Reply

Every woman should be able to make choices regarding her own body and her own
reproductive health, period. Why do so many people (particularly men) believe
that it's their place to make these choices? Last I checked, most pro-life
politicians, the ones who are privileged enough to make these choices for
society, don't have a uterus. Why then should their opinion on the matter
trump the needs of the applicable person? Whatever you may think about the
topic of abortion, unless you're the one who will have to undergo it, you have
no say.

P.S. I realise the irony here of myself being a man, but that is truly beside
the point. Even though I'm the one voicing it, I do believe my opinion
shouldn't carry much weight.

        
                  25. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/df3488c5aa4e68f08bda7d269b194f6f?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Rebecca

February 27, 2016 at 7:19 pm | Reply

Some people can never feel pain. I think it is dangerous to qualify a human
life based on her abilities.

I also don't think the fact that a lot of women have miscarriages is worth
mentioning. A lot of people in their 60's die natural deaths from heart
attacks. Does if follow we can kill people in their 60″s?

        
                  26. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ef58ff1bc9aaa88987371e0db3e0ab9f?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Michael

March 5, 2016 at 11:02 am | Reply

It's sad to me that "life" or "not life" boils down to a matter of the first-
down chain. "Sorry Ken, you only made it to 9.93, off by mere inches. Off you
go, then." JOEY! You made it to 10.000006. Congratulations then, here's hoping
you don't become a genocidal dictator.

        
                  27. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5d71dc88dd9a5f0d6603dae8e87bfe73?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Micheal Tarr

June 19, 2016 at 9:04 pm | Reply

A fetus has no cognitive ability:

Neither does a dead person. The dead person has no memory of being killed,
since they are dead.

A fetus cannot survive by itself before 24 weeks, so killing it before then is
ok:

A baby cannot survive by itself before 2 years old in the wild… Is killing it
before then ok?

Is the baby a living human or not. What it feels or remembers about the death,
and whether or not it can survive before a date are both irrelevant.

In the end, you're justifying murder.

I can justify ANYONES murder with science too. It's what the nazis did.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d9cfff180970617d5bf7bbf2a3ad9f17?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

ov suvajac

June 27, 2016 at 4:58 pm | Reply

I don't think anyone else here would justify murder quite the way you suggest.
The question at hand is at what point do fetuses become human beings. If there
is no cognitive ability then removing a fetus is more akin to removing an
appendix rather than a 2 year old child who does feel and think. The fact that
if it was left unattended, it has the potential to grow into a human being
only suggests it is farther along than an egg or sperm which are also not
human beings.

        
                  28. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5d71dc88dd9a5f0d6603dae8e87bfe73?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Micheal Tarr

June 19, 2016 at 9:10 pm | Reply

"Gabriel says:  
January 19, 2016 at 9:17 am  
Every woman should be able to make choices regarding her own body and her own
reproductive health, period. Why do so many people (particularly men) believe
that it’s their place to make these choices? Last I checked, most pro-life
politicians, the ones who are privileged enough to make these choices for
society, don’t have a uterus. Why then should their opinion on the matter
trump the needs of the applicable person? Whatever you may think about the
topic of abortion, unless you’re the one who will have to undergo it, you have
no say.

P.S. I realise the irony here of myself being a man, but that is truly beside
the point. Even though I’m the one voicing it, I do believe my opinion
shouldn’t carry much weight."

A greater percentage of women with children are opposed to abortion, than men
in general. That's a cop out.

Yes, I agree you can do with your body what you want… The problem is… The baby
is not part of your body… it's inside it.

        
                  29. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b86633689d343a25d6fe27a147df3cc7?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Wheeler

June 30, 2016 at 6:50 pm | Reply

The science behind this is interesting but I don't view it as relevant since,
through science, I've yet to see a scholarly offering that indicates
definitively the point in time when you could say that a human has the
POTENTIAL for becoming a conscious being. And by that, I mean conscious in the
sense of being self-aware…aware of one's own existence. Not just being aware,
per se, but the point in time when the capacity to become conscious being
happens. And therein lies the rub. Scientific inquiry will not resolve this
question since it's not purely a question of biology or chemistry. So, my
Christian views aside, I believe it is dangerous to assume you can define a
point in time after conception where you can draw the line between abortion
being OK or not OK because of the ethical issues attached (along with the
slippery slopes that led intellectuals in pre WW-2 Germany down the path of
eugenics). That said, I want to emphasize I'm not a 'pro-lifer' in the
political sense and believe that since God trusted us with freewill, who am I
to take it away from anyone else, especially since I'm so imperfect myself.
That said, I do think that we Christians (myself included) could do a better
job of influencing the hearts of people such that abortion went away
regardless of legislation for or against…and that wouldn't be a bad thing,
would it?

        
                  30. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Sheáin

August 20, 2016 at 8:05 pm | Reply

Not to allow a growing individual time to become 'aware', in line with Nature,
but to kill him/her, exemplifies a Cognitive Bias. People, through
accident/illness, can at any time lose awareness and yet we don't (often) call
for their death. Calls for abortion use several catchwords. Some people want
'trial parenthood' for 5 years (since there is not too much difference between
killing the preborn and the born). Vulnerable/different people have always
been killed or let die off. If abortionists do not regard human life as
sacred, why do they pussyfoot with catchwords, and not just say they want rid
of the child? They will eventually be listened to, things are getting ever
more liberal.

        
                  31. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff929d22bbf18bc5128cfec65f1ad59e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Joana

September 1, 2016 at 8:22 am | Reply

Great article Sarah! Very informative and we'll written. I start to realize
that most people that are so called pro life are not going to change their
minds ever, perhaps showing a more deontological way of thinking than a
consequentialist. If one has the ability to distanciate some early established
beliefs from actual real consequences it will realize that life isn't black
and white and sometimes the least harm choice has to be done. I believe in
life with quality for both mom and child that comes with choice. In the state
of the world today, with rape crime increasing but lesser convictions, with
the fact contraception methods not being fully effective (and some require
coloration from the man, wich doesn't allwais happen), and with economic
dificulties amongst many, one should think more about wath are the real
consequences of abortion within first trimester or forcing a women to carry
unwanted pregnancy, the consequences for her life, mental and physical health,
socio-economic situation… after all the laws in other countries in Europe
permit voluntary interruption of pregnancy up to 12 weeks and protects the
women in case of rape and danger to her health. This doesn't happen in
Ireland, where the women's life is even at risk in case of unproperlly dealt
with cases of miscarriage. From a consequentialist point of view, being an
unwanted child has very negative impact in the childs future life, even when
adoption occurs, let alone a life spend in institutions that unfortunately
faill to provide some essentials for a happy life. Speaking about the pain
argument… most abortion are performed within the 12 weeks, it us not
reasonable to think that the fetus feels or remembers anything at this point.
However it is acceptable for many to inflict both phsycological and even
physical pain to an adult living women, making her going trhough unwanted
pregnancy against her will, putting her trough life risk, and deplete her from
deciding to her life and body. I would say she would be the real unprotected
one here. And not to forget that this women us a contributing member of
society, many with already very relevant jobs and activities, with impact in
other people's life's. I think one should think more about the consequences
within each situation instead of blindly preach unrealistic arguments. That
would be the real challenge

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ff929d22bbf18bc5128cfec65f1ad59e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Joana

September 1, 2016 at 8:27 am | Reply

(Apologies for the typos)

        
                  32. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Réamonn

November 6, 2016 at 3:04 am | Reply

It is not for mankind to determine by laws (always different, to account for
changing sensitivity), that because an embryo is on the natural path to
adulthood, that this human can be killed for convenience (social reasons are
those usually given). Using the neural argument is a poor escape: adults can
lose their self-awareness by illness or accident. The case of Savita
Halappanavar (RIP) was widely misrepresented. She died of sepsis, deadly
infection. The argument of 'bodily integrity' is also poor: the fact that
there is another body, another person who is very young, can be proven by
growing an embryo in an artificial womb. There is a flourishing set phrases to
excuse abortion. Poor excuses when examined. Extreme abortionists even claim
the right to murder born children up to the age of five, after a 'trial
parenthood'. Mankind is very good at dehumanising. Remember the old phrase 'Ya
Injun varmint!' before the cowboy pulled his trigger? Sadly, it will always be
thus.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1106dc1e120ff14c0e9efda1026dd466?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

J.D.H., MD, PhD

November 6, 2016 at 7:55 am | Reply

Wow. I had difficulty understanding exactly what you have said here. I did
understand this:

"Extreme abortionists even claim the right to murder born children up to the
age of five, after a ‘trial parenthood’."

I cannot imagine why anyone would think that is true. It's a ridiculous
assertion and simply not true.

I know abortion is a contentious issue, but I see no logic in any of your
assertions. Most of it reads as nonsensical to me. Sorry, fellow - those are a
strange collection of words. If you want to make a logical argument that
people will understand and consider, you need to construct sentences that make
sense.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Réamonn

November 7, 2016 at 1:52 pm | Reply

Just googles post-birth abortions. I came accross this when surfing. College
groups form one constituency for this. A day before birth and a day after this
does not make much difference to infant development. This is one basis for
post-birth abortion.  
Google: http://aleteia.org/2014/11/05/post-birth-abortions-an-idea-thats-
gaining-ground-on-campus/  
http://jme.bmj.com/content/39/5/261.full.pdf+html  
http://www.joe.ie/fitness-health/uk-doctors-argue-for-killing-babies-calling-
it-after-birth-abortion/33126  
http://www.naturalnews.com/041398_post-
birth_abortion_infanticide_Melissa_Harris-Perry.html - et cetera.  
Reticence to reading (more than short, simple writing) is common. However, if
you have difficulties with any particular sentence in my post, I should be
glad to assist. Just keep it polite - and using deduction, not opinion.  
An inability to accept facts, in the face of evidence (you can google
yourself, I guess), is eg called 'cognitive bias' by neuroscientists. Read up
on the research done eg by David Eaglemann and Dr Lasana Harris and, again, I
shall be glad to help in any way I can.  
"Suffer the little ones to come unto Me" is a nice quote, with which to end.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/64fc04be4a6f99647c568e022f97f608?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

S

November 7, 2016 at 6:29 pm | Reply

I believe that you may have misunderstood the premice of the article you are
quoting here: (http://jme.bmj.com/content/39/5/261.full.pdf+html).

This article was published in a journal of medical ethics and was purely meant
as a 'thought experiment' encouraging medics and ethicists to think
differently about the moral and ethical debates surrounding abortion -
http://www.ibtimes.com/dr-francesca-minerva-after-birth-abortion-article-
defended-after-death-threats-419638 (this link includes an explanation from
the author of this paper - the poor woman received death threats after co-
authoring this paper)

Unfortunately a google search will turn up all manner of misinformation and it
can be a minefield to sort out fact from opinion. - It's also way too easy to
misrepresent what people are saying.

As you suggest with your comment on cognitive bias, if you look for something
you are likely to find information backing up your notion (whether this is
from a trustworthy source or not).

        
                  33. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2e9a1fbc93736c2ccca13068e5e780cd?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Mel Doomis

February 6, 2017 at 11:10 pm | Reply

Wow, from the original post I guess it's okay if we kill children that cant
yet contemplate their existence? I guess we should tell parents of children
with autism their lives are not worth living because they cant explain to you
their self worth? Maybe it should be OK to rape someone under anesthesia
because they wont be aware of what is happening like baby kept in a docile
state by its natural brain chemistry? If a baby isn't aware in the womb why
could I view my baby at 22 weeks, being woken up, adjusting and pushing back
when played with, becoming active with music etc, sucking on his hand like he
still does no when he is hungry. (46/50 states allow abortion at this point)
He was just as aware then as the day he was born full term.

If a baby could survive without its mother, why does it matter it's level of
understanding of the universe? If it's alive and well inside, and could
survive outside the womb, there is no denying that is murder. If you took that
22 week old baby out and it lived. Then you purposely killed it at any point,
it would be murder. No difference, a fetus just hasn't gotten a chance to take
a breath. The mother shouldnt have any more rights than the baby does. The
mothers choice was to have sex, the baby is the result of that choice. It
wasn't the babies choice to enter the mother. No rights are given to the
father. Or the baby, the human boy or girl who's gender can be known, who gets
no say because their selfish mother doesn't want a kid.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2cd814e9a4c4b48110b7c1363c40416c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Val

February 13, 2017 at 9:28 pm | Reply

Good points.  
I would just like to add that no one knows  
for sure when each individual unborn baby becomes pain-capable, sentient, or
"viable" with the technology surrounding him/her, and I feel life should
ALWAYS be given the benefit of doubt.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

An Dr Liam SS Réamonn

February 13, 2017 at 9:55 pm | Reply

All these points and more are addressed in the paper at:  
http://www.thelifeinstitute.net/blog/2013/07/03/abortion-the-scientific-truth/

Just about every dodge imaginable has been devised to excuse killing our own
kind, at the most vulnerable stage. The sad thing is the absence of relevant
scientific information which would show human intent in a clearer, less
adulating form. In truth, there are many people, authorities they might claim,
who have read and studied little, who will nonetheless assume a lot and not
trouble to try to weigh up what is out there.

        
                  34. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/66e1297c69c4a0c8005916f5753c189a?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Luis Rainha

February 13, 2017 at 1:13 pm | Reply

Clear and useful article. Thank you.

        
                  35. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/60fe14dfec06dac45473711544a0e6c3?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

ilovelucy

April 26, 2017 at 4:42 am | Reply

Wow thank you so much for writing this. Super brave to delve into this
territory and you did an amazing job. Love that you're still getting comments.
It's so hard to find really clear scientific information about fetal
development. I always get mommy blogs or pro-lifers in my search results. This
is GREAT. Now I just have to try really hard not to troll all the people
making terrible points that make no sense. Yay!

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/191b0559a1192216b1e1fcdbc0e33a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

The Brain Bank North West

May 2, 2017 at 3:50 pm | Reply

Thank you 🙂

        
                  36. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/db330bb93ecfd8f29b27887b7d81ac64?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Creator/created

May 15, 2017 at 12:16 pm | Reply

Wow some of these comments were disturbing, we are lucky in a way that these
people prove themselves oblivious with unrelatable comparisons and analogies.

It seems that the debate should be about whether or not these "pro lifers" are
capable of critical thinking.  
Preaching Religion is just showing  
blind faith in the unknown will leave you ignorant to deeper thinking.  
Seek knowledge in all things important to humanity and heighten your
perspective.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

May 15, 2017 at 12:47 pm | Reply

The problem about the proper consideration of abortion is that people have
honest views based on feelings and no study. Here is a study carried out by
three PhDs in science - with other scientists backing their research:
http://www.thelifeinstitute.net/blog/2013/07/03/abortion-the-scientific-truth/

Whilst the paper is published by the Life Institute, the focus of interest is
in the factual falsehood of abortionist slogans and the idea that an Infinite
Intelligence was so dumb that there is no sign of such outside the Bible. The
work is written at the level of eg Scientific American but it is widely based
and not an easy read. Only for those with time and a real wish to know.

        
                  37. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4fd995156e5cb47f0fd59f8e8dad9267?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

mass gang fuck

June 9, 2017 at 11:21 am | Reply

You actually make it seem so easy together with yoour presentation but I  
to find this topic to be really one thing that I thinmk I might by no means
understand.  
It sort of feels too complex and extremely extensive  
for me. I'm taking a look forward on your subsequent post,  
I will try to get the cling of it!

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

June 9, 2017 at 12:41 pm | Reply

One thing needed to 'out' what abortion really is, is clear knowledge - ie
information which is discovered and validated by scientists. There are,
please, two papers which show the scientific reality of abortion, at a level
of clarity to allow you to be able to challenge the false basis for the
practice - such as is used both in legislation and in pro-abortion slogans.
The two papers cover the same ground. The shorter is for the casual reader,
the longer is for people of greater determination. Reactions to these papers,
of course, should usefully come after a study of them.

These secular works are available in published form, thanks to the Life
Institute: http://www.thelifeinstitute.net/information/abortion-the-
scientific-truth The oft-expressed view that there is only i) a religious
constituency against abortion and ii) a secular argument for it, is fatuous
and ill-informed. Such arguments are based on bias and presumption: indeed
decision-making is covered in the papers.

As regards poor Savita, she passed away from a Sepsis infection and an
abortion would have had no effect on her length of life. This was established
by inquiry after a chorus of pro-aborts had swooped down on her misfortune
callously to exploit it for their own purpose. Regarding any case, I suggest,
please, the best way forward is to investigate a little yourself and follow
your own deductions. Even the Brain Bank can be invaded by rather silly tweet-
type expressions, full of views and empty of well-sourced information. Ádh mór
(Irish for Good Fortune)!

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c1286c2a574b4b62b591ceb5ca7109ec?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Christina

June 13, 2017 at 12:14 pm | Reply

Isn't it convenient that sepsis took her life because they left dying and
decaying tissue in the woman's body in a dirty infectious environment like a
hospital. Of course they say she wouldn't have lived even with the abortion. I
lived through sepsis and so have millions of other people when it was treated
and cleaned up in a timely manner. Sepsis doesn't happen spontaneously and
doesn't have to be a death sentence either. The fact is not even science could
definitively say that had her abortion happened immediately she would have
died anyway because there is just no way of proving it conclusively one way or
another unless all available options had been attempted immediately  
.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

June 13, 2017 at 6:29 pm | Reply

I was talking about the importance of knowledge in understanding abortion.
Then there is this comment about poor Savita, a case cruelly exploited by pro-
abortionists, with little reference to facts. She was infected before she was
ever admitted into hospital. Sepsis, of the type she had, carries a 60%
mortality rate. The care she received in the hospital had flaws. Delay in her
diagnosis was the issue. At the Inquest, the consultant in charge of Savita
said that, but for this delay, she would have aborted the child. Rash things
were said in the immediate aftermath by both sides. The bottom line is that
abortion, to save a mother's life, is allowed under Irish Law, right up to
birth.

        
                  38. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4bf84696bbb1d7b22b5a180a1e55913e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Cl

June 25, 2017 at 7:56 am | Reply

Disregarding the conscious debate, whigh science still does not fully yet
understand (look up near death experiences conducted by horizon studies) . The
fetus is no doubt 'alive' according to science from day 1. So why is this life
not rated at the same value as their mothers? Not all abortion cases are women
with their lives in danger, the majority just feel it's the wrong time.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

June 25, 2017 at 8:45 pm | Reply

http://www.thelifeinstitute.net/information/abortion-the-scientific-truth -
one point elaborated in the longer paper is that, from conception, an infinite
(ie unlimited) and awesome kit - covering an array of biological procedures -
kicks into action, guiding the conceptus unerringly towards the wonder which
is a human adult. A moral (ethical if you prefer) code is hard-wired into
their DNA. Prenatal psychology is now a growing field. The work and judgement
of three highly qualified working scientists, and the critical appraisal of
their output by other scientists, brings you secular information on abortion
issues, from the literature (from as recently a few months ago), in all
humility and with a passion for digging out the truth (even at the cost of
much midnight oil). Ádh mór (Irish for Good Fortune - you will note a short
intro in Irish, our 5,000 y/o tongue).

        
                  39. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

November 8, 2017 at 1:36 pm | Reply

Science does not take sides on moral, ethical or other topics. It spills out
the facts of discoveries in several relevant branches of the discipline. It is
then for people to weigh up the facts - although you will know that psychology
tells us that facts may only be seen as obstacles to realising Expectations.
For those few who are both open-minded and curious, there is here a paper of
some years' writing: http://www.thelifeinstitute.net/information/abortion-the-
scientific-truth/

        
                  40. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/503d4d873be0c55aa8b3b0a365bb3a5e?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Lorraine

November 8, 2017 at 6:18 pm | Reply

Not something I would brag about!

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2cd814e9a4c4b48110b7c1363c40416c?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Val

November 8, 2017 at 7:21 pm | Reply

You are disgusting for advertising what you do on a forum like [email
protected]

        
                  41. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e6bee243e61cdad7eee25c6389e36371?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Mike

December 14, 2017 at 2:55 am | Reply

I find it interesting that Republicans, who are in charge of most rural and
southern areas of the US, are so adamant about establishing personhood for a
large group of cells in a woman’s womb, have for a very long time had no
trouble denying personhood to people based on creed and culture. Even now
Republicans work to deny voting, healthcare, freedom, and subsistence to large
swaths of the population.

        
                  42. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e6bee243e61cdad7eee25c6389e36371?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Mike

December 14, 2017 at 3:15 am | Reply

Sorry about my last post but as this blog has proven, there is no divorcing
the science from the political/religious aspects of this issue. I do
appreciate the information regarding the development of a fetus. There is no
doubt in my mind that a nine month old fetus, the day before birth, is a
person and should be afforded the same constitutional rights as any other
citizen. Unfortunately for anti choice factions, a fertilized egg is not
afforded constitutional protections. Let me try to explain why this is the
case.

        
                  43. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e6bee243e61cdad7eee25c6389e36371?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Mike

December 14, 2017 at 3:34 am | Reply

Imagine that scientists create an artificial womb in which any fertilized egg
could be inserted and it would incubate the fetus until term. Still there
would be women who would prefer to give birth the old fashioned way. If every
fertilized egg is protected as a citizen, how will you certify that each
citizen has been created? Millions of women spontaneously lose their lose
their newly fertilized egg shortly after conception. Will they be brought up
on charges of the inability to care for a new soul? And how will you know it
was there and lost? Let’s go back to that artificial womb. Are you willing to
have the state pay to incubate unwanted fetuses? If you are, why would you not
support the state supporting the nurturing the child after it exits the
incubator?

        
                  44. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/897122050697aee3c2f63a2b84f863e2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Enzo

April 18, 2018 at 1:53 am | Reply

Hi Sarah. I've found this link trying to get some scientific answer with
respect to the abortion debate. At this time the abortion legislation is being
discussed right here in Argentina. The feminist movement is trying to pass a
law in congress so woman can decide on their body and on their own life.

However, I haven't heard so good arguments in this debate as yours since,
maybe the essay by Carl Sagan, and your arguments are stronger, and with a
strong scientific basis, coming from an expert in neuroscience. It would be
awesome if you could make a contact with people in here in Argentina, as this
is being discussed right now, and I think that your opinion could make a real
difference. Thousands of womans die here in Argentina in illegal abortions,
frequently they live children, and they decide to interrupt their abortions
because they can't even sustain their home economy with the kids they already
have. All this could change if the legislation changes.

Best regards,  
Enzo Gaggioli

        
                  45. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/897122050697aee3c2f63a2b84f863e2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Enzo

April 18, 2018 at 1:56 am | Reply

**leave other child without a mother I've tried to say (not live).

        
                  46. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/897122050697aee3c2f63a2b84f863e2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Enzo

April 18, 2018 at 1:57 am | Reply

Sorry, it is horrible written, I should have re read before posting.

        
                  47. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ddd6ba50ad3b71151587fb7f703e39f7?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Star

May 17, 2018 at 1:41 pm | Reply

I agree with your research and article thank you for sharing. I was wondering
if you might know of any good articles about the study of fetal brain wave
activity studies that are 2015 to current?

        
                  48. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c8390f146f754499bc9c7ea9e0b110bf?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

compression socks for nurses

August 27, 2018 at 7:18 pm | Reply

Thanks , I've recently been searching for info about this topic for  
a while and yours is the greatest I have discovered so far.  
But, what about the conclusion? Are you sure about the supply?

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Réamonn

August 27, 2018 at 8:45 pm | Reply

You will find scientific (secular) articles at:
http://www.thelifeinstitute.net/information/abortion-the-scientific-truth/
Perhaps notable here is that babies can pretty well be born now without
contact with a parent (separate entity from the start). Also the practice of
'embryo adoption' can be a 'win, win, win' story. And full life begins at
conception with a truly awsome neurological kit (ie of infinite complexity and
precision). In sum, the reasons for US and UK abortion laws have been undone
with technological process (profit driven). Humans have always been killers.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1106dc1e120ff14c0e9efda1026dd466?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Donna Henson

August 27, 2018 at 11:47 pm | Reply

Nooooo… "The Life Institute" is not remotely credible nor scientific. It's an
extreme anti-choice organization. Hardly what anyone would call secular. And
certainly not credible.

There are many reasons women seek safe medical abortion. The opinion that
"life begins at conception" is a personal opinion that is used to argue
against abortion. The only credible scientific approach is looking at the
brain and stages of development.

I've known several people who were adamantly against abortion, only to seek
abortion for THEIR pregnant teen daughters. It's different when the shoe is on
the other foot.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Réamonn

August 28, 2018 at 12:27 pm | Reply

That's super smart. You judge the work of three noted Science PhDs on the
basis of the reputation you give the body which published their work, before
rubbishing the standing of that body. (Not very nice.) Over five years ago, I
started research, only accepting the secular position that Society respects
Human Life and only argues over when 'human life', as defined, begins. With
recent scientific developments, one may see that fetus viability has been
brought forward more and more in the pregnancy and that the (infinite) neural
capacities, active in and after maturation, truly command respect. Above, I
gave the examples that a child may be grown to maturity in the lab. and is so
unarguably a separate person from the start. And spoke of 'embryo adoption' as
a 'win, win, win' procedure (two mothers and a baby can get on with their
lives). Why some women may seek to end the lives they carry is another issue.
Personal views/stories are other issues, also not related to science. Whether
abortion should be legalised or not is, yet again, another issue. Show me what
is not secular in the papers you did not read. For anyone who is prepared to
overcome bias (not easy) with stolid logic {induction of fact and deduction
(analysis of this)} and actually read what I wrote, they will be better
informed regarding the decisions they make.

        
                      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/897122050697aee3c2f63a2b84f863e2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Enzo

August 28, 2018 at 2:40 pm | Reply

She has been clear about the organization is biased against abortion. In the
first stages of development there isn't even a brain. What is the difference
after conception and before it? why won't you try to save every sperm cell and
every egg as 'potential human beings'? that position is radical and
ridiculous. And it is more proper to the times of inquisition and obscurantism
than to the XXI century. Here in my country, this debate has been taken on the
public domain last months, the law was finally rejected by the conservative
legislators at our senate. Days after the law was rejected, which would have
been an advance on womans right over their own body, three women died on
clandestine abortion. The debate took speakers of many different areas of our
society to the senate, people from the medical area who receive womans who
have undergone clandestine abortion at our public hospitals, lawyers who have
represented girls of 10 to 13 years old who have been raped in some provinces
at the north of our country, where the people in power, and the conservative
people in those provinces have refused and made lobby to prevent that raped
girl from making an abortion.

When you discuss with people who is against abortion, they say they protect
life, but that is an hypocritical and cynical lie, because women die in
clandestine abortion just for trying to decide over their lives and over their
own bodies. They are saving no lives, they are condemning woman to die on
clandestine abortion. And when you mention this to this people, they say, well
they should have their legs closed, and then you say very clearly how this
close this is to inquisition. This people think those woman deserve to die
because of deciding over their own body or over their own sexual life.

        
                        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Réamonn

August 28, 2018 at 6:57 pm | Reply

You say the Life Institute is biased against abortion. You are incorrect. The
Institute takes a stand against abortion. My research provides information on
complex topics. The aim is to help to balance the debate. The Institute was
open enough to publish for me. You impress me with your big word
'obscurantism' and recognition of Roman numerals (despite the awful English).
Digression over. Your rant, touching of matters of science, with your
reference to the absence of a brain, makes me laugh. Thank you. Bad enough,
though, not to read my research. Unacceptable not to read my post and yet
presume to be engaging with me (with you stumbling all over the pitch - even
into the Spanish Inquisition!). The conditions under which women undergo
backstreet abortions, by the way, primarily indicate absent health services.
And you do not have to tell me that some so-called 'pro-lifers' are heartless.
And they no different from extreme 'pro-choicers' who would have post-birth
abortion up to age five - or more. I provide scientific information. There is
nothing in that to rant about.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/897122050697aee3c2f63a2b84f863e2?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Enzo

August 28, 2018 at 7:45 pm

Oh, so sorry for my horrible English. Nice argument of yours -or may I say
fallacy?-. I have to read some real scientific work now. But I use to read
science fiction on my vacation time, if you are lucky enough I might waste my
time on your work then.

You haven't answered any of the questions I posed neither by the way.

        
                          * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1106dc1e120ff14c0e9efda1026dd466?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Donna Henson

August 29, 2018 at 11:51 pm

Uh… "biased against abortion" is the same as "takes a stand against abortion."

A credible, scientific source has no interest either way.

Please take just a basic science course. Life institute is as unbiased as
Krispy Kreme is a health food company.

Absurd.

        
                  49. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2666e8392676e69502bb1e23be4bb5d6?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

womenscenterus

December 28, 2018 at 10:11 am | Reply

The type of the abortion procedure to be followed is totally depends upon time
period of the pregnancy as how far the pregnancy exits. During the first
trimester, you have the best option of having a medical abortion procedure or
surgical abortion procedure. Before considering any option, it is better to
determine if the pregnancy is possible and for the accurate pregnancy dating.
If you want help for abortion, then second trimester abortion clinics near me
and gets require services.

        
                    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/adec6ddeef2d3eaff1480b98e17bbb7b?s=50&d=wavatar&r=g)
        

Liam Reamonn

December 29, 2018 at 7:43 pm | Reply

to - Donna Henson - It's great to hear pontificating on scientific papers from
someone who evidently has not read them. The scientific papers on abortion, on
the Life Institute website are 1) secular and 2) do not take sides. What the
papers actually do, is provide information on the conceptus, and on the
mechanisms of ending such a life. Unlike those pro-choicers who have a closed
mind, the papers give information on alternatives to outright killing, like
the win-win-win embryo adoption procedure. The Natural Order puts infinite
complexity and maintenance into the lives of all living things. This is a fact
to be internalised, not trivially to be ignored in a shallow fashion. Happy NY
to all.

### Leave a Comment Cancel reply

Comment

Name Email Website

Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

Notify me of new posts by email.

Search for:

> ## Recent Tweets

My Tweets

## Recent Posts

        
                  * Is mental health data more sensitive than physical health data?
          * The science behind the stories: drug treatment to slow progress of Huntington’s disease.
          * A random blog post
          * Wolves: the power of the pack
          * Comment: Why being ‘overweight’ means you live longer: the way scientists twist the facts.
        

## Archives

        
                  * January 2018
          * December 2017
          * November 2017
          * October 2017
          * September 2017
          * August 2017
          * July 2017
          * June 2017
          * May 2017
          * April 2017
          * March 2017
          * February 2017
          * January 2017
          * December 2016
          * November 2016
          * October 2016
          * September 2016
          * August 2016
          * July 2016
          * June 2016
          * May 2016
          * April 2016
          * March 2016
          * February 2016
          * January 2016
          * December 2015
          * November 2015
          * October 2015
          * September 2015
          * August 2015
          * July 2015
          * June 2015
          * May 2015
          * April 2015
          * March 2015
          * February 2015
          * January 2015
          * December 2014
          * November 2014
          * October 2014
          * September 2014
          * August 2014
          * July 2014
          * June 2014
          * May 2014
          * April 2014
          * March 2014
          * February 2014
          * January 2014
          * December 2013
          * November 2013
          * October 2013
          * September 2013
          * August 2013
          * July 2013
          * June 2013
          * May 2013
          * April 2013
          * March 2013
          * February 2013
          * January 2013
          * December 2012
          * November 2012
          * October 2012
          * September 2012
          * August 2012
          * July 2012
          * June 2012
          * May 2012
          * April 2012
          * March 2012
          * February 2012
          * November 2011
          * September 2011
          * June 2011
          * April 2011
          * February 2011
        

(C) 2019 The Brain Bank Northwest

Scroll back to top

        
                  * __
          * __
          * __
          * __
        

Share This

        
                  * __
        

StumbleUpon

        
                  * __
        

Facebook

        
                  * __
        

Twitter

        
                  * __
        

Print Friendly

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

