  
  
* * *
    
        * Home
    * Social Security No.
    * Photo ID
    * Lodging Guide
    * Credit History
    * Car Guide
    * Banking Guide
    * Phone Guide
    * Entertainment
    * Household Goods
    * Visa Guide
    * 'Small Things'
    * Coming Soon!
    * Tell your story
    

| |

## Moving to America?

Get _real_ guidance from real people!

Are you a new immigrant to the US? Or perhaps moving to America on a work
visa? Either ways, settling-in is not easy. Most of your savings, your friends
and contacts, and your family support structure are in your home country.
You’re probably starting life afresh.

Well, here's the good news - you're not alone in this predicament. Every year,
thousands of people are relocating to America. Most of them face _exactly the
same_ issues.

I did too!

Six years ago I was a project manager with an information technology firm in
Delhi, India. Then my company transferred me to the US. It was an exciting
time. I loved America at first sight, and its been my home ever since.

But I craved for guidance.

Don’t get me wrong. The United States of America is not the boondocks. I was a
well-traveled, well-educated IT professional. I had no language problems,
could easily figure things out, had company colleagues to assist, and was good
at researching the web.

And yet I made mistakes. Some expensive, many avoidable.

Big Things like:

    
        * What car should you buy? Should you go in for a pre-owned (second-hand) car? Should you buy or lease (what is leasing?)
    * What kind of apartment should you rent?
    * What credit card should you get? How do you build a credit history (and what is that?)
    * What is insurance? How many 'types' of insurances are there? Medical? Car? Life? Do you need these? Where do you get them from?
    * How do you open a bank account? Which bank offers the best interest rates?
    * How much can you expect to save every month? How do you send money back to your parents?
    * Should you invest in stocks? Property? How?
    

And Little Things like:

    
        * What classy restaurant can you take your spouse to, on your anniversary?
    * What else can you do on weekends, besides going to the movies?
    * How can you get your flat tire fixed?
    * Where on earth do you get your eyebrows threaded?
    

And therein lays the genesis of this website. It’s a compilation of all the
little and big things I learnt, and all that other people like me learnt, when
we first came to the US. Moving to America is, literally a life changing
event. This Moving to America 'Guide' will hopefully equip you with knowledge
and regularly updated, location-specific information that makes your move a
whole lot more enjoyable with fewer hassles.

Remember, there's a smart way of doing things, and a slow way of doing things.
The slow way is to make discoveries yourself, one by one. You'll spend time
and energy. You'll make mistakes, get confused. You'll spend money, then
regret it. The smart way is to stand on the shoulders of others who've been-
there, done-that. You'll save money and avoid inconvenience. Most importantly,
you'll feel secure that your decisions are based on the learnings of others
like you who've tread the path of....Moving to America!

Moving-to-America-Guide.com is an informational site only All trademarks are
the property of their respective owners

![SBI](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAGAAAAAQAgMAAACU1JJqAAAABGdBTUEAANbY1E9YMgAAAAlQTFRFAAD/////AAD/zPImzAAAAAJ0Uk5TAAB2k804AAAAiElEQVQY033Quw1DIQwFUMulx0hlMU2aNJkGuYo8hZWK3CnD70VB73MLJHxkDNDjJHQOd/qP9rXDEysgNuC8QOgPDGxmEE2RSgWVCd7qzl5CQ4+AOqBsAGF73Rxea61DRAeQcC5JSChoB3U3jqrDhWMCo+0gVG/VZkxYX94zALu8/XPcwfnqd78PeWblWIvK+wAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)  
**SBI!**

* * *

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

