

Skip to Content

![Science Translational Medicine](//blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-

content/themes/science/img/logo-stm.svg)

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Journals
    * Topics
    * Careers
    * Search
    

Search __

* * *

Search

Search __

    
        * Log in
    * My account
    * Contact Us
    

![](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/highwire/covers/sci/364/6444/-F1.medium.gif)

### Subscribe

    
        * Renew my subscription
    * Sign up for alerts
    

![Science Translational Medicine](//blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-

content/themes/science/img/logo-stm.svg)
![AAAS](//blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-content/themes/science/img/logo-

aaas.svg)

.

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    
    * Authors
    * Members
    * Librarians
    * Advertisers
    
    * Home
      * Recent Videos
      * Latest Podcasts
      * Photo Galleries
      * Dance Your Ph.D. Contest
    * News
      * Latest News
      * ScienceInsider
      * ScienceShots
      * Sifter
      * From the Magazine
      * About News
      * Quizzes
    * Journals
      * Science
      * Science Advances
      * Science Immunology
      * Science Robotics
      * Science Signaling
      * Science Translational Medicine
      * Science Partner Journals
    * Topics
      * All Topics
      * Special Issues
      * Custom Publishing
    * Careers
      * Articles
      * Find Jobs
      * Career Resources
      * Forum
      * For Employers
      * Employer Profiles
      * Graduate Programs
      * Booklets
      * Advertising Features
    * #### Share
    

![In the pipeline](//blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-

content/uploads/sites/2/2015/06/logo-in-the-pipeline.svg)

Derek Lowe's commentary on drug discovery and the pharma industry. An
editorially independent blog from the publishers of Science Translational
Medicine. All content is Derek’s own, and he does not in any way speak for his
employer.

![Derek Lowe](//blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-

content/uploads/sites/2/2018/07/Derek-Lowe.jpg)

### By Derek Lowe

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    

### Business and Markets

# How Much Does the Drug Industry Spend on Marketing?

By Derek Lowe 8 July, 2009

Anyone who defends the pharmaceutical industry has to be ready to hear, over
and over and over, about how much it spends on sales and marketing versus R&D.
This is thought to be a telling point about where the priorities _really_ are.
I 've addressed this one several times, and my best response is to point out
that sales and marketing are actually supposed to _bring in more money_ than
you spend on them, and do so more reliably than R  &D in the short term.  
There's now a very useful paper in _Nature Reviews Drug Discovery_ looking at
just this issue. The authors (from three universities in the US and Israel)
are looking into the general question of which is the better use of money: put
it into R  &D for the long term, or promote existing products for the short
term? I should make clear at the outset that those two options do line up in
that way. R&D expenditures take years to pay off, if ever, given the amount of
time that drug development takes. And marketing of a current product had
better start paying off in a shorter time frame, because every patented drug
is a wasting asset, constantly being eaten into by competition and by its time
to patent expiration.  
So which makes more financial sense? The authors numbers from the Wharton
databases on publicly traded drug companies, looking at those with more than
$50 million in sales. Using the company stock prices as a measure of value (
_J. Finance_ LVI(6), 2431–2456 (2001), I 'm giving you references here), they
found, in general, that R &D investments have a net positive effect, while
increased promotion has a negative effect. (See also _Rev. Account Stud._ 7,
355–382 (2002), another journal I don't reference much). Both effects are
larger for smaller companies, as you might expect, but they held up across the
industry. The effect also holds up if you factor out the compensation packages
of the top five executives of each company (which is a nice control to run, I
have to say). And yes, since you ask, there is a negative effect on stock
price that correlates to higher executive compensation, and I'm willing to bet
that this effect holds for more than just the drug industry.  
Since we 're talking about stock prices, which are generally forward-looking,
the way to interpret these results is probably that investors expect R &D
expenditures to pay off in the long term, but actually expect sales and
marketing expenditures to reduce long-term value. If that's so, then why spend
money on marketing? The reason the authors propose is just what I'd been
talking about: short-term reliability. Drug discovery and development is
inherently risky, and promotion of existing products is (at least
comparatively) more of a sure thing. Companies engage in a mix of the two to
try to even the cash flow out. (And as the authors note, if executive
compensation is tied more to short-term performance, then there's an incentive
to go with the short-term gains).  
![NRDD graph](http://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-

content/uploads/sites/2/2015/04/NRDD-graph.jpg)  
In general, though, you'd figure that companies should invest more in R&D. And
here's the real kicker: _that 's exactly what's been happening_. As this graph
from the paper shows, over the last thirty years expenditures in the Sales,
General, and Administrative area have risen only slightly as a per cent of
sales. The Cost of Goods Sold category (materials, physical plant,
manufacturing facilities, etc.) has gone proportionally down, with an
interesting excursion in the mid-1990s. (Note also that this used to be the
leading category). And R &D expenditures (again, as a per cent of sales) rose
in the 1980s, were flat in the 1990s, and have risen since then. Overall,
since 1975, the proportion of money spent on R&D has _more than tripled_ ,
from 5% to 17%.  
This, I hardly need point out, does not fit the narrative of some of the
e-mails and comments I get. Some perceptions of the drug industry have us,
Back In the Old Days, as spending our money on R &D, only to slimily slide
into becoming pure marketing businesses as time has passed, with our recent
years being especially disgusting and rapacious. According to these figures,
this is at the very least not accurate, and comes close to being the opposite
of the truth. Comments are welcome - most welcome, indeed.

## 58 comments on "How Much Does the Drug Industry Spend on Marketing?"

    
        1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4104dd9bf41333f4c3f4f9ead4c6f8eb?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Greg Hlatky says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 7:53 am

You spend more on marketing and sales than on R&D. All your ideas come from
NIH-funded projects. Your mother was a hamster and your father smelt of
elderberries!

    
        2. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22867b6a1b3c939157b0cd3851c0ef24?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Lethe says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 8:31 am

The choice as presented is between spending money on marketing or on R&D.
There is, of course, is a third option, which is not spending the money at
all, and instead, lowering the price of drugs. Crazy talk, I know. Much better
to spend vast sums of money hiring former cheerleaders to bring doctors
branded pens and stationary.

    
        3. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d1aa7169e577b8376fbcb1e00586633a?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Ed says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 8:34 am

Drug companies are no longer allowed to bring doctors branded pens and
stationary.

    
        4. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/90ebb5d2faff5501c3666adf3abf8b33?s=32&d=mm&r=g) imarx says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 8:35 am

The absolute numbers are still pretty dramatic though - 40% sales & marketing
vs. 15% R&D? That's quite a sizable difference. Or does that 40% include other
things besides marketing?

    
        5. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3aefdb8a26e131a0cef0f68031efd395?s=32&d=mm&r=g) MTK says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 8:53 am

First, I have not read the article, so I'm just going off of Derek's comments.  
With that in mind, just because the authors found that spending money on
marketing is a net negative on stock price doesn't suggest that less money
spent on marketing would be better, since that presumes that the increased
SG&A costs led, directly or indirectly, to the lower stock price.  
An alternative could be that companies with less in the R&D pipeline would
spend more on marketing to squeeze out as much as possible now. So spending
more on marketing does not lead to lower stock prices, but is rather a
response to lower, or future lower, stock prices due to lower R&D
productivity.  
Lethe, as for your suggestion to spend nothing. Those are called generic
companies. They discover no new drugs and they conduct only the most limited
of clinical trials. They have a role, but so does Pharma. Unless of course you
believe there is no room for improvement in the treatment of the human
condition.

    
        6. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8b4c7a0d59c4e86295e81418209ae97d?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Sili says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 8:54 am

So why are executives rewarded in the short term, and how does one stop that?

    
        7. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a60e0236a7ad716a42ae07c5e40ef3c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Hap says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:02 am

While I have yet to figure why cutting R+D will magically create more drugs, I
can see why drug company executives might wonder why they don't seem to be
producing more drugs with their increased R+D expenditures. It's kind of like
how I feel lately about taxes (and how I'm sure I will feel even more when
they go up, shortly) - if you're spending so much money, what exactly are you
doing with it? I'm not buying that it's been a five- or ten-year unlucky
streak for drug companies - it seems sort of improbable, particularly since
with that much money, R+D ought to be spread among fields likely to flower
with different arrival times.  
On the other hand, well over twice as much money on marketing and sales as to
R+D? It probably fits both what they want their revenue stream to be and what
businesses spend (the R+D for drugs sounds a lot bigger, actually), but it
doesn't sound like a balance designed to get more drugs. If you have something
useful, in most cases demonstrably so, why does it cost so much to get people
to buy it (particularly when the cost of getting people to buy it drives up
its costs and forces you to work harder to get people to buy it)?

    
        8. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3cb6dedae669089755fc8833f03c2ae5?s=32&d=mm&r=g) milkshake says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:08 am

post-approval clinical research is often carefully designed with an eye on the
marketing so the distinction becomes blurred, and the scientific integrity
suffers - as we have seen most recently with Merck

    
        9. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e13e0d140ba4d9c3dc9ace47a137479c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Ben says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:15 am

This data is very interesting, Derek. Do you know if there have been any
studies showing the ROI of investments in sales/marketing vs investments in
R&D?  
In a purely rational setup, you would expect companies to spend on
sales/marketing and R&D until the ROI of both was equivalent (and thus you get
to that mystical "profit maximizing" point). I'm wondering how much of that is
being done here -- the only way I can rationalize your point with the
"theoretical" view (which is not perfect, but still roughly what sort of
decision is being made) is if there is a huge difference between actual and
perceived payout for R&D and sales/marketing.  
Also to the rest of the peanut gallery, please remember that SG&A includes far
more than sales/marketing. It includes things like HR, IT, support services,
etc. So a percentage of the SG&A spend is also "relevant" (either on a medical
level because it involves working with insurance companies and doctors or on a
company level because it pays for work that needs to be done).

    
        10. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/3aefdb8a26e131a0cef0f68031efd395?s=32&d=mm&r=g) MTK says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:18 am

imarx,  
Yes, it dos include other things beyond marketing. Sales is the S. G and A is
general and administration. Expenses that would be included are payroll and
HR, taxes, rent, capital depreciation, maintenance, IT, etc.

    
        11. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a60e0236a7ad716a42ae07c5e40ef3c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Hap says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:20 am

# 6: Because some (a lot) of the stockholders are holding stock for the short-

term, and so execs that benefit in that term are likely to make them more
money than those looking for long-term gains? Alternatively, long-term
contracts (such as in baseball) are expensive, and if you're looking for the
long-term, you have to give excutives enough time to achieve the goals you
want, which is expensive and uncertain. You also have to separate other types
of market gains from your stock gains (you want to know what your CEO got you
that you wouldn't have gotten otherwise), and in the long term that's probably
hard. Maybe giving shareholders as a whole (rather than merely the preferred
ones) more of a say would help.

# 2: Sure - because not spending money on R+D will get you more drugs, right?

If companies knew they could get drugs from doing nothing, don't you think
they would be doing it already?  
The other issue is that when you have a patented drug, why would you lower the
price? Unless you have competition, there isn't any reason (and you wouldn't
have disclosed and patented and tested the drug in the first place if you
could expect to make more money some other way) to lower the price of the drug
(which in lots of cases, won't help the end users, anyway, who you could more
directly target - the gains will go to insurance companies, in most cases).  
Everyone wants to be able to make money from the products of their own work
and mind, but wants at the same time the output of others' minds and their
work to be free or cheap. Good luck with that.

    
        12. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8fc95586d42236daa25fa8f596b2b649?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Dylan says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:22 am

The 40% number is for all SG&A (Selling, General and Administrative) expenses
and includes more than just sales and marketing, pretty much everything that
isn't a direct input to R&D or production gets lumped in to SG&A.

    
        13. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a6571a5b8a08b0975eef972673d08d1d?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Tom King says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:39 am

SGA includes operations ( finance, warehousing etc etc) to operate a pharma
company you need to take orders and then deliver product. You need to employ
scientists and lab space. SGA covers a wide swath of expenses. My company has
about 80 reps and about 20 back office support. The reps cost about 150K a
year ( salary, commission, car, expenses) the back office support staff cost
about 120K a year. Thats about 14 million a year for the sales team and we
sell about 300 million a year of our product. Fairly reasonable to me.

    
        14. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d4ad218c15a7d4b54167b318d261957f?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Bny says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 9:52 am

Here is a question.. would the G&A costs also include biz operations costs
associated with R&D but not direct R&D inputs? For instance HR related costs
associated with researchers, etc?

    
        15. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a60e0236a7ad716a42ae07c5e40ef3c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Hap says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 10:01 am

If sales and marketing include a whole bunch of costs that are not just for
sales and marketing (HR, accounting, payroll - things that are used in common
for lots of parts of the business), then isn't comparing sales and marketing
(and lots of other stuff) to R+D and the ROI incorrect, if not deceptive? I'm
not a fan of sales spending, but lumping in fixed costs that don't generate
money for the company (ever) but are necessary to its operation to
expenditures that may generate future revenue would seem to reduce the ROI of
sales and marketing unfairly and make the comparison not so good. Maybe bad
data is better than none, but this could be a large flaw if not addressed.

    
        16. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/48b293567484edc02cd70efa8bf3f9cc?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Dana says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 10:09 am

I have read that research and development as defined by the drug companies
often includes market research. I wonder if this study took that into account?

    
        17. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/876dbd9eab12e231feb0f2f073843613?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Big biotech says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 10:42 am

NEJM suggested spending on mkting was $30 billion in 2005:
http://content.nejm.org/cgi/content/full/357/7/673  
Don't forget the marketing adage, "I konw half my advertising works, I just
don't know what half".

    
        18. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/826816e6b5f00d98ac8aa5c22a941b37?s=32&d=mm&r=g) RandDChemist says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 11:01 am

Marketing isn't inherently evil, neither is R&D inherently good.  
I've seen glimpses of the reality distortion field that exists within some
marketing groups. I've certainly seen it within R&D. It comes down to asking
the tough questions, challenging assumptions and asking for the data. In both
areas.  
Part of the problem is that there exists a gap between the two areas. Finding
a scientist who can work with marketing (understand, comprehend, etc.) or a
marketer who can grasp the scientist is no mean feat.  
To me, the absolute numbers mean little. As ben points out in #9, what is the
ROI for both?  
Do they account for lobbying expenditures?  
To me, it appears that more breakdown is needed.  
One thing that has impressed me about skilled marketing is managing a
product's lifecycle. Well done, it can sustain a company for years.  
One of the issues is that companies often have an imbalance of a certain group
at the head of the table. A scientist running the show will fail if they do
not surround themselves with people who compliment them and can sell the
science. Likewise, no scientific input and just trying to make a sale will
ruin the venture.  
A larger issue is that of pride and go once you are at the upper echelons of
the company. I expect confidence, but it can blind you if it becomes
arrogance.  
Thanks for challenging assumptions Derek!

    
        19. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/db174a53eef0417a3fbcaabd39207ed5?s=32&d=mm&r=g) John Harrold says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 11:03 am

milkshake mentioned:  
_post-approval clinical research is often carefully designed with an eye on
the marketing so the distinction becomes blurred, and the scientific integrity
suffers - as we have seen most recently with Merck_  
I'm not quite sure 'post-approval' research is really that relevant here. Most
R &D expenditures are going to be coming from pre-approval research namely
drug discovery, preclinical trials, and clinical trials.

    
        20. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dda7d203b7f0afc2b17980dc46a66906?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Cloud says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 11:27 am

Very interesting post, Derek.  
@Dana- just from an operational standpoint, I'd guess that most of the market
research done is included in SG&A, not R&D. The only way a company the size of
a Pfizer is likely to report these sorts of numbers is by looking at expenses
reported by business units. Any group doing market research is going to be
housed in some sort of sales/marketing business unit, not in one of the R&D
business units.  
Of course, the target selection process typically includes a look at predicted
market size. You want to know if the a drug hitting the target would have
sufficient payoff to justify the investment. At a small company, some of this
sort of "market research" gets done in R&D, but it is usually limited to "what
do published sources say about the potential market?" not "let's call a bunch
of doctors and ask them what they think." I have no idea how targets actually
get selected in big Pharma- I've never been high enough in one of those
companies to have any insight into the process.  
Regardless, I would also guess that the cost of even a thorough market survey
is absolutely dwarfed by what gets spent in the research labs.

    
        21. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/486abfd9f11a3a2d179092f209815ca2?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Sigivald says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 12:25 pm

Lethe: Beyond what hap said, there's the pesky fiduciary duty _the board has
to its _shareholders_ (who, lest you forget, are probably_ as likely to be
retirement funds as individual investors).  
( _That might not be exactly the right term of art, but it 's close and I'm
too busy not-being-a-lawyer to care.  
_ * I don't have specific data for ownership breakdown in Pharmaceutical
stocks, but that's typical of established industries in general, as far as I
know.)

    
        22. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0960022e45281b4e4a2b0aa3de956e5c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Bill says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 12:33 pm

Why haven't specific marketing companies filled this niche so that small
biotechs or even bigger companies for that matter can focus on R & D and cut
out sales. Basically another type of outsourcing, for the marketing and sales
portion, in the end the competition of many marketing companies should
ultimately drive down the cost and maybe even drug prices. Just a thought.

    
        23. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Cellbio says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 1:13 pm

Bill, basically, pharma is best suited to handle registration, distribution
and marketing, and these all fit well in one shop. With limits on what sales
reps can do or say, companies also employ Medical Liasons, who discuss the
"science" of the product, but are not formally part of the sales force. Sales
and marketing are also, and best if nearly soley, supported by timely and
truthful sicentific publications. All this, if done well, is part of a long
strategy of life cycle management that requires mutliple disciplines,
including research. I believe a larger % of R in the R&D of big companies will
serve this role, and it is an important role, both for marketing and the
accuracy of clinical claims, while more of the discovery part of R will occur
in small companies.  
Research innovation does not scale well, IMO.

    
        24. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/58a43f66fc0e94f5174b1b5f01aa0f40?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Dave says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 1:17 pm

Why is that no seems to understand that drugs are priced just like everything
else in the world that takes big money to develop? Balpoint pens were more
than $25 each when they first hit the market, calculators cost hundreds, and
the first microwaves were priced out of almost everyones budjet. A new drug
costs hundreds of millions of dollars to develop and the initial branded price
reflects that. Once a drug has been around long enough to become a generic it
becomes cheaper because all the initial development costs have been long
repaid…just like that calculator sitting on you desk.  
Oh yeah, and all those profits? They are being poured back into developing the
next drug that may help keep you or your children alive and healthy.

    
        25. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dda7d203b7f0afc2b17980dc46a66906?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Cloud says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 1:33 pm

@Dave, while I understand (and largely agree with) your point, I think your
comparisons are unlikely to matter to most people who complain about drug
costs. No one needed the ballpoint pen or a microwave oven to survive. The
reason discussions about drug pricing get so emotional is that these products
are often about life and death, and that is an inherently emotional topic.  
You don't, for instance, see people getting upset about how much Viagra costs,
except as a comparator- e.g., "why is Viagra so cheap when the drug I need to
control my life-threatening condition is so expensive?"  
The discussion also gets all tangled up in access to care issues. The people
who care most about the cost of drugs are the ones for whom the cost is
prohibitive- people without adequate health insurance and without the means to
pay the costs out of pocket. They complain vocally, and a cute little kid who
needs asthma medication that his parents can't afford is always going to be
more sympathetic than a large pharma company.  
Like it or not, our industry has to find a way to address these concerns,
because the end user doesn't really care about repaying the cost of
development or ensuring that there is money to fund future research. He cares
about his own health and his own financial viability, and it is completely
understandable that he lashes out and looks for someone to blame when it seems
that he can't have one without wrecking the other.

    
        26. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/58a43f66fc0e94f5174b1b5f01aa0f40?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Dave says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 1:49 pm

Cloud, my point is that as long as the FDA and patent laws force us to be
competitive businesses by allowing generic competition so early in the
marketing life cycle, the current price structure is the only way we can
remain in business and viable. Prices would be lower and would be stable for
much longer if the innovator of a drug product were given lifetime exclusivity
in exchange for a reduced pricing structure. The governemnt has forced this
"perceived" captialistic greed game and only they can change it.

    
        27. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/667827c0ddda461dc731d7875a37b178?s=32&d=mm&r=g) RickCain says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 2:18 pm

Why do drug companies market at to the public at all? Doctors prescribe drugs,
and they are already under enough pressure from companies who promote drugs to
them and don't need their patients badgering them to prescribe the latest
thing just because Wilford Brimley says so.

    
        28. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Anon says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 2:34 pm

I personally wonder what percentage of the R&D budget is basic research and
development and what percentage is the skyrocketing costs of clinical trials.
It is entirely possible to envision a situation where the total R&D budget
increases (due to the disproportionate costs of clinical trials) while the
funds for basic development (discovery) of new drugs (which would include
funding for chemists/biologists/etc) are decreasing. If this hypothetical
situation were true, it would explain the apparent decrease of basic research
as compared to marketing (which has not changed markedly).

    
        29. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f14b274253bdbc881a930be31e1e6ffe?s=32&d=mm&r=g) TFox says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 3:03 pm

I once read that the large majority of pharma marketing expenditures consisted
of free samples, and the accountants require these to be priced at full retail
value, rather than the marginal cost of making an additional pill. Not sure if
that's true, or taken into account in these studies, but it risks making
marketing seem far more expensive than it really is.

    
        30. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) alig says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 3:06 pm

Derek, you are going to need to institute one of those "report abuse" buttons
the way these drug spammers are taking a liking to your site (ie 29. Michael
Pain).

    
        31. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/37f900b0c1d0f0419355b558063a70d2?s=32&d=mm&r=g) beentheredonethat says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 3:22 pm

It's funny how so few, that work in pharma research, understand what the
companies they work for, actually do. Big pharma DEVELOPS and MARKETS!! They
buy good ideas from small nimble companies that RESEARCH, and turn them into
products that they can SELL! Therefore they spend a lot of money on marketing
and selling what they DEVELOPED. The people at the top know full well that
it's almost impossible to foster the kind of environment required for research
in a large corporate environment. They have a token research effort to give
the air of prestige and an understanding of fundamental discovery science.

    
        32. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a60e0236a7ad716a42ae07c5e40ef3c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Hap says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 3:35 pm

It's the same spammer/moron (but I repeat myself) as always, or at least the
same website the spammers are trying to push traffic to. I wonder if it's the
same IP or class of IPs (whether we have one or many).  
I'm still trying to decide whether the drug spammer is simply evil and should
be terminated with extreme prejudice or whether he is helping other morons to
find their inner Darwin Award winners (because if you buy narcotics from a
spammer, you might be lucky if drug trafficking/possession charges are the
only consequences). I'm having a hard time deciding.

    
        33. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a60e0236a7ad716a42ae07c5e40ef3c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Hap says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 3:50 pm

Lifetime exclusivity is unlikely to end well - this discussion has been around
the block. If the government has control of pricing with drug companies, it
will likely be abused, either by the gov't (appealing to voters to get cheap
drugs) or by the companies themselves (to generate larger profits).  
If the government doesn't have a role in pricing, then lifetime exclusivity is
likely to give lots of similar, nonexchangeable drugs with large price tags -
it probably won't help R+D (because, though the potential benefits of a drug
are higher under such a system, the costs will still be high or higher to get
the drug - it doesn't make drug company R+D cheaper than acquiring it from
other companies, and because companies don't want to spend on R+D once they
have a secure revenue stream, though they might spend to get there). Drugs
will probably not get cheaper (because everyone wants as much money as they
can get - they will charge what they can get, knowing that there is no
alternative). There might or might not be more drugs - it might depend on
whether the revenue stream from initial drugs allows the winners enhanced
access to others' R+D. It might be better to start the patent/sales
exclusivity clock when the drug is approved, but I don't know what holes that
plan would have.

    
        34. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Cellbio says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 4:10 pm

Are you guys sure #29 is a spammer, looks like gibberish, and coupled
with.."for example I take hydrocodone, vicodin which is medicine…" makes me
think maybe entering his piece is just a nice way for him to pass 2 or 3 hours
until the next "dose". Maybe he has MJS….Michael Jackson Syndrome. And us
regular folks are limited to being just addicts, life is so unfair.

    
        35. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a60e0236a7ad716a42ae07c5e40ef3c?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Hap says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 4:23 pm

If it's gibberish, why does he always mention pharmaceuticals (usually
narcotics) and always makes sure to include the website he finds his drugs on?
The style and text of the comments are consistent (occasional use of caps,
complaints about his/her pain), and the topic of the spam is generally
completely disconnected from the topic of the posts on which the comments
appear.  
It's relatively well-made spam (the lack of context and the location forces
people to look at the comments and digest them for a second before they
realize that it's spam) but it's still spam.

    
        36. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1c05e33089e47b8237a6e8e5e9df8aeb?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Sebastian says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 6:23 pm

"The absolute numbers are still pretty dramatic though - 40% sales & marketing
vs. 15% R&D? That's quite a sizable difference. Or does that 40% include other
things besides marketing?"  
It includes a lot of other things besides marketing. It includes the cost of
the finance department, the legal department, non-manufacturing operations,
human resources, secretaries, and nearly all of the other things that
corporations need to run other than production and research.

    
        37. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/deec33b864bcd2a47c1d5747363ef050?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Fred Drinkwater says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 6:41 pm

Another data point: In the 80's I worked in Silicon Valley developing
minicomputers and telephone switches, for a very successful, growing company.
We spent 13-15% on R&D and that was considered high by industry standards.

    
        38. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/eb6a833b4c89ce9ac151cdce743c950b?s=32&d=mm&r=g) hibob says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 6:59 pm

@#27 RickCain: Why do DTC (direct to consumer advertising)? One study found
that it reminded people to refill their prescriptions more often.

    
        39. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73e18c6c235ce152b912c19833066092?s=32&d=mm&r=g) CMCguy says:
    

8 July, 2009 at 11:58 pm

Excellent summary Derek of some of the fundamental contradictions in Pharma
expenditures. Sales Profits bring in the income to live (and grow) on today
while R&D (which cost much at great uncertainty) provides the incomes of the
future. Part of the issue of R&D vs Marketing expenditure balance is the
perceptions in ways this is portrayed by critics, the media and even
companies/PhMRA. It usually is argued in the context of why "drugs cost so
much" with critics focusing overly on Marketing numbers (suggest spend less
there can lower prices) and pharma emphasizing the R&D component (need to
charge high prices to recoup those high costs/reward risk). In reality neither
view is totally sound (or completely unreasonable considerations) because of
vast complexities and indirect correlations/causation of these elements to a
drug's price.  
I agree with #18 RandDChemist as both groups need to coexist and work together
and is rarely easy/done correctly (was better in the past IMO). Both are
subject to "abusive practices" or contain unethical actors (and believe are
rare in both). Just like differences above Marketing "badness" usually is
highly visible and stains entire industry. R&D miscreants are generally more
subtle and take longer to become apparent/spawn negative impacts.

    
        40. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) CC says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 2:10 am

How much contribute the D in the R&D for this raise? A lot, I would suggest
and this is mainly driven by marketing, part FDA, part not distinctive enough
drug - which again links back to marketing.  
Another point is that if the sales decrease, but you have to maintain your
(R)&D you will have to put the same amount of money in, which in turn
increases the %.  
This kind of data presentation can be very fishy. Especially if your CEO
starts to be proud of/or complain about the raising (R)&D expenditure.

    
        41. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fe34d9a22c2ecdf24ab9f6d374f69efe?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Dominik says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 2:28 am

This numbers become really interesting if you start looking at the R&D output:
how many new products (ideally blockbusters) hit the market. This number
declines. So cost go up and output falls - this is what I call the "R&D
productivity challenge". Today big pharma has no concept to face this
challenge. From my pov this will lead to further concentration (M&A) in the
market. Only very big companies will have the ability to develop a well
balanced portfolio. The source of innovation (research) may well come from a
large network of small companies, biotechs, universities etc…

    
        42. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f1d18df34db83de4e97606c6aef5452e?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Morten G says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 4:13 am

I would have preferred to have seen that graph broken down by company. Or at
the very least some standard deviations.  
Also I worry that altered accounting practices is the real reason for the
increase in R&D expenditures. It worked for Enron.

    
        43. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/38132c5acb849d7370c1be6ce58a99e4?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Kim Slocum says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 5:54 am

Has anyone read Dr. Meredith Rosenthal's excellent paper on pharmaceutical
marketing costs published in the NEJM on August 16, 2007? She showed that
marketing expenses (as opposed to the cruder measure of SG&A) as a percentage
of industry sales had risen steadily over the period 1996-2005. This was
undoubtedly driven by the run up in rep counts and secondarily by the
expansion of DTC following the Washington Legal Foundation decision.  
What's changed recently is that "troop movement" sales and marketing (very
expensive to conduct) no longer works particularly well, but the industry
hasn't yet figured out what will replace it. Over the long term, a blend of
clinical health care information technology applications, evidence-based
medicine, and comparative effectiveness reviews are likely to be a major part
of the answer, but in the short term, most every firm is stuck in neutral
trying to figure out what to do in the next quarter. When this gets layered on
top of the dramatic slowing of revenue growth that industry has seen year on
year throughout this decade, it gets very difficult for senior executives to
manage their businesses.

    
        44. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/90ebb5d2faff5501c3666adf3abf8b33?s=32&d=mm&r=g) imarx says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 9:29 am

Since there are many other things in the SG&A category, how can we say for
sure how much marketing has increased or decreased? Perhaps marketing
increased while other expenses decreased due to computers, automation,
increased productivity, etc. Or perhaps it decreased while everything else
increased due to mergers, consolidations, etc. Just throwing some
possibilities out there, but with so much lumped together how can we draw any
conclusions?

    
        45. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/45c4bb799e627ca8e828e6f1f2de3896?s=32&d=mm&r=g) TW Andrews says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 12:36 pm

What bucket do clinical trials fall into?

    
        46. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) James says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 12:47 pm

The question is not whether Pharma spends too much or too little money on R&D,
or even on whether Pharma is good at R&D. The real question is whether Pharma
is better at the R part of R&D than gov't funded research. The answer is no,
and THAT is why Pharma is failing to find new products.  
Pharma is great at D, not R. The great medical breakthroughs (insulin,
penicillin, etc.) have not come from Pharma, they have come from gov't-funded
research. Why? Because breakthroughs by their nature are not predictable. If
they were, they would be incremental improvements -- which is something that
Pharma IS good at. Most Pharma patents are based on incremental improvements;
a better NSAID, not something completely new.  
Academics are actually good at coming up with new things, perhaps precisely
because they are not tied to the real world of profit & loss. In the old days
(pre-1984), government-funded research was ineligible for patenting, on the
theory that the general public that pays for a patented invention (whether via
insurance company premiums for medication, or higher consumer prices for a
better mousetrap, or whatever) had funded that invention in the first place.  
In my view, that is the better way because Pharma is simply not suited to
basic Research, only to Development. Until we return to a system based on non-
profit research, Pharma's pipeline will continue to dry up until it is empty.

    
        47. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4e9c0c4831d022222b2a628a5935f2ac?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Mike G says:
    

9 July, 2009 at 2:50 pm

Kim, I think the profound cuts we've seen to SG&A over the past few years is
mostly to the salesforce, specifically, primary care reps. The new commercial
models you refer to are slowly taking root.

# 28 -- you're right, clinical costs have far outpaced basic research in

growth. REMS, larger populations to power trials, stricter regulatory
requirements, PIV requirements, larger safety databases are all pushing up
clinical trial costs.  
I didn't get the impression that the authors of the Nature Reviews article
knew enough about pharmaceutical R&D to confidently correlate it with company
value. Any correlation of R&D investments with company value would have to
allow for the c.10 year lag between R&D investment and (potential) return.
Also, the value of R&D investments rise and fall along that risk-adjusted 10
year timeline. That is, R&D events impact share price or company value, not
investments per se. Positive proof of concept, positive PIII results -- these
kinds of events go straight to company value, not some abstract aggregate of
R&D spend as a % of sales.  
The authors believe that greater investment in R&D will "address the decline
in innovation." (I think they're confusing innovation with productivity, but
let that pass.) This, despite their own numbers showing rising investments in
R&D, but other measures showing steep declines in R&D productivity.

    
        48. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) alig says:
    

10 July, 2009 at 6:58 am

It's interesting when you look at the graph that overall costs have stayed
about the same(may have actually decreased a little). Meaning the pharma
companies have been able to maintain the same profit margin. It seems that
they've been putting the savings from reduced COGS into more R&D and a little
more SG&A. My thoughts on why pharma seems to be cutting R&D (& SG&A) over the
past couple years is that the executives are expecting an actual decrease in
sales over the next few years and they want to get costs in line with expected
sales so they can maintain the same prfoit margin. Hopefully the downward
trend in sales will be temporary or pharmaceutical research will dry up as
money shifts to web and iphone apps.

    
        49. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/268303bdb74e552b48ff2f6ba309fc0e?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Scott says:
    

10 July, 2009 at 4:18 pm

It's hard for me to rationalize the comparison of the cost of R&D with that of
Sales & Marketing. I might as well ponder why I spend so much more on
electricity for my home than I do for gas and water combined. The simple fact
is that some things cost more than others. I could try spending the same on
both, but then I would either end up with not enough electricity, or too much
gas/water usage. It's an equation that just doesn't work. The investment in
each area, and corresponding ROI, deserves proper analysis, indeed. But I
initially view these analyses as mutually exclusive explorations. Both are
important investments, and both have their related costs and benefits. My
perspective may seem to some as an oversimplification, but I welcome any sound
rebuttal.

    
        50. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Allen Templeton says:
    

11 July, 2009 at 12:47 am

At Merck, we believe in putting patients first in all we do. And we recognize
that our employees are our single greatest asset in achieving this mission.  
Top 5 reasons our people are committed to working at Merck:  
_Quality of co-workers  
_ Ethical standards and values  
_Merck's mission  
_ Compensation and benefits  
* Work environment
    
        51. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Allen Templeton says:
    

11 July, 2009 at 12:48 am

At Merck, we believe in putting patients first in all we do. And we recognize
that our employees are our single greatest asset in achieving this mission.  
Top 5 reasons our people are committed to working at Merck:  
_Quality of co-workers  
_ Ethical standards and values  
_Merck's mission  
_ Compensation and benefits  
* Work environment
    
        52. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/bc230359df24d83d86f958fc54928e9a?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Allen Templeton says:
    

11 July, 2009 at 5:09 pm

Enjoy Wheaties: The Breakfast of Champions!

    
        53. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d870535515550605cda9e28ce4670e8b?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Prabir Basu says:
    

13 July, 2009 at 8:14 am

We at Purdue University published a similar paper in 2008 titles "Analysis of
Manufacturing Costs in Pharmaceutical Comapnies" in the J. Pharm Innovation
(2008) 3:30-40.

    
        54. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d6bfba745ca8dd43cb7ae7fb68583ada?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Jonadab the Unsightly One says:
    

13 July, 2009 at 8:59 am

For some industries, 17% would be a lot to spend on R&D, but for the drug
industry, it doesn't sound high at all.  
If you want to see crazy-high R&D spending, look at the software industry.

    
        55. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ab1b2b49d6f8e187d6005c6efc749495?s=32&d=mm&r=g) Jonadab the Unsightly One says:
    

13 July, 2009 at 9:15 am

Scott (comment 49): The opportunity cost of spending more on marketing is that
less is immediately available for other things, including R&D, and going the
other way, if you increase R&D to 25% of your budget instead of 17%, something
else has to decrease to make up that 8%. So you do have to take one into
account when deciding what to spend on the other. You can only spend 100% of
the budget. (Well, in the short term you can go into the red for a bit, but
ultimately that's not sustainable.)  
Both advertising and R&D are things you spend money on because you believe
they'll pay for themselves in the future (albeit, on different timescales).
But until that money comes in, you still have to divide the money that you
have among the things you're going to spend it on. If marketing and research
both pay off by creating greater revenue, then they may be able to both
increase over time in absolute numbers, but that does NOT mean they can both
increase over time as a percentage of the total budget.

    
        56. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/73e18c6c235ce152b912c19833066092?s=32&d=mm&r=g) CMCguy says:
    

22 July, 2009 at 1:15 pm

A post in bnet provides what looks like some direct ROI for Sales (Merck and
S-P) and gives a figure of about $3 back for every $1 spent. Difficult to know
if this data is representative of Pharma in general but I think every company
generates such data as "metrics" for Sales and Marketing and thus are acutely
aware of immediate potential to get a payback. I believe R&D is much less
quantifiable both in terms of specific expenditures (investment) and then
ultimate financial rewards (returns).  
http://industry.bnet.com/pharma/10003203/merck-and-schering-q2-who-needs-this-
merger-more/

    
        57. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/86332be7921ca017e7f723953799e5f2?s=32&d=mm&r=g) concerned citizen says:
    

7 March, 2011 at 3:01 pm

Here's another stat to research. Drug Companies actually have higher net
profit percentages to sales than R & D expenditures. Why is all that profit
necessary. Certainly some of those BILLIONS could help reduce drug costs.

    
        58. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/962d54e8b34ad7368843bc7312100fc0?s=32&d=mm&r=g) العاب فلاش says:
    

22 March, 2012 at 8:25 am

Great period, may perhaps be this is towards situation merely well, i%u2019ve
become executing study concerning your webpage which%u2019s why it is
obviously pro. I include been getting a fresh unique writings with your lover
with attempting return glance good, every time in addition to feel a solution
i%u2019ve damage it. Recommendations on how burdensome was generally known as
the to successfully site? Properly any individual much for example me lacking
an occurence accomplish this, ahead that complete folks boost web should
possess associated with chewing entirely up receiving which will done plus?

Comments are closed.

### More From Science Translational Medicine

    
        * Archive
    * Current Table of Contents
    * In the Pipeline
    * About Science Translational Medicine
      * Mission and Scope
      * Editors and Advisory Boards
      * Editorial Policies
      * Information for Authors
      * Information for Reviewers
      * Access Policies
      * Staff
      * Contact Us
      * Submit
    

### Recent Comments

    
        * Skeptic on Google Investigates Cold Fusion
    * WWCody on Google Investigates Cold Fusion
    * anonymous on Google Investigates Cold Fusion
    * gippgig on Google Investigates Cold Fusion
    * gippgig on Google Investigates Cold Fusion
    

### Categories

    
        * "Me Too" Drugs (32) 
    * Academia (vs. Industry) (157) 
    * Aging and Lifespan (77) 
    * Alzheimer's Disease (141) 
    * Analytical Chemistry (160) 
    * Animal Testing (46) 
    * Autism (23) 
    * Biological News (346) 
    * Birth of an Idea (43) 
    * Blink &#8250 (5) 
    * Blog Housekeeping (278) 
    * Book Recommendations (35) 
    * Business and Markets (1,058) 
    * Cancer (405) 
    * Cardiovascular Disease (169) 
    * Chem/Bio Warfare (18) 
    * Chemical Biology (147) 
    * Chemical News (568) 
    * Clinical Trials (510) 
    * Closing Time (16) 
    * Current Events (166) 
    * Diabetes and Obesity (153) 
    * Drug Assays (370) 
    * Drug Development (574) 
    * Drug Industry History (412) 
    * Drug Prices (155) 
    * General Scientific News (191) 
    * Graduate School (69) 
    * How Not to Do It (43) 
    * How To Get a Pharma Job (32) 
    * In Silico (167) 
    * Infectious Diseases (215) 
    * Inorganic Chemistry (13) 
    * Intelligent Design (10) 
    * Job Postings (1) 
    * Life As We (Don't) Know It (30) 
    * Life in the Drug Labs (359) 
    * Lowe's Laws of the Lab (7) 
    * Metaphors, Good and Bad (3) 
    * Natural Products (48) 
    * Odd Elements in Drugs (15) 
    * Patents and IP (166) 
    * Pharma 101 (15) 
    * Pharmacokinetics (99) 
    * Press Coverage (113) 
    * Regulatory Affairs (257) 
    * Safety Warnings (23) 
    * Science Gifts (13) 
    * Snake Oil (108) 
    * The Central Nervous System (190) 
    * The Dark Side (247) 
    * The Scientific Literature (463) 
    * Things I Won't Work With (31) 
    * Things I'm Glad I Don't Do (8) 
    * Toxicology (203) 
    * Uncategorized (201) 
    * Who Discovers and Why (170) 
    * Why Everyone Loves Us (86)
    

### Archives

Archives Select Month June 2019 (7) May 2019 (21) April 2019 (21) March 2019
(18) February 2019 (18) January 2019 (20) December 2018 (15) November 2018
(20) October 2018 (21) September 2018 (19) August 2018 (17) July 2018 (22)
June 2018 (21) May 2018 (20) April 2018 (20) March 2018 (20) February 2018
(21) January 2018 (21) December 2017 (15) November 2017 (20) October 2017 (22)
September 2017 (21) August 2017 (16) July 2017 (21) June 2017 (19) May 2017
(24) April 2017 (20) March 2017 (24) February 2017 (19) January 2017 (20)
December 2016 (18) November 2016 (22) October 2016 (25) September 2016 (25)
August 2016 (24) July 2016 (22) June 2016 (24) May 2016 (23) April 2016 (28)
March 2016 (27) February 2016 (29) January 2016 (32) December 2015 (30)
November 2015 (33) October 2015 (35) September 2015 (36) August 2015 (40) July
2015 (29) June 2015 (39) May 2015 (38) April 2015 (46) March 2015 (55)
February 2015 (43) January 2015 (45) December 2014 (42) November 2014 (44)
October 2014 (48) September 2014 (42) August 2014 (30) July 2014 (40) June
2014 (44) May 2014 (56) April 2014 (39) March 2014 (45) February 2014 (42)
January 2014 (43) December 2013 (41) November 2013 (44) October 2013 (50)
September 2013 (34) August 2013 (42) July 2013 (51) June 2013 (39) May 2013
(40) April 2013 (46) March 2013 (52) February 2013 (45) January 2013 (50)
December 2012 (39) November 2012 (47) October 2012 (42) September 2012 (49)
August 2012 (38) July 2012 (27) June 2012 (37) May 2012 (47) April 2012 (31)
March 2012 (38) February 2012 (45) January 2012 (44) December 2011 (35)
November 2011 (44) October 2011 (35) September 2011 (32) August 2011 (37) July
2011 (26) June 2011 (35) May 2011 (40) April 2011 (31) March 2011 (40)
February 2011 (27) January 2011 (35) December 2010 (34) November 2010 (28)
October 2010 (39) September 2010 (37) August 2010 (38) July 2010 (30) June
2010 (42) May 2010 (44) April 2010 (48) March 2010 (63) February 2010 (36)
January 2010 (38) December 2009 (25) November 2009 (35) October 2009 (30)
September 2009 (32) August 2009 (27) July 2009 (24) June 2009 (40) May 2009
(36) April 2009 (24) March 2009 (35) February 2009 (33) January 2009 (32)
December 2008 (17) November 2008 (18) October 2008 (24) September 2008 (22)
August 2008 (15) July 2008 (23) June 2008 (20) May 2008 (20) April 2008 (22)
March 2008 (21) February 2008 (20) January 2008 (21) December 2007 (15)
November 2007 (23) October 2007 (23) September 2007 (19) August 2007 (21) July
2007 (17) June 2007 (12) May 2007 (19) April 2007 (23) March 2007 (19)
February 2007 (27) January 2007 (23) December 2006 (16) November 2006 (20)
October 2006 (24) September 2006 (21) August 2006 (19) July 2006 (21) June
2006 (24) May 2006 (27) April 2006 (20) March 2006 (27) February 2006 (21)
January 2006 (24) December 2005 (21) November 2005 (25) October 2005 (26)
September 2005 (21) August 2005 (29) July 2005 (18) June 2005 (24) May 2005
(22) April 2005 (18) March 2005 (21) February 2005 (21) January 2005 (24)
December 2004 (24) November 2004 (20) October 2004 (23) September 2004 (18)
August 2004 (21) July 2004 (15) June 2004 (19) May 2004 (20) April 2004 (20)
March 2004 (20) February 2004 (23) January 2004 (18) December 2003 (1)
November 2003 (1) August 2003 (1) January 2003 (9) December 2002 (24) November
2002 (19) October 2002 (26) September 2002 (18) August 2002 (18) July 2002
(21) June 2002 (12) May 2002 (18) April 2002 (9) March 2002 (7) February 2002
(11)

    
        * About Us
      * Journals
      * News from Science
      * Leadership
      * Team Members
      * Work at AAAS
    * For Advertisers
      * Advertising Kits
      * Awards and Prizes
      * Custom Publishing
      * Webinars
    * For Authors
      * Submit
      * Information for Authors
      * Editorial Policies
    * For Librarians
      * Manage Your Institutional Subscription
      * Information for Librarians
      * Request a Quote
      * FAQs
    * Related Sites
      * AAAS.org
      * EurekAlert!
      * Science in the Classroom
      * Science Magazine Japanese
    * Help
      * Access and Subscriptions
      * Order a Single Issue
      * Reprints and Permissions
      * Contact Us
      * Accessibility
    * Stay Connected
      *  __
      *  __
      *  __
      *  __
    

![AAAS Logo](//blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/wp-

content/themes/science/img/logo-aaas.svg)

(C) 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. All rights
Reserved. AAAS is a partner of HINARI, AGORA, OARE, CHORUS, CLOCKSS, CrossRef
and COUNTER.

    
        * Terms of Service
    * Privacy Policy
    * Contact Us
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

