

This content does not have an English version.

This content does not have an Arabic version.

![Mayo

Clinic](https://www.mayoclinic.org/~/media/386AC346D62D46A4944E0923CAF00D28.svg)

Menu

Search

Search

    
        * Request an Appointment
    * Find a Doctor
    * Find a Job
    * Give Now
    
    * Log in to Patient Account
    * English
      * Español
      * Português
      * العربية
      * 中文
    
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Pinterest
    * YouTube
    
    * Patient Care & Health Info
    
      * Patient Care & Health Info
      * Healthy Lifestyle
      * Symptoms A-Z
      * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
      * Tests & Procedures A-Z
      * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
      * Appointments
      * Patient & Visitor Guide
      * Billing & Insurance
      * Patient Online Services
    

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

patientcare.jpg) **Quality Care** _Find out why Mayo Clinic is the right place
for your health care._ Make an appointment.

    
        * Departments & Centers
    
      * Departments & Centers
      * Doctors & Medical Staff
      * Medical Departments & Centers
      * International Services
      * Research Centers & Programs
      * About Mayo Clinic
      * Contact Us
    

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

docsdepts.jpg) **Meet the Staff** _Find a directory of doctors and departments
at all Mayo Clinic campuses._ Visit now.

    
        * Research
    
      * Research
      * Explore Research Labs
      * Find Clinical Trials
      * Research Faculty
      * Postdoctoral Fellowships
      * Discovery's Edge Magazine
      * Search Publications
      * Training Grant Programs
    

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-research.jpg)
**Research and Clinical Trials** _See how Mayo Clinic research and clinical
trials advance the science of medicine and improve patient care._ Explore now.

    
        * Education
    
      * Education
      * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
      * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
      * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
      * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
      * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
      * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
      * Alumni Center
    

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-meded.jpg)
**Visit Our Schools** _Educators at Mayo Clinic train tomorrow’s leaders to
deliver compassionate, high-value, safe patient care._ Choose a degree.

    
        * For Medical Professionals
    
      * For Medical Professionals
      * Provider Relations
      * Referring Physician Portal
      * AskMayoExpert
      * Video Center
      * Publications
      * Continuing Medical Education
      * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-medprofs.jpg)
**Professional Services** _Explore Mayo Clinic's many resources and see jobs
available for medical professionals._ Get updates.

    
        * Products & Services
    
      * Products & Services
      * Health Books
      * Healthy Living Program
      * International Advisory Services
      * Sports Medicine
      * Licensable Content
      * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
      * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
      * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
      * Medical Products and Stores
    
    * Giving to Mayo Clinic
    
      * Giving to Mayo Clinic
      * Give Now
      * Philanthropy in Action
      * Frequently Asked Questions
      * Contact Us to Give
    

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2018/04/25/20/54/globalnav-

transform-3col.jpg) **Philanthropy at Mayo Clinic** _Your support accelerates
powerful innovations in patient care, research and education._ Give today.

    
        * Request an Appointment
    * Find a Doctor
    * Find a Job
    * Give Now
    * Log in to Patient Account
    *       * Twitter
      * Facebook
      * Pinterest
      * YouTube
    

Request an Appointment

    
        * Patient Care & Health Information
    * Diseases & Conditions
    

# Cirrhosis

    
        * Sections
    * Symptoms & causes
    * Diagnosis & treatment
    * Doctors & departments
    * Care at Mayo Clinic
    

Print

## Diagnosis

    
        * ![Liver biopsy](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-consumer/images/2013/11/15/17/39/ca00083_-ds00097_-ds00373_-ds00398_-ds00411_-ds00577_-ds00638_-ds00676_-ds00785_-ds00918_-my00088_-ds00811_-my00949_im04144_mcdc7_liver_biopsythu_jpg.jpg)
    

### Liver biopsy

### Liver biopsy

A liver biopsy is a procedure to remove a small sample of liver tissue for
laboratory testing. A liver biopsy is commonly performed by inserting a thin
needle through your skin and into your liver.

People with early-stage cirrhosis of the liver usually don't have symptoms.
Often, cirrhosis is first detected through a routine blood test or checkup. To
help confirm a diagnosis, a combination of laboratory and imaging tests is
usually done.

### Tests

Your doctor may order one or more tests that may suggest a problem with your
liver, including:

    
        * **Laboratory tests.** Your doctor may order blood tests to check for signs of liver malfunction, such as excess bilirubin, as well as for certain enzymes that may indicate liver damage. To assess kidney function, your blood is checked for creatinine. You'll be screened for the hepatitis viruses. Your international normalized ratio (INR) is also checked for your blood's ability to clot.
    

Based on the blood test results, your doctor may be able to diagnose the
underlying cause of cirrhosis. He or she can also use blood tests to help
identify how serious your cirrhosis is.

    
        * **Imaging tests.** Magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) may be recommended. This noninvasive advanced imaging test detects hardening or stiffening of the liver. Other imaging tests, such as MRI, CT and ultrasound, may also be done.
    * **Biopsy.** A tissue sample (biopsy) is not necessarily needed for diagnosis. However, your doctor may use it to identify the severity, extent and cause of liver damage.
    

If you have cirrhosis, your doctor is likely to recommend regular diagnostic
tests to monitor for signs of disease progression or complications, especially
esophageal varices and liver cancer. Noninvasive tests are becoming more
widely available for monitoring.

## Treatment

Treatment for cirrhosis depends on the cause and extent of your liver damage.
The goals of treatment are to slow the progression of scar tissue in the liver
and to prevent or treat symptoms and complications of cirrhosis. You may need
to be hospitalized if you have severe liver damage.

### Treatment for the underlying cause of cirrhosis

In early cirrhosis, it may be possible to minimize damage to the liver by
treating the underlying cause. The options include:

    
        * **Treatment for alcohol dependency.** People with cirrhosis caused by excessive alcohol use should try to stop drinking. If stopping alcohol use is difficult, your doctor may recommend a treatment program for alcohol addiction. If you have cirrhosis, it is critical to stop drinking since any amount of alcohol is toxic to the liver.
    * **Weight loss.** People with cirrhosis caused by nonalcoholic fatty liver disease may become healthier if they lose weight and control their blood sugar levels.
    * **Medications to control hepatitis.** Medications may limit further damage to liver cells caused by hepatitis B or C through specific treatment of these viruses.
    * **Medications to control other causes and symptoms of cirrhosis.** Medications may slow the progression of certain types of liver cirrhosis. For example, for people with primary biliary cirrhosis that is diagnosed early, medication may significantly delay progression to cirrhosis.
    

Other medications can relieve certain symptoms, such as itching, fatigue and
pain. Nutritional supplements may be prescribed to counter malnutrition
associated with cirrhosis and to prevent weak bones (osteoporosis).

### Treatment for complications of cirrhosis

Your doctor will work to treat any complications of cirrhosis, including:

    
        * **Excess fluid in your body.** A low-sodium diet and medication to prevent fluid buildup in the body may help control ascites and swelling. More-severe fluid buildup may require procedures to drain the fluid or surgery to relieve pressure.
    * **Portal hypertension.** Certain blood pressure medications may control increased pressure in the veins that supply the liver (portal hypertension) and prevent severe bleeding. Your doctor will perform an upper endoscopy at regular intervals to look for enlarged veins in the esophagus or stomach (varices) that may bleed.
    

If you develop varices, you likely will need medication to reduce the risk of
bleeding. If you have signs that the varices are bleeding or are likely to
bleed, you may need a procedure (band ligation) to stop the bleeding or reduce
the risk of further bleeding. In severe cases, you may need a small tube -- a
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt -- placed in your vein to reduce
blood pressure in your liver.

    
        * **Infections.** You may receive antibiotics or other treatments for infections. Your doctor also is likely to recommend vaccinations for influenza, pneumonia and hepatitis.
    * **Increased liver cancer risk.** Your doctor will likely recommend periodic blood tests and ultrasound exams to look for signs of liver cancer.
    * **Hepatic encephalopathy.** You may be prescribed medications to help reduce the buildup of toxins in your blood due to poor liver function.
    

### Liver transplant surgery

In advanced cases of cirrhosis, when the liver ceases to function, a liver
transplant may be the only treatment option. A liver transplant is a procedure
to replace your liver with a healthy liver from a deceased donor or with part
of a liver from a living donor. Cirrhosis is one of the most common reasons
for a liver transplant. Candidates for liver transplant have extensive testing
to determine whether they are healthy enough to have a good outcome following
surgery.

Historically, those with alcoholic cirrhosis have not been liver transplant
candidates because of the risk that they will return to harmful drinking after
transplant. Recent studies, however, suggest that carefully selected people
with severe alcoholic cirrhosis have post-transplant survival rates similar to
those of liver transplant recipients with other types of liver disease.

For transplant to be an option if you have alcoholic cirrhosis, you would
need:

    
        * To find a program that works with people who have alcoholic cirrhosis
    * To meet the requirements of the program, which would include lifelong commitment to alcohol abstinence as well as other requirements of the specific transplant center
    

### Potential future treatments

Scientists are working to expand current treatments for cirrhosis, but success
has been limited. Because cirrhosis has numerous causes and complications,
there are many potential avenues of approach. A combination of increased
screening, lifestyle changes and new medications may improve outcomes for
people with liver damage, if started early.

Researchers are working on therapies that will specifically target liver
cells, helping to slow or even reverse the fibrosis that leads to cirrhosis.
While no targeted therapy is quite ready, the framework for developing such
treatments is in place, and progress is accelerating.

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

## Clinical trials

Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as
a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this disease.

## Lifestyle and home remedies

If you have cirrhosis, be careful to limit additional liver damage:

    
        * **Don't drink alcohol.** Whether your cirrhosis was caused by chronic alcohol use or another disease, avoid alcohol. Drinking alcohol may cause further liver damage.
    * **Eat a low-sodium diet.** Excess salt can cause your body to retain fluids, worsening swelling in your abdomen and legs. Use herbs for seasoning your food, rather than salt. Choose prepared foods that are low in sodium.
    * **Eat a healthy diet.** People with cirrhosis can experience malnutrition. Combat this with a healthy plant-based diet that includes a variety of fruits and vegetables. Choose lean protein, such as legumes, poultry or fish. Avoid raw seafood.
    * **Avoid infections.** Cirrhosis makes it more difficult for you to fight off infections. Protect yourself by avoiding people who are sick and washing your hands frequently. Get vaccinated for hepatitis A and B, influenza, and pneumonia.
    * **Use over-the-counter medications carefully.** Cirrhosis makes it more difficult for your liver to process drugs. For this reason, ask your doctor before taking any medications, including nonprescription drugs. Avoid drugs such as aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others). If you have liver damage, your doctor may recommend you avoid acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or take it in low doses for pain relief.
    

## Alternative medicine

A number of alternative medicines have been used to treat liver diseases. Milk
thistle (silymarin) is the most widely used and best studied.

However, there is not enough evidence of benefit from clinical trials to
recommend use of any herbal products to treat liver cirrhosis. In addition,
some alternative medications may harm the liver. Talk with your doctor if
you're interested in trying alternative medicine to help you cope with
cirrhosis.

## Preparing for your appointment

If you have cirrhosis, you may be referred to a doctor who specializes in the
digestive system (gastroenterologist) or the liver (hepatologist).

Here's some information to help you get ready for your appointment and what to
expect from your doctor.

### What you can do

    
        * **Be aware of any pre-appointment restrictions,** such as diet restrictions on the day before your appointment.
    * **Write down your symptoms,** including when they started and how they may have changed or worsened over time.
    * **Take a list of all your medications,** as well as any vitamins or supplements.
    * **Write down your key medical information,** including other diagnosed conditions.
    * **Bring results of medical tests done so far,** including digital copies of CT, MRI or ultrasound images and biopsy slides if a liver biopsy has been done.
    * **Write down key personal information,** including any recent changes or stressors in your life.
    * **Take a family member or friend along** to help you remember things.
    * **Write down questions to ask** your doctor.
    

### Questions to ask your doctor

Preparing a list of questions can help you make the most of your time. Some
basic questions to ask your doctor include:

    
        * What is most likely causing my cirrhosis?
    * Is there a way to slow or stop my liver damage?
    * What are my treatment options?
    * Are there medications or supplements that can hurt my liver?
    * What signs and symptoms of complications should I watch for?
    * I have other health conditions. How can I best manage them together?
    

Don't hesitate to ask additional questions during your appointment.

### What to expect from your doctor

Be prepared to answer questions your doctor is likely to ask, including:

    
        * When did you first begin experiencing symptoms?
    * Have your symptoms been continuous or occasional?
    * How severe are your symptoms?
    * What, if anything, seems to improve your symptoms?
    * What, if anything, appears to worsen your symptoms?
    * How often do you drink alcohol?
    * Have you been exposed to or taken toxic drugs?
    * Do you have a family history of liver disease, hemochromatosis or obesity?
    * Have you ever had viral hepatitis?
    * Have you ever had jaundice?
    * Have you ever had a blood transfusion or used injection drugs?
    * Do you have any tattoos?
    

By Mayo Clinic Staff

Cirrhosis care at Mayo Clinic

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

Symptoms & causesDoctors & departments

Dec. 07, 2018

Print

Share on: FacebookTwitter

References

    
        1. Feldman M, et al. Overview of cirrhosis. In: Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Management. 10th ed. Philadelphia, Pa.: Saunders Elsevier; 2016. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Nov. 25, 2018.
    2. Bope ET, et al. Cirrhosis. In: Conn's Current Therapy 2018. Philadelphia, Pa.: Elsevier; 2018. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Nov. 25, 2018.
    3. Cirrhosis. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/liver-disease/cirrhosis. Accessed Nov. 25, 2018.
    4. Goldberg E, et al. Cirrhosis in adults: Overview of complications, general management, and prognosis. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Nov. 26, 2018.
    5. Cirrhosis. American Gastroenterological Association. https://www.gastro.org/practice-guidance/gi-patient-center/topic/cirrhosis. Accessed Nov. 25, 2018.
    6. Alagille syndrome. National Organization for Rare Disorders. https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/alagille-syndrome/. Accessed Nov. 27, 2018.
    7. Goldberg E, et al. Cirrhosis in adults: Etiologies, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Nov. 26, 2018.
    8. Liver cirrhosis. American College of Gastroenterology. http://patients.gi.org/topics/liver-cirrhosis/. Accessed Nov. 25, 2018.
    9. Cirrhosis. Merck Manual Professional Version. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/hepatic-and-biliary-disorders/fibrosis-and-cirrhosis/cirrhosis. Accessed Nov. 26, 2018.
    10. Hernaez R, et al. Acute-on-chronic liver failure: An update. Gut. 2017;66:541.
    11. Hepatitis B questions and answers for the public. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hbv/bfaq.htm. Accessed Nov. 27, 2018.
    12. Dove LM, et al. Liver transplantation in adults: Patient selection and pretransplantation evaluation. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Nov. 28, 2018.
    13. Martin P, et al. Evaluation for liver transplantation in adults: 2013 practice guideline by the AASLD and the American Society of Transplantation. https://www.aasld.org/publications/practice-guidelines-0. Accessed Nov. 28, 2018.
    14. Berzigotti A. Advances and challenges in cirrhosis and portal hypertension. BMC Medicine. 2017;15:200.
    15. Friedman SL. Emerging therapies for hepatic fibrosis. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed Nov. 28, 2018.
    16. Brown AY. Allscripts EPSi. Rochester, Minn. Sept. 18, 2018.
    17. Litin SC (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn. Nov. 29, 2018.
    

## Related

    
        * Symptom Checker
    * Unexplained weight loss
    * Nausea and vomiting
    * Fatigue
    * Leg swelling
    

__

### Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., has been recognized as the best

Gastroenterology & GI Surgery hospital in the nation for 2018-2019 by U.S.
News & World Report.

Learn more about this top honor

## Cirrhosis

    
        * Symptoms & causes
    * Diagnosis & treatment
    * Doctors & departments
    * Care at Mayo Clinic
    

## Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue
supports our not-for-profit mission.

**Advertising & Sponsorship**

    
        * Policy
    * Opportunities
    * Ad Choices
    

### Mayo Clinic Marketplace

Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic.

    
        * Live stronger, longer and healthier
    * 4 simple steps to a joy-filled life
    * Mayo Clinic on Arthritis
    * Stop osteoporosis in its tracks
    * The Mayo Clinic Diet
    

CON-20157220

    
        * Patient Care & Health Information
    * Diseases & Conditions
    * Cirrhosis
    

![Mayo Clinic](/styles/img/logo-mayoclinic.png)

    
        * Request Appointment
    * Contact Us
    * About Mayo Clinic
    * Employees
    * Find a Job
    * Site Map
    * About This Site
    
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Pinterest
    * YouTube
    

Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit organization. Make a donation.

## Patient Care & Health Info

    
        * Healthy Lifestyle
    * Symptoms A-Z
    * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
    * Tests & Procedures A-Z
    * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
    * Appointments
    * Patient & Visitor Guide
    * Billing & Insurance
    * Patient Online Services
    

## Departments & Centers

    
        * Doctors & Medical Staff
    * Medical Departments & Centers
    * International Services
    * Research Centers & Programs
    * About Mayo Clinic
    * Contact Us
    

## Research

    
        * Explore Research Labs
    * Find Clinical Trials
    * Research Faculty
    * Postdoctoral Fellowships
    * Discovery's Edge Magazine
    * Search Publications
    * Training Grant Programs
    

## Education

    
        * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
    * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
    * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
    * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
    * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
    * Alumni Center
    

## For Medical Professionals

    
        * Provider Relations
    * Referring Physician Portal
    * AskMayoExpert
    * Video Center
    * Publications
    * Continuing Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    

## Products & Services

    
        * Health Books
    * Healthy Living Program
    * International Advisory Services
    * Sports Medicine
    * Licensable Content
    * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
    * Medical Products and Stores
    

Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions
and Privacy Policy linked below.

    
        * Terms and Conditions
    * **Privacy Policy**
    * **Notice of Privacy Practices**
    * Notice of Nondiscrimination
    * Manage Cookies
    

A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal
use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy
Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct636199_hr1.gif) This
site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:  
verify here.

© 1998-2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All
rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

