

Skip to main content

Lien contactez-nous

Contact us

Lien mon compte

My account

    
        * English
    * Français
    * Deutsch
    

Menu

Menu

    
        * Home
    * Customer access
    * Partner & broker access
    * INDIVIDUALS
    * International health insurance
    * International student medical insurance
    * Schengen travel insurance
    * Working holiday, au pair and international volunteer insurance
    * Travel insurance
    * BUSINESSES
    * International group health insurance
    * APRIL INTERNATIONAL
    * About us
    * Contact us
    * ADVICE & INFORMATION
    * Discover our destination sheets
    * All our articles
    

Find the health/travel insurance solution to suit your needs

Search for an insurance solution

My search criteria :

Change my search settings

# Which countries have the best healthcare systems?

## Breadcrumb

    
        1. Home
    2. All the actualities
    3. Healthcare abroad
    4. Healthcare for expatriates
    5. Which countries have the best healthcare systems?
    

Image d'introduction

![Which countries have the best healthcare

systems?](/sites/france/files/styles/intro_image/public/2018-04/quels-sont-

les-pays-avec-les-meilleurs-systemes-de-sante-miniature_0.jpg?itok=VfNoedho)

Date de publication

12 March 2019

Texte d'introduction

Do you know if your (future) country of expatriation has an efficient
healthcare system? According to the WHO, average global life expectancy is
rising steadily, which suggests that the quality of healthcare also tends to
increase. However, the rankings of health systems in the world show that only
high-income countries are better off. Also, in these nations, healthcare costs
often are quite high. Find out which countries have the best health systems.

Corps de l'article

## Europe's best healthcare systems

Every year, the Health Consumer Powerhouse publishes a study about healthcare
systems across Europe: the Euro Health Consumer Index (EHCI). This report
ranks 35 countries according to the quality of their healthcare systems, based
on 48 indicators.

    
        1. Switzerland
    
    2. Netherlands
    
    3. Norway
    
    4. Denmark
    
    5. Belgium
    
    6. Finland
    
    7. Luxemburg
    
    8. Sweden
    
    9. Austria
    
    10. Iceland
    

## 2 rankings of world's best healthcare systems

In its study called Mirror, Mirror 2017- International Comparison Reflects
Flaws and Opportunities for Better U.S. Health Care, the Commonwealth Fund
assessed the performance of healthcare systems in 11 countries based on 72
indicators. The idea was to find out how efficient healthcare in the United
States is. The survey ranked US healthcare clear last…

**1.** United Kingdom

**2**. Australia

**3.** Netherlands

**4.** New Zealand and Norway

**6.** Switzerland and Sweden

**8.** Germany

**9.** Canada

**10.** France

**11.** USA

The Bloomberg annual study, Most Efficient Health Care 2018, ranked no less
than 56 countries. Asia is the big winner of these rankings.

    
        1. Hong Kong
    
    2. Singapore
    
    3. Spain
    
    4. Italy
    
    5. S. Korea
    
    6. Israel
    
    7. Japan
    
    8. Australia
    
    9. Taiwan
    
    10. United Arab Emirates
    

## Ranking world's healthcare systems: what criteria?

To succeed in ranking healthcare systems around the world, surveys use a more
or less significant amount of indicators.

    
        * The EHCI study ranks healthcare systems based on such criteria as patient rights, waiting times for treatment, services provided to patients and prevention.
    * The Commonwealth Fund classifies indicators into 5 groups: quality, access, efficiency, equity and healthy lives. Thus, the survey includes indicators like safety, waiting times, administrative organisation and equal access to healthcare.
    * Bloomberg uses life expectancy, healthcare cost as percentage of GDP and healthcare cost per capita to rank world's healthcare systems.
    

Titre articles poussés

Know more about : Healthcare for expatriates

###

    
        * See more
    

## Hong Kong’s winter 2019 flu season reinforces the importance of

vaccinations

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

Hong Kong’s winter flu season started early with 6 outbreaks in the first week
of January 2019, however that number skyrocketed to over 250 by January 16th.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## Health Insurance in Thailand

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

When considering your health insurance options in Thailand, the best choice
will often depend on your personal circumstances: whether you’re living,
working or just travelling through Thailand, and whether o

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## How to stay healthy in Hong Kong with a busy schedule

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

Hong Kong, one of the most densely populated cities in the world, is a city
that never sleeps.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## Six Tips to Save Money on your Healthcare Expenses in Hong Kong

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

In 2017, Hong Kong ranked as the country with the most efficient healthcare
system in the world.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## Five things you should know about maternity in Hong Kong

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

Being pregnant in a foreign country is not always a smooth experience.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## Maternity in Hong Kong: Public VS Private Hospitals

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

As a soon-to-be mother, there is a lot to consider before giving birth in Hong
Kong.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## Traditional Chinese Medicine in Hong Kong

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

In a city like Hong Kong where the ancient and the modern co-exist every day,
it comes as no surprise that Traditional Chinese Medicine is deeply rooted
into the local culture.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## Keep breathing: is air pollution in Hong Kong getting better?

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

The focus for international Earth Day this month was on reducing the amount of
plastic pollution in the world.

Image d'introduction

    
        * See more
    

## The health system in the United Kingdom

Catégorie

Healthcare for expatriates

Texte d'introduction

Are you intending to get a job London, settle in Bristol or study in
Manchester? To get ready to live in Great Britain, learn about the health care
system in the United Kingdom.

Image d'introduction

X X

    
        *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     * Zone: France
    
    * English
    * Français
    * Deutsch
    

## Find the right insurance

    
        * Travel insurance
    * International health insurance
    * International group health insurance
    * International student medical insurance
    * Short-term and working holiday visa insurance
    * Schengen travel insurance
    

## Discover APRIL

    
        * APRIL Group
    * Press
    * Finance
    * Career
    * Association des Assurés d’APRIL
    

* * *

@ 2018 April International

    
        * Site terms and conditions
    * About us
    * Contact
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

