

The page could not be loaded. The CMS.gov Web site currently does not fully
support browsers with “JavaScript” disabled. Please enable “JavaScript” and
revisit this page or proceed with browsing CMS.gov with “JavaScript” disabled.
Instructions for enabling “JavaScript” can be found here. Please note that if
you choose to continue without enabling “JavaScript” certain functionalities
on this website may not be available.

Skip to Main Content

![CMS.gov Centers for Medicare & Medicaid

Services](//assets.cms.gov/resources/cms/images/logo/site-logo.png)

    
        * Home - Opens in a new window
    
    * About CMS
    
    * Newsroom
    
    * Archive - Opens in a new window
    
    * Share
    * Help
    * Print
    

## Main Menu

    
        * Medicare
    * Medicaid/CHIP
    * Medicare-Medicaid Coordination
    * Private Insurance
    * Innovation Center
    * Regulations & Guidance
    * Research, Statistics, Data & Systems
    * Outreach & Education
    

You are here: Home > Research, Statistics, Data and Systems > National Health
Expenditure Data > Historical

## National Health Expenditure Data

    
        * Historical
    * Projected
    * Age and Gender
    * State (Residence)
    * State (Provider)
    * NIPA Reconciliation
    * MEPS Reconciliation
    * NHEA Related Studies
    * NHE Fact Sheet
    

# Historical

The National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA) are the official estimates of
total health care spending in the United States. Dating back to 1960, the NHEA
measures annual U.S. expenditures for health care goods and services, public
health activities, government administration, the net cost of health
insurance, and investment related to health care. The data are presented by
type of service, sources of funding, and type of sponsor.

U.S. health care spending grew 3.9 percent in 2017, reaching $3.5 trillion or
$10,739 per person. As a share of the nation's Gross Domestic Product, health
spending accounted for 17.9 percent.

For additional information, see below.

## Downloads

    
        * Highlights [PDF, 255KB] 
    * NHE Tables [ZIP, 458KB] 
    * National Health Expenditures by type of service and source of funds, CY 1960-2017 [ZIP, 214KB] 
    * NHE Summary including share of GDP, CY 1960-2017 [ZIP, 27KB] 
    * Definitions, Sources, and Methods [PDF, 1MB] 
    * Nation's health dollar - where it came from, where it went [PDF, 296KB] 
    * NHE Deflator Methodology [PDF, 493KB] 
    * Summary of benchmark changes (2014) [PDF, 29KB] 
    * Summary of benchmark changes (2009) [PDF, 166KB] 
    * Summary of benchmark changes (2004) [PDF, 34KB] 
    * Quick Reference: National Health Expenditure category definitions [PDF, 351KB]
    

## Related Links

    
        * Health Affairs article: Martin, et al.,"National Health Care Spending In 2017: Growth Slows To Post-Great Recession Rates; Share Of GDP Stabilizes" - Opens in a new window ![ - External Link Policy - Opens in a new window](//assets.cms.gov/Resources/Medicare/Images/icons/external_link.png)
    
    * Page last Modified: 12/11/2018 10:44 AM 
    * Help with File Formats and Plug-Ins
    

## Footer

Home ![CMS.gov](//assets.cms.gov/resources/cms/images/logo/cms.gov-footer.png)

A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers for
Medicare &  
Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services

7500 Security Boulevard

Baltimore, MD21244

USA

![Department of Health and Human Services

USA](//assets.cms.gov/resources/cms/images/logo/hhslogo.png)

### CMS & HHS Websites

    
        * Medicare.gov - Opens in a new window
    * MyMedicare.gov - Opens in a new window
    * Medicaid.gov - Opens in a new window
    * InsureKidsNow.gov - Opens in a new window
    * HealthCare.gov - Opens in a new window
    * HHS.gov/Open - Opens in a new window
    

### Tools

    
        * Acronyms - Opens in a new window
    
    * Contacts - Opens in a new window
    
    * Glossary - Opens in a new window
    
    * Archive - Opens in a new window
    

### Helpful Links

    
        * Web Policies & Important Links
    *     *     * Privacy settings
    * Plain Language
    * Freedom of Information Act
    * No Fear Act 
    * Nondiscrimination/Accessibility 
    * HHS.gov  - Opens in a new window
    * Inspector General  - Opens in a new window
    * USA.gov  - Opens in a new window
    * Help with file formats & plug-ins
    

Receive Email Updates

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

