

![Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan](/etc/designs/bcbsm-

retail/_jcr_content/page/logoTop.img.png/1492562708553.png)

    
        * Contact Us
    
    * Home
    * Employers
    * Agents
    * Providers
    
    * Find Plans
      * Individual and Family
      * Dental and Vision
      * Medicare
      * Medicaid Plans
      * Employers
      * Specialty Benefits
      * International Plans
    * Health Insurance 101
      * The Basics
      * What's New in Health Care
      * Selecting the Right Plan
    * For Members
      * Your Online Account
      * Member Discounts
      * Health and Wellness
      * Drug Lists
    * About Us
      * Why Choose Us?
      * Our Company
      * Careers
    * Help
      * Frequently Asked Questions
      * Plan Documents and Forms
      * Calculators and Tools
      * Contact Us
      * Walk-In Centers
    
    * Already a Member?
    

Login![ ](/etc/designs/bcbsm-retail/img/arrowLogin.png)

Login ![ ](/etc/designs/bcbsm-retail/img/arrowLogin_o.png)

Log in as a:

    
        * Member
    * Employer
    * Provider
    * Agent
    

**Not Registered?** Get access to your member portal. Register Now

    
        * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Plan Documents and Forms
    * Calculators and Tools
    * Contact Us
    * Walk-In Centers
    

## Browse by Topic

    
        * How Health Insurance Works
    * Buying Health Insurance
    * Understanding My Benefits
    * Getting Care
    * Managing My Account
    * Claims
    * Health Care Reform
    * Other Topics
    

## Browse by Plan Type

    
        * HMO / Blue Care Network
    * Medicare
    * Dental
    * Pharmacy
    * Health Spending Accounts
    * Physician Choice PPO
    
    * Help
    

![Modal Icon](/etc/designs/bcbsm-retail/img/breadCrumb-arrow.png)

    
        * Frequently Asked Questions
    

![Modal Icon](/etc/designs/bcbsm-retail/img/breadCrumb-arrow.png)

    
        * Topics
    

![Modal Icon](/etc/designs/bcbsm-retail/img/breadCrumb-arrow.png)

    
        * Buying Health Insurance
    

# How does the size of my family impact my insurance cost?

#### Who is this for?

![Michigan Health Insurance – Customer Service – Learn

More](/content/public/en/index/health-insurance-help/faqs/topics/buying-

insurance/family-size-impact-

cost/_jcr_content/par/whoisthisfor/image.img.png/1479488087990.png)

If you purchase your own health coverage, this explains how the number of
people covered by your insurance affects your monthly payment and other costs.

The size of your family doesn't necessarily determine what you spend on
doctors and prescriptions. A healthy family of six could spend less than a
married couple with chronic conditions. But when it comes to your health
insurance costs, the number of people on a plan does affect what you pay.
We'll show you how.

## Premiums and people on your plan

When you add a spouse or child onto a plan, your monthly payment goes up.
That's because you're charged for each person covered by your plan. When you
have more than three children under the age of 21, you only pay for the three
oldest. Here's how that works.

    
        * Darrell and Tamara have five children, ages 5, 8, 12, 14 and 16. Although their health plan covers all seven of them, they're only charged on their monthly premium for five people. They're not charged for their two youngest children.
    * Samar has two children, ages 7 and 10. So her health plan covers three people, and she's charged for three people on her monthly premium.
    * Terry and Joaquin have four children, ages 17, 20, 22 and 24. Their health plan covers six people. Because two of their children are over age 21, they're charged on their monthly premium for all six people.
    

## Individual versus family plans

An individual plan has one member, or just one person covered by the plan.
Family plans cover two or more members.

Your plan's deductible and out-of-pocket maximum are based on whether you have
an individual or family plan.

The deductible and out-of-pocket maximum for a family plan is usually double
of an individual plan. So if the deductible for a plan is $2,000 for a family,
it's $1,000 for an individual. If the out-of-pocket maximum for an individual
plan is $6,000, it will be $12,000 for a family, no matter how many people the
plan covers.

Take a look at the individual and family health insurance plans to get more
information.

## Related Items

    
        * How can I lower my monthly health insurance cost?
    * How can I know I'm purchasing the right health insurance plan?
    

Was this content helpful?

Give Feedback

## Contact Us

### Need help finding the right phone number?

    
        * Looking for insurance
    * PPO members
    * HMO / Blue Care Network members
    * Medicare members
    

**Michigan Health Insurance**

    
        * Individual and Family Plans
    
    * Dental Plans
    
    * Medicare
    
    * Medicaid Plans
    * Employers
    

**Get a Quote**

    
        * Apply Now
    * Request a Callback
    

**Help and Information**

    
        * Find a Doctor or Hospital
    * Contact
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Documents and Forms
    * --------------------------
    * Language Assistance
    * Nondiscrimination Notice
    * Health Care Reform
    * About ACA Plans
    * Stop Fraud
    

**I am a...**

    
        * Blue Cross Member
    
    * Insurance Shopper
    
    * Employer
    * Provider
    * Agent
    * Supplier
    

**About Us**

    
        * Our Company
    * Our Mission
    * Careers
    * Diversity
    * Media Resources
    * Code of Conduct
    

![Shopping for health insurance? Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan and Blue

Care Network have affordable plans for your business and

family.](/content/dam/public/shared/documents/responsive-styles/_img/bcbsm-

bcn-logo-gray.png)

* * *
    
          * #### Stay Connected:
    
      * Follow us on TwitterTwitter
      * Follow us on FacebookFacebook
      * Follow us on LinkedInLinkedIn
      * __Learn more about a Healthier Michigan.org A Healthier Michigan
    

(C)1996- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan and Blue Care Network are
nonprofit corporations and independent licensees of the Blue Cross and Blue
Shield Association. We provide health insurance in Michigan.

State and Federal Privacy laws prohibit unauthorized access to Member's
private information. Individuals attempting unauthorized access will be
prosecuted.

Important Legal and Privacy Information | Important Information About Medicare
Plans | Privacy Practices  
Site Map | Feedback | Download Adobe Acrobat Reader

![BCBSM is an Accredited Business through the Better Business

Bureau](/content/public/_jcr_content/img2.img.png/1479488169658.png)

![opinion lab transparent

pixel](/content/dam/microsites/sharedassets/documents/img/empty.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

