  
      
        * Home
    * About
    * Services
    

![Debt.org](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Debt.org](/wp-

content/themes/debt/img/brand/logo@2x.png)

America's Debt Help Organization

Need Help Now? Call Us!

(888) 505-2105

__Menu

    
        * Manage Your Debt
      *         * #### Ways to Manage & Eliminate Your Debt
    
        *           * Settlement
          * Consolidation
          * Debt Management Plan
        *           * Credit Card Help
          * Bankruptcy
          * Debt Advice
        *           * Student Loan Consolidation
          * Student Loan Forgiveness
          * Student Loan Repayment
    
      *         * #### Credit Card Debt?
    

![Credit Card

Help](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Credit

Card Help](/wp-content/themes/debt/img/template/blog/cc-icon.png)

We can help reduce the amount you owe and lower your monthly payments today!

Get Started

    
          *  __Close
    * Understand Your Debt
      *         * #### You & Your Debt
    
        *           * Students
          * Veterans
          * Real Estate
        *           * Retirement
          * Small Business
          * Unemployment
    
      *         * #### Types of Debt
    
        *           * Credit
          * Loans
          * Mortgages
        *           * Tax
          * Medical
          * Government
    
      *         * #### Latest News
    
        * ![Older couple sitting with papers and considering bankruptcy](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%2047%2047'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Older couple sitting with papers and considering bankruptcy](https://www.debt.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/retirees-and-bankruptcy-47x47.jpg)Retirees and BankruptcyNovember 28, 2018
        * ![Credit report next to a laptop to freeze credit checks](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%2047%2047'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Credit report next to a laptop to freeze credit checks](https://www.debt.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/credit-report-freeze-47x47.jpg)New Law Allows Credit FreezeOctober 22, 2018
    
      *  __Close
    * Tips & Tools
      *         * #### Tools
    
        *           * Credit Score Grader
          * Common Financial Terms
    
      *         * #### Tips
    
        *           * How to Get Out of Debt
          * Financial Aid Infographic
          * How Student Loan Debt Adds Up
    
      *         * #### Personalized Debt Help
    

![Personalized Debt

Help](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Personalized

Debt Help](/wp-content/themes/debt/img/template/blog/personal-help-icon.png)

Get one-on-one assistance from one of our debt relief specialists

Get Started

    
          *  __Close
    * Blog
    * News
    

# Doctor Visit Costs

Costs for a visit to the doctor's office varies depending upon the services
rendered and the way in which the visit is paid for.

Get Financial Help Now

Need more info? Call now! **(888) 505-2105**

Both the science and the practice of medicine have changed dramatically over
the past several decades. New procedures, medications and treatment options
have vastly improved the medical profession's ability to diagnose and cure
disease, repair damage due to accident or injury, and test for various
ailments and conditions whose early detection and management helps save lives.

The business of medicine has changed considerably, as well. Years ago, a
person visiting his or her doctor would pay for the services provided without
the intervention of an insurance company acting as a middle man or co-payer.
Financial arrangements were between doctor and patient, and payments were
negotiated privately and with a certain amount of flexibility.

Today, with approximately 87 percent of all Americans covered by some form of
health insurance, that private, fee-for-service model has largely been
replaced by insurance plans that share costs with their beneficiaries based
upon various coverage formulas, and negotiated price agreements made with
physicians for services they provide.

This new business model makes it difficult to know what any individual doctor
visit might cost. Not only does it depend upon the extent and complexity of
the medical service(s) rendered, and the amount of time spent in the delivery
of those services, but also on the way in which the doctor is paid -- both by
the patient and by his or her insurance provider (and by whether that provider
is a private company or a government entity like Medicare or Medicaid).

In addition, most private insurance plans have in-network providers whose fees
differ from those of their out-of-network colleagues, as well as from one
another. All of these factors help to complicate the ability of a patient to
assess doctor visits costs.

![Here are a few blue book prices for the doctor

office](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Here

are a few blue book prices for the doctor office](/wp-

content/uploads/2013/01/Medical-Visit-Cost.jpg)

## Average Doctor Visit Costs

There are several ways in which consumers of health care services can get
reasonable estimates of what a visit to their primary care doctor, or a
specialist's office, might cost. This is important information to have in
hand, since the costs are typically less than the fees at an urgent care
center or an emergency room.

The American Medical Association publishes a web-based reference formulary of
physician charges, known as CPT codes, for many preventive services and office
procedures. The information on these payment charts is broken down into
several categories, including the average charge for a particular procedure as
submitted by a doctor's office.

For example, in 2011 in America, the average charge for an office visit for an
established patient, level 3, requiring approximately 15 minutes with a
doctor, was $104. The average total paid was $69. Some more examples: a flu
vaccine incurred an average charge of $25; a cholesterol test has an average
submitted charge of $72; and a glucose tolerant test (GTT) has a submitted
charge of $60.

Another useful cost estimator, particularly for those who are privately
insured, is the Healthcare Blue Book, an online guide to health care pricing,
with amounts based on the typical fees physicians nationwide accept as payment
from insurance companies.

#### Here are some Blue Book prices for doctor office visits:

    
        * Office Visit, New Patient, Level 1 - Very minor problem requiring counseling and treatment, may require coordination of care with other providers - approximately 10 minutes with doctor - $68.
    * Office Visit, Established Patient, Level 5 - Complex medical problem(s) requiring comprehensive evaluation- approximately 40 minutes with the doctor - $234.
    * Tetanus shot - $28.
    * Eye Examination, New Patient - $234.
    

## Private Insurance Deductibles, Co-Pays and Co-Insurance

Almost all private insurance policies require the insured person to pay a co-
pay when visiting a doctor or any other health care provider. The co-payment
amount varies depending on the insurance plan. Typical co-pays for a visit to
a primary care physician range from $15 to $25. Co-pays for a specialist will
generally be between $30 and $50.

Most plans also require that the insured pay a deductible before the insurance
provider will take over payments to a physician. Deductibles vary widely among
plans, and some benefits may be available even before the deductible is met.
Also, co-pays may or may not be included in meeting the deductible.

Co-insurance charges are usually stipulated as a percentage of the total bill.
For example, an 80/20 policy is one in which the insured pays 20 percent of
the bill and the insurance company pays 80 percent, but only after the insured
has paid a co-pay and met the required deductible.

When a doctor orders tests from a diagnostic facility, they may be paid for by
insurance, depending upon the specific test and the policy in force. If a
particular policy does not cover lab tests, the bill must be paid by the
patient.

## Doctor Visit Charges Are Not Set in Stone

It is important to remember that, even today, doctor visit fees are often
negotiable, both before and even after an office visit. Discounts are widely
available for self-payers, and like any other consumer product or service,
individuals can shop around to locate the best price for a particular
procedure – especially if they know in advance what the average charge is for
a particular service, or what other providers in the area are asking.

Also, some physicians have decided to opt out of the current insurance payment
model and have returned to a less administratively complex, fee-for-service
approach. Others have elected to do away entirely with fees, charging their
patients one annual price for any and all services rendered during the year.

Patients who are having trouble paying their medical bills, including doctor
visits, may benefit from talking to a professional debt relief company
experienced in negotiating payments on their behalf. Either debt settlement or
debt consolidation may be an appropriate option to help settle overdue or
unmanageable accounts.

Patients who qualify for Medicaid, which is the federal/state insurance
program for low-income individuals and families, can have their doctor visits
covered. Eligibility requirements vary from state to state.

Savvy consumers will benefit from communicating with their insurance companies
as well as with their own health care providers so that they have the best
available estimate of what their doctor visits will cost them, and whether or
not they are getting the best value for their money.

### Are you in debt? We can help!

    
        * Amount
    * Type
    * Contact
    

### How much do you owe?

Not Sure Under $2.5k $2.5k - $5k $5k - $10k $10k - $15k $15k - $20k $20k -
$50k $50k+ Next Step

### What can we help you with today?

Credit Cards

Student Loans

My loans are Loan TypeFederalPrivateBothNot Sure

Bankruptcy

Credit Monitoring

Credit Score

Next Step

First Name

Last Name

Phone

Email

Zip Code

State Select your
StateAlabamaAlaskaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareDistrict
Of
ColumbiaFloridaGeorgiaHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew
HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth
DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPuerto RicoPennsylvaniaRhode IslandSouth CarolinaSouth
DakotaTennesseeTexasUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWest VirginiaWisconsinWyoming

I agree to the Privacy Policy and I agree to be contacted at the phone number
I provided as a best contact number, including on a mobile device, using an
auto-dialer and/or text message, or by email for the purpose of communicating
regarding an evaluation of credit or debt relief services. Wireless carrier
fees may apply. My consent does not require purchase.

Get Started

#### Need help finding the right debt consolidation loan for you?

Get Help Now

#### Author

####

Bill Fay

##### Staff Writer

Bill “No Pay” Fay has lived a meager financial existence his entire life. He
started writing/bragging about it seven years ago, helping birth Debt.org into
existence as the site’s original “Frugal Man.” Prior to that, he spent more
than 30 years covering college and professional sports, which are the fantasy
worlds of finance. His work has been published by the Associated Press, New
York Times, Washington Post, Chicago Tribune, Sports Illustrated and Sporting
News, among others. His interest in sports has waned some, but his interest in
never reaching for his wallet is as passionate as ever. Bill can be reached at
bfay@debt.org.

#### Share This Page

#### Last Updated

April 2, 2019

#### Related Pages

    
        * ![Managing debt is very important for Veterans, here are some options for members of the military](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Managing debt is very important for Veterans, here are some options for members of the military](/wp-content/uploads/consolidation-page/Debt-Management-for-Veterans.jpg)
    

#### Debt Management for Veterans

    
        * ![We have listed the pros and cons of consolidating your student loans to help you understand](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![We have listed the pros and cons of consolidating your student loans to help you understand](/wp-content/uploads/consolidation-page/Pros-Cons-Consolidate-Student-Loans.gif)
    

#### Pros & Cons of Consolidating Federal Student Loans

    
        * ![Learn the difference between Debt Management and Settlement](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Learn the difference between Debt Management and Settlement](/wp-content/uploads/consolidation-page/Debt-Management-vs-Settlement.gif)
    

#### Debt Settlement vs. Debt Consolidation

    
        * ![Consolidation loans and your options](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Consolidation loans and your options](/wp-content/uploads/consolidation-page/Debt-Consolidation-Loans.gif)
    

#### Debt Consolidation Loans – What They Are & How They Work

View All

#### Sources

    
        1. Miller, M. (2012, February 8). Don't Waste Your Money: Find Doctor's Costs Before You Go. Retrieved from http://www.toledonewsnow.com/story/16771228/dont-waste-your-money-find-doctors-costs-before-you-go
    2. Humana. (2012). Why Does it Cost More to Use Some Doctors than Others? Retrieved December 26, 2012, from http://www.staysmartstayhealthy.com/doctorcosts
    3. Healthcare Blue Book. (n.d.). Physician Services. Retrieved December 26, 2012, from http://healthcarebluebook.com/
    4. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (n.d.). Physician Payments. Retrieved December 26, 2012 from http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research/HealthCareConInit/Physician.html
    

View All

Get Help Now

Overwhelmed with debt? You have options for lower monthly payments!

x

##### Navigation

    
        * Home
    * Understand Your Debt
    * Manage Your Debt
    * Debt Advice
    * News
    * Blog
    

##### Our Services

    
        * Debt Consolidation
    * Credit Card Help
    * Free Consultation
    * About Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms and Conditions
    

##### Join Our Community

twitter Facebook

##### Stay Connected

Join our mailing list for monthly tips on ways to manage your finances!

You have successfully subscribed to our newsletter! Check your inbox for
monthly financial tips and more.

![Debtonator](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Debtonator](/wp-

content/themes/debt/img/template/debtonator-footer.jpg)

![Debt.org](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Debt.org](/wp-

content/themes/debt/img/template/footer-logo.png) Copyright © 2019 Debt.org.
All rights reserved

![Jumpstart Financial Literacy Blue Trust

Logo](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%201%201'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![Jumpstart

Financial Literacy Blue Trust Logo](/wp-content/themes/debt/img/jumpstart-

logo-blue.png)

* * *

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

