

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/default/files/aaa_logo_regular_small_0.png)

Home

## Utility links

    
        * Member Login
    * Contact Us
    

Search

## Secondary menu

    
        * Public Policy
    * Professionalism
    
    * About us
    * Membership
    * Newsroom
    * International
    * Public discipline
    

Menu

-A A +A

![](/sites/default/files/files/imce/print-friendly-for-web.png)

# Risk Pooling: How Health Insurance in the Individual Market Works

For a print-ready PDF of this page, click here.

## What is risk pooling?

The pooling of risk is fundamental to the concept of insurance. A health
insurance risk pool is a group of individuals whose medical costs are combined
to calculate premiums. Pooling risks  
together allows the higher costs of the less healthy to be offset by the
relatively lower costs of the healthy, either in a plan overall or within a
premium rating category. In general, the larger the risk pool, the more
predictable and stable the premiums can be.

## Is the size of a risk pool the only factor?

No. Although larger risk pools are typically more stable, a large risk pool
does not necessarily mean lower premiums. The key factor is the average health
care costs of the enrollees included in the pool. Just as a pool with healthy
individuals can result in lower-than-average premiums, a large pool with a
large share of unhealthy individuals can have higher-than-average premiums.

## What is "adverse selection"?

"Adverse selection" describes a situation in which an insurer (or an insurance
market as a whole) attracts a disproportionate share of unhealthy individuals.
It occurs because individuals with greater health care needs, when given the
opportunity, are more likely to purchase health  
insurance and to purchase health insurance with richer benefits than
individuals with fewer health care needs.

## Why is adverse selection a problem?

Adverse selection increases premiums for everyone in a health insurance plan
or market because it results in a pool of enrollees with higher-than-average
health care costs. Adverse selection is a byproduct of a voluntary health
insurance market in which people can choose whether and when to purchase
insurance coverage, depending in part on how their anticipated health care
needs compare with the insurance premium charged.

The higher premiums that result from adverse selection, in turn, may lead to
more healthy individuals opting out of coverage, which would result in even
higher premiums. This process typically is referred to as a "premium spiral."
Avoiding such spirals requires minimizing adverse selection and instead
attracting a broad base of healthy individuals, over which the costs of sick
individuals can be spread. Attracting younger adults and healthier people of
all ages ultimately will help keep premiums more affordable and stable for all
members in the risk pool.

## Why do premiums depend on who buys coverage?

Health insurance premiums are set to pay projected claims to providers, as
well as insurers' administrative expenses, taxes, and profit. The largest
component of health insurance premiums is the medical spending paid on behalf
of enrollees. As a result, health insurance premiums reflect the expected
health care costs of the risk pool. Because health spending is skewed--that
is, a small share of consumers account for a large share of total health
spending--if a risk pool attracts a disproportionate share of unhealthy
individuals, premiums will be higher than they would be if the risk pool
attracted an average population.

## How does risk pooling currently work in the individual market?

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires that insurers use a single risk pool
when developing premiums. The single risk pool incudes all ACA-compliant plans
inside and outside of the marketplace/exchange within a state. In other words,
insurers must pool all of their individual market enrollees together when
setting the prices for their products. This means that the costs of the
unhealthy enrollees are spread across all enrollees.

## ![](/sites/default/files/files/imce/RiskPoolingFAQtake2-1.jpg)How does the

ACA protect against adverse selection?

The ACA includes a number of provisions that are intended to broaden
participation in the individual market. Among the more significant of these
are the individual mandate, premium and cost-sharing subsidies for low-income
individuals, and a limited open-enrollment period.

The ACA rules also support a level playing field. That is, the rules governing
the insurance market regarding issue, rating, and benefit requirements apply
equally to all insurers. In addition, the ACA includes a permanent risk
adjustment program that transfers payments among insurers in the single risk
pool based on the relative risk of their enrollees.

By limiting the adverse selection in the market as a whole and mitigating the
effects of enrollee risk profile differences among insurers, the single risk
pool requirement, uniform market rules, risk adjustment program, and
provisions to encourage enrollment work together to facilitate market
competition and the ACA's pre-existing condition protections.

## What if more flexibility were allowed in the ACA market rules?

If insurers were able to compete under different issue, rating, or benefit
coverage requirements, it could be more difficult to spread risks in the
single risk pool. Currently, risk adjustment is used to calibrate payments to
insurers in the single risk pool based on the relative risks of their enrolled
populations.

By reducing insurer incentives to avoid high-cost enrollees, risk adjustment
helps support protections for those with pre-existing conditions. Some changes
to market rules, such as increasing flexibility in cost-sharing requirements,
could require only adjustments to the risk adjustment program. Other changes,
such as loosening or eliminating the essential health benefit requirements,
could greatly complicate the design and effectiveness of a risk adjustment
program, potentially weakening the ability of the single risk pool to provide
protections for those with pre- existing conditions.

## What if some plans were allowed to avoid ACA rules altogether?

If some plans were allowed to avoid the ACA rules altogether, then plans
competing to enroll the same participants wouldn't be competing under the same
rules. Noncompliant plans would likely be structured to be attractive to low-
cost enrollees, through fewer required benefits, higher cost- sharing, and
premiums that vary by health status.

Higher-cost individuals would tend to want the broader benefits and pre-
existing condition protections of ACA-compliant coverage. Rather than having a
single risk pool, in which costs are spread broadly, there would be in effect
two risk pools--one for ACA-compliant coverage and one for noncompliant
coverage. As a result, average premiums for ACA-compliant coverage could far
exceed those of noncompliant coverage, thereby destabilizing the market for
compliant coverage. The instability would be exacerbated if market rules
facilitate movement of people between the two pools (e.g., if people with
noncompliant coverage can easily move to compliant coverage when health care
needs arise).

![](/sites/default/files/files/imce/RiskPoolingFAQtake2-2.jpg)![](/sites/default/files/files/imce/RiskPoolingFAQtake2-3.jpg)

By transferring payments among insurers based on the relative risk of their
enrollees, the ACA risk adjustment program can reduce premium differences
resulting from some insurers attracting more costly enrollees than others.
However, risk adjustment programs transfer payments within the same risk pool,
but not between pools, especially when the different pools have different
issue and rating rules. Therefore, in a market with separate risk pools for
compliant and noncompliant coverage, costs would no longer be spread over the
broad enrollee population. In addition, for risk adjustment to work properly,
the benefit coverage requirements need to be fairly similar across plans. Even
if the compliant and noncompliant plans were pooled together for risk
adjustment purposes, the potentially large differences in underlying benefits
between compliant and noncompliant coverage would make risk adjustment
extremely difficult to implement. And any resulting risk transfers from
noncompliant plans to compliant plans would be very high, thus negating much
of the premium advantages of noncompliant coverage.

Instead of using risk adjustment to mitigate the higher premiums needed for
compliant coverage, external funding could directed to the compliant pool, for
instance in the form of a reinsurance program. However, the funding for such a
program would have to be substantial and permanent.

Share

* * *

## Actuarial Board links

    
        * Actuarial Board for Counseling and Discipline
    * Actuarial Standards Board
    

## Quick Links

    
        * Find an actuary
    * Academy Committees
    * Board Election Center
    * Code of Professional Conduct
    * U.S. Qualification Standards
    * Volunteer
    * Additional Links
    

Calendar of Events

![Shawna Ackerman](/sites/default/files/2019-03/ShawnaAckerman_0.png)

President's messages

Shawna Ackerman

/content/messages-president

## Features

    
        * Webinars
    * Publications
    * Practice Notes
    * Professionalism First
    * Actuaries Climate Index
    * Actuaries Longevity Illustrator
    * Pension Assistance List
    

Volunteer

    
        * The Social Security Game
    * The Academy Celebrates 50 Years
    * Essential Elements 
    * TRACEÂ® Tracking Your CE
    * USQS Attestation Form
    * Principle-based Reserving
    * StateScan
    * Retirement for the AGES
    * Aging Securely
    * Public Pension Plans Actuarial E-Guide
    * Navigating Health Reform Implementation
    * Lifetime Income Initiative
    * Economic Scenarios Generators
    * Process for Signing NAIC P/C SAOs
    

![](/themes/custom/nt_actuary/style/images/facebook.png) |
![](/themes/custom/nt_actuary/style/images/Twitter-icon.png) |
![](/themes/custom/nt_actuary/style/images/youtube.png) |
![](/themes/custom/nt_actuary/style/images/linkedin.png)  
---|---|---|--- 

The American Academy of Actuaries' mission is to serve the public and the
United States actuarial profession.

PRIVACY POLICY â¢ Â©2019 American Academy of Actuaries. All rights reserved.

1850 M Street NW, Suite 300, Washington, D.C. 20036 | Tel 202-223-8196 | Fax
202-872-1948 | webmaster@actuary.org

Editor Login

    
        * About us
    * Membership
    * Newsroom
    * International
    * Public discipline
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

