

Skip to main content Google Tag Manager

Tickets

Menu

# Thomas Jefferson's Monticello

    
        * Calendar
    * Donate
    * Shop
    * Buy Tickets
    * Search
    * Visit
    * Exhibits & Events
    * Thomas Jefferson
    * House & Gardens
    * Slavery
    * Research & Education
    
    * Research & Education
      * Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia
        * Southeast Piazza
        * Parlor
        * Micrometer
        * Rose Campion
    

## You are here

    
        * Home
    * Research & Education
    * Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia
    * Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia
    

# Jefferson's Religious Beliefs

An article courtesy of the Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia. Click for more.

Thomas Jefferson’s religious beliefs have long been a subject of public
discussion, and were a critical topic in several of his important political
campaigns as he was viciously and unfairly attacked for alleged atheism.

Jefferson took the issue of religion very seriously. A man of the
Enlightenment, he certainly applied to himself the advice which he gave to his
nephew Peter Carr in 1787: "Question with boldness even the existence of a
god; because, if there be one, he must more approve the homage of reason, than
that of blindfolded fear."1 Jefferson read broadly on the topic, including
studying different religions, and while he often claimed that religion was a
private matter “between Man & his God,” he frequently discussed religion.2

### Jefferson's Beliefs

Jefferson was deeply committed to core beliefs - for example, the existence of
a benevolent and just God. Yet, as with any human, some of Jefferson’s beliefs
shifted over time and were marked by uncertainty, and he accepted that some of
his less central beliefs might be wrong; e.g. his belief that everything in
the universe had a wholly material existence rather than there being both
material and spiritual worlds. Jefferson insisted that such matters of dogma
were not critical; telling one correspondent that on these “I … reposed my
head on that pillow of ignorance which a benevolent creator has made so soft
for us, knowing how much we should be forced to use it.”3![Descent from the

Cross, by Frans Floris. Thomas Jefferson Foundation. Photograph by Edward

Owen.](//www.monticello.org/../../../sites/default/files/uploaded-content-

images/Descent.jpg)

Care must also be taken in evaluating Jefferson’s statements on religion, both
because he often defined terms in a rather idiosyncratic manner, and because
many comments with literal religious significance must be understood in the
context of social convention as much as theology (e.g. telling a bereaved
spouse that he/she might meet the departed in an afterlife may evidence
empathy as much as theology). Still, much can be said about Jefferson’s
religion.

Jefferson was a devout theist, believing in a benevolent creator God to whom
humans owed praise. In an early political text, he wrote that “The god who
gave us life, gave us liberty at the same time;…”4 He often referred to his or
“our” God but did so in the language of an eighteenth century natural
philosophy: “our creator,” the “Infinite Power, which rules the destinies of
the universe,” “overruling providence,” “benevolent governor,” etc. In 1823,
he wrote to John Adams referring to “the God whom you and I acknowledge and
adore” while denouncing atheism.5

Jefferson’s views on an afterlife developed over time, and historians disagree
on what he believed in this regard. As a young man, he seemed to have a
relatively conventional view of heaven. A firm believer in man’s free will, he
thought that good works were the way to salvation and that rewards and
punishments for actions on earth were “an important incentive” for people to
act ethically.6 Yet, as his views matured, particularly his materialism, he
likely encountered doubts. As he aged, Jefferson spoke passionately about the
prospect of meeting loved ones in heaven, assuring a bereaved John Adams after
the death of his wife Abigail, that “it is of some comfort to us both that the
term is not very distant at which we are to deposit, in the same cerement, our
sorrows and suffering bodies, and to ascend in essence to an ecstatic meeting
with the friends we have loved & lost and whom we shall still love and never
lose again.”7 In the end, he seems to have believed in a heaven or, at least,
as historian Johann Neem says, he had “hope.”8

Jefferson’s views on prayer are even more ambiguous. He dismissed Biblical
miracles as myth, implying doubts about the efficacy of prayer. But he
recognized an obligation of humans to worship God, and he often prayed
publicly, at least in very broad terms. His second inaugural address included
a prayer request for his listeners: “I ask you to join with me in
supplications, that he [that Being in whose hands we are] will so enlighten
the minds of your servants, guide their councils, and prosper their measures,
that whatsoever they do, shall result in your good, and shall secure to you
the peace, friendship, and approbation of all nations.”9 Of course, as with
references to an afterlife, these prayers might be understood in the context
of social convention and political posturing. In the end, it can be said that
he prayed although apparently with little belief or expectation of miraculous
divine intervention.

### Jefferson and Christianity

While Jefferson was a firm theist, the God in which he believed was not the
traditional Christian divinity. Jefferson rejected the notion of the Trinity
and Jesus’ divinity. He rejected Biblical miracles, the resurrection, the
atonement, and original sin (believing that God could not fault or condemn all
humanity for the sins of others, a gross injustice).10 In neither the
eighteenth century nor today would most people consider a person with those
views a “Christian.”

Given these views, Jefferson’s relationship with Christianity was complicated.
He believed that Jesus was the “first of human sages,” noting that his
philosophy, “freed from the corruptions of later times” – including Jesus’
divinity, resurrection, ![Salome Bearing the Head of Saint John, copy after c.

1631 original by Guido

Reni](//www.monticello.org/sites/default/files/uploaded-content-

images/Herodias.jpg)and miracles – “is far superior” to others because Jesus
preached “universal philanthropy, not only to kindred and friends, to
neighbors and countrymen, but to all mankind….”11 With this in mind, Jefferson
said that Christianity would be the best religion in a republic, especially
one like the United States with a broad diversity of ethnicities and
religions. “[T]he Christian religion when divested of the rags in which they
[the clergy] have inveloped it, and brought to the original purity &
simplicity of its benevolent institutor, is a religion of all others most
friendly to liberty, science, & the freest expression of the human mind,” he
explained.12 It was a “benign religion … inculcating honesty, truth,
temperance, gratitude and love of man, acknowledging and adoring an overruling
providence.”13 Based on these understandings, Jefferson demonstrated a deep,
even devout, admiration of Jesus, “the purity & sublimity of his moral
precepts, the eloquence of his inculcations, the beauty of the apologues in
which he conveys them...”14 At times, Jefferson described these moral and
ethical teachings of Jesus as “primitive christianity” before its perversion
by church leaders seeking temporal power.15

It was in this context that Jefferson said that “I am a Christian,” a quote
which is often repeated or referred to without context. What he said was “I am
a Christian, in the only sense in which he [Jesus] wished anyone to be;
sincerely attached to his doctrines, in preference to all others; ascribing to
himself every human excellence; & believing he never claimed any other.”16
What he embraced was Jesus’ moral and ethical philosophy, a “rational creed .
. . universal & eternal,” what he elsewhere terms “Christianism.”17 Similarly,
at one point he seemed to endorse “deism,” but only after defining the term as
simply a belief in one god, more accurately “monotheism.”18

### The Jefferson Bible

Early in his presidency, Jefferson reexamined his own beliefs and expressed a
renewed interest in Christianity. In 1803, he pieced together a short
comparison of various religions and philosophies, including Christianity. This
document is generally referred to as the “Syllabus.”19 The next year,
Jefferson decided to comb through the Gospels and extract what he believed to
be the real teachings of Jesus, devoid of perversions which had been made by
church leaders over the centuries. He insisted that Jesus’ true words “are as
distinguishable from the matter in which they are imbedded as diamonds in
dunghills.”20 This short compilation is generally referred to as the
“Philosophy of Jesus of Nazareth” or the “Extracts.” Finally, in retirement,
Jefferson set out to rework the “Philosophy” by taking four copies of the
Gospels – in English, French, Latin, and Greek – and literally cutting-out
with a razor those parts that he thought to be the legitimate teachings of
Jesus, devoid of miracles and the resurrection. This work, entitled by
Jefferson “The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth,” is commonly referred to
as the “Jefferson Bible.”21

Setting aside his own abridgement, Jefferson did support the Virginia Bible
Society in its efforts to ensure that any family in Virginia unable to afford
a Bible could obtain one. He believed that the Bible contained useful lessons,
in spite of its corruptions. At the same time, given his commitment to allow
people to form their own religious beliefs, Jefferson pointedly argued that
the Bible should be kept out of the hands of children, only made available
after their own ability to reason independently had been established through
study of history and philosophy.22

* * *

In the end, categorizing Jefferson’s religion should be done with some
caution. He was baptized and raised Anglican (and married and buried by
Anglican ministers), but he rejected many of the tenets of that church. He
regularly attended church of various denominations, but he declared that “I am
of a sect by myself.” In simple terms, Jefferson is a theist (he believes in
God). If a more precise label is sought, he might be labeled a Unitarian (a
theist who rejects the Trinity), although there are many variations in
Unitarians (some who believe Jesus was more than human, others who do not). In
1822, he boasted that “I confidently expect that the present generation will
see Unitarianism become the general religion of the United States,” but he
never formally joined that church. Technically, he was not a deist if the term
is understood to mean belief in a god who created the universe and then left
it to “run” on its own according to natural laws, a “clock-maker” god.
Jefferson did believe that God actively engaged in time, sustaining creation
on an ongoing basis; yet, in his rejection of Biblical miracles and belief
that natural laws were the language of God, he certainly is deistic.23

Importantly, Jefferson’s religious beliefs played a foundational role in his
abiding commitment to religious freedom and separation of church and state.

### Primary Source References

**1787 August 10.** (Jefferson to Peter Carr). "Fix reason firmly in her seat,
and call to her tribunal every fact, every opinion. Question with boldness
even the existence of a god; because, if there be one, he must more approve
the homage of reason, than that of blindfolded fear."24

**1802 January 1.** (Jefferson to the Baptist Association of Danbury,
Connecticut). "Believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely
between Man  & his God, that he owes account to none other for his faith or
his worship, that the legitimate powers of government reach actions only, &
not opinions, I contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole
American people which declared that their legislature should 'make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof,' thus building a wall of separation between Church & State."25

**1803 April 21.** (Jefferson to Benjamin Rush). "[T]o the corruptions of
Christianity, I am indeed opposed; but not to the genuine precepts of Jesus
himself. I am a Christian, in the only sense in which he wished any one to be;
sincerely attached to his doctrines, in preference to all others; ascribing to
himself every human excellence,  & believing he never claimed any other."26

**1813 May 31.** (Jefferson to Richard Rush). "... the subject of religion, a
subject on which I have ever been most scrupulously reserved. I have
considered it as a matter between every man and his maker, in which no other,
& far less the public, had a right to intermeddle."27

**1814 September 26.** (Jefferson to Miles King). "I must ever believe that
religion substantially good which produces an honest life, and we have been
authorised by one, whom you and I equally respect, to judge of the tree by
it's fruit. our particular principles of religion are a subject of
accountability to our god alone. I enquire after no man's, and trouble none
with mine: nor is it given to us in this life to know whether your's or mine,
our friend's or our foe's are exactly the right."28

**1816 January 9.** (Jefferson to Charles Thomson). "I too have made a wee
little book, from the same materials, which I call the Philosophy of Jesus. it
is a paradigma of his doctrines, made by cutting the texts out of the book,
and arranging them on the pages of a blank book, in a certain order of time or
subject. a more beautiful or precious morsel of ethics I have never seen. it
is a document in proof that I am a real Christian, that is to say, a disciple
of the doctrines of Jesus, very different from the Platonists, who call me
infidel, and themselves Christians and preachers of the gospel, while they
draw all their characteristic dogmas from what it’s Author never said nor saw.
they have compounded from the heathen mysteries a system beyond the
comprehension of man, of which the great reformer of the vicious ethics and
deism of the Jews, were he to return on earth, would not recognise one
feature. if I had time I would add to my little book the Greek, Latin and
French texts, in columns side by side, and I wish I could subjoin a
translation of Gassendi’s Syntagma of the doctrines of Epicurus, which,
notwithstanding the calumnies of the Stoics, and caricatures of Cicero, is the
most rational system remaining of the philosophy of the ancients, as frugal of
vicious indulgence, and fruitful of virtue as the hyperbolical extravagancies
of his rival sects."29

**1821 February 27.** (Jefferson to Timothy Pickering). "[N]o one sees with
greater pleasure than myself the progress of reason in it’s advances towards
rational Christianity. when we shall have done away the incomprehensible
jargon of the Trinitarian arithmetic, that three are one, and one is three;
when we shall have knocked down the artificial scaffolding, reared to mask
from view the simple structure of Jesus, when, in short, we shall have
unlearned every thing which has been taught since his day, and got back to the
pure and simple doctrines he inculcated, we shall then be truly and worthily
his disciples: and my opinion is that if nothing had ever been added to what
flowed purely from his lips, the whole world would at this day have been
Christian. I know that the case you cite, of Dr Drake, has been a common one.
the religion-builders have so distorted and deformed the doctrines of Jesus,
so muffled them in mysticisms, fancies and falsehoods, have caricatured them
into forms so monstrous and inconcievable, as to shock reasonable thinkers, to
revolt them against the whole, and drive them rashly to pronounce it’s founder
an imposter. had there never been a Commentator, there never would have been
an infidel. in the present advance of truth, which we both approve, I do not
know that you and I may think alike on all points. as the Creator has made no
two faces alike, so no two minds, and probably no two creeds. we well know
that among Unitarians themselves there are strong shades of difference, as
between Doctors Price and Priestley for example. so there may be peculiarities
in your creed and in mine. they are honestly formed without doubt. I do not
wish to trouble the world with mine, nor to be troubled for them. these
accounts are to be settled only with him who made us; and to him we leave it,
with charity for all others, of whom also he is the only rightful and
competent judge. I have little doubt that the whole of our country will soon
be rallied to the Unity of the Creator, and, I hope, to the pure doctrines of
Jesus also."30

**1823 April 11.** (Jefferson to John Adams). "[T]he truth is that the
greatest enemies to the doctrines of Jesus are those calling themselves the
expositors of them, who have perverted them for the structure of a system of
fancy absolutely incomprehensible, and without any foundation in his genuine
words. and the day will come when the mystical generation of Jesus, by the
supreme being as his father in the womb of a virgin will be classed with the
fable of the generation of Minerva in the brain of Jupiter. But we may hope
that the dawn of reason and freedom of thought in these United States will do
away all this artificial scaffolding, and restore to us the primitive and
genuine doctrines of this the most venerated reformer of human errors."31

* * *

## **Further Sources**

    
        * Adams, Dickinson W., Ruth W. Lester, and Eugene R. Sheridan, eds. _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels: "The Philosophy of Jesus" and "The Life and Morals of Jesus."_ Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983. The introduction to this work is almost identical to the Monticello Monograph _Jefferson and Religion_ (see below), but also includes facsimiles of Jefferson's two Bible compilations and transcriptions of letters in which Jefferson discussed his religious beliefs.
    * Gaustad, Edwin S. _Faith of the Founders: Religion and the New Nation, 1776-1826_. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2011.
    * Mapp, Alfred J., Jr. _The Faiths of Our Fathers: What America’s Founders Really Believed_. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2003.
    * Meacham, Jon. _American Gospel: God, the Founding Fathers, and the Making of a Nation_. New York: Random House, 2006.
    * Meyerson, Michael I. _Endowed by Our Creator: The Birth of Religious Freedom in America_. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012.
    * Peterson, Merrill D., and Robert C. Vaughan, eds. _The Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom: Its Evolution and Consequences in American History_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
    * Ragosta, John. _Religious Freedom: Jefferson’s Legacy, America’s Creed_. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2014.
    * Ragosta, John. "Thomas Jefferson and Religion." In _Encyclopedia Virginia_. Virginia Foundation for the Humanities. Article published August 10, 2012.
    * Sheridan, Eugene R.  _Jefferson and Religion_. Charlottesville: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, 1998.
    * Waldman, Steven. _Founding Faith: Providence, Politics, and the Birth of Religious Freedom in America._ New York: Random House, 2008.
    * Look for further sources in the Thomas Jefferson Portal on Jefferson and religion.
    * 1. _PTJ_, 12:15. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 2. Jefferson to Danbury Baptists, January 1, 1802, in _PTJ_, 36:258. Transcription available at Founders Online. For example, Jefferson bought a copy of the Qur’an in 1765 while he was studying law in Williamsburg with George Wythe. See, e.g., Denise A. Spellberg, _Thomas Jefferson’s Qur’an: Islam and the Founders_ (New York: Knopf, 2013).
    * 3. Jefferson to Isaac Story, December 5, 1801, in _PTJ_, 36:30. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 4. Summary View of the Rights of British America, _PTJ_, 1:135. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 5. Jefferson to John Adams, April 11, 1823, in Jefferson, Thomas, _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels: "The Philosophy of Jesus," and "The Life and Morals of Jesus,"_ed. Dickinson W. Adams et al (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1983), 410-13. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 6. Jefferson to William Short, April 13, 1820, in Adams, _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels_, 391–4. Transcription available at Founders Online. See also Jefferson to John Page, July 15, 1763, _PTJ_, 1:10 (“to proceed with a pious and unshaken resignation till we arrive at our journey’s end, where we may deliver up our trust into the hands of him who gave it, and receive such reward as to him shall seem proportioned to our merit”). Transcription available at Founders Online. See also “Syllabus of an Estimate of the merit of the doctrines of Jesus, compared with those of others,” __ in _PTJ_, 40:255 (hereinafter “Syllabus”). Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 7. Jefferson to John Adams, November 13, 1818, in _PTJ:RS, _ 13:392. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 8. Johann N. Neem, “A Republican Reformation: Thomas Jefferson’s Civil Religion and the Separation of Church and State,” in _A Companion to Thomas Jefferson_, ed. Francis D. Cogliano (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012), 91, 97.
    * 9. Yale Law School. The Avalon Project. "Thomas Jefferson Second Inaugural Address."
    * 10. Jefferson to William Short, October 31, 1819, in Adams, _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels_, 387-91. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 11. Jefferson to Francis Adrian Van der Kemp, April 25, 1816, in _PTJ:RS,_ 9:703, transcription available at Founders Online; Jefferson to Edward Dowse, April 19, 1803, in _PTJ_, 40:236, transcription available at Founders Online; “Syllabus,” in _PTJ_, 40:255, transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 12. Jefferson to Moses Robinson, March 23, 1801, in _PTJ_, 33:424. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 13. Jefferson’s First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801, in _PTJ_, 33:150. Transcription available at Founders Online. Jefferson’s comparative analysis of Jesus’ teaching and those of other religions has been faulted for being unfairly narrow in its understanding of Judaism, for example. See Paul K. Conkin, “The Religious Pilgrimage of Thomas Jefferson,” in _Jeffersonian Legacies_, ed. Peter S. Onuf (Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press, 1993): 37-38. His limited understanding of Judaism has occasionally contributed to claims that Jefferson was anti-Semitic. For these purposes, the accuracy of the comparison is not at issue, but only Jefferson’s understanding.
    * 14. Jefferson to William Short, April 13, 1820, in Adams, _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels_, 391–4. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 15. Jefferson to Wells & Lilly, April 1, 1818, in _PTJ:RS,_ 12:576. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 16. Jefferson to Benjamin Rush, April 21, 1803, in _PTJ_, 40:251 (emphasis original). Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 17. Jefferson to Francis Adrian Van der Kemp, July 30, 1816, in _PTJ:RS,_ 10:278. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 18. “Syllabus,” in _PTJ_, 40:255. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 19. “Syllabus,” in _PTJ_, 40:255. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 20. Jefferson to Francis Adrian Van der Kemp, April 25, 1816, _PTJR_ 9:703. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 21. Adams, _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels._ See generally Eugene R. Sheridan, _Jefferson and Religion_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998): 44-49.
    * 22. Jefferson to Samuel Greenhow, January 31, 1814, in _PTJ:RS_ 7:178. Transcription available at Founders Online. _Notes_, ed. Peden; see Query XIV.
    * 23. Jefferson to Ezra Stiles Ely, June 25, 1819, in Adams, _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels_, 386-7. Transcription available at Founders Online. Jefferson to Thomas B. Parker, May 15, 1819, in ibid., 385-6. Transcription available at Founders Online. Jefferson to James Smith, December 8, 1822, in ibid., 408-9. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 24. _PTJ_, 12:15. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 25. _PTJ_, 36:258. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 26. _PTJ_, 40:251. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 27. _PTJ:RS_, 6:160. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 28. _PTJ:RS_, 14:198. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 29. _PTJ:RS_, 9:340-41. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 30. Dickinson W. Adams, Ruth W. Lester, and Eugene R. Sheridan, eds., _Jefferson's Extracts from the Gospels: "The Philosophy of Jesus" and "The Life and Morals of Jesus"_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983), 403. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    * 31. _Jefferson's Extracts_, 412-13. Transcription available at Founders Online.
    

See Also:

The Philosophy of Jesus of NazarethThe Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth

Filed In:

Personal Life, Religion

## Video: Jefferson's Jesus

A view of Jefferson's religious beliefs by David Holmes, retired professor of
religion at the College of William and Mary.

More >>

## Participate

Login or register to participate in our online community.

![](https://monticello-www.s3.amazonaws.com/images/footer-lg1.jpg)

Thomas Jefferson's Monticello

![](//maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/staticmap?center=Monticello&zoom=12&size=314x236&maptype=roadmap&markers=color:red%7C%7C38.0086043,-78.4531994&key=AIzaSyBwSbsmEyfSbfWd2EkqWi60xvv3MjiALZk)
![monticello on the map](https://www.monticello.org//images/map.png)

Address

Monticello 931 Thomas Jefferson Parkway

Charlottesville, VA 22902

General Information (434) 984-9800

## Helpful Links

Contact Us

Get Email Updates

Press

Jobs and Internships

Thomas Jefferson Foundation

Terms of Use & Privacy Policy

Hours of Operation

Accessibility

A World Heritage Site

A Site of Conscience

## Connect

Facebook

Instagram

Twitter

Pinterest

TripAdvisor

YouTube

Flickr

monticello.org - Charlottesville VA

Monticello and the University of Virginia in Charlottesville inscribed on the
World Heritage List in 1987

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

## Header Menu

    
        * Calendar
    * Donate
    * Shop
    * Buy Tickets
    * Search
    

## Primary Menu

    
        * Visit
    * Exhibits & Events
    * Thomas Jefferson
    * House & Gardens
    * Slavery
    * Research & Education
    

## Search form

Search

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

