
    
        * Billionaires
    
      * All Billionaires 
      * World's Billionaires 
      * Forbes 400 
      * America's Richest Self-Made Women 
      * China's Richest 
      * India's Richest 
      * Indonesia's Richest 
      * Korea's Richest 
      * Thailand's Richest 
      * Japan's Richest 
      * Australia's Richest 
      * Taiwan's Richest 
      * Singapore's Richest 
      * Philippines' Richest 
      * Hong Kong's Richest 
      * Malaysia's Richest 
    * Innovation
    
      * All Innovation 
      * AI & Big Data 
      * AppDynamics BrandVoice 
      * Cloud 100 2018 
      * Consumer Tech 
      * Cybersecurity 
      * Enterprise & Cloud 
      * ExtraHop BrandVoice 
      * Games 
      * Green Tech 
      * Healthcare 
      * Oracle BrandVoice 
      * SAP BrandVoice 
      * Science 
      * ServiceNow BrandVoice 
      * Sharing Economy 
      * Social Media 
      * T-Mobile 
      * Venture Capital 
    * Leadership
    
      * All Leadership 
      * Careers 
      * CMO Network 
      * Crowe BrandVoice 
      * Deloitte BrandVoice 
      * Diversity & Inclusion 
      * Education 
      * Entrepreneurs 
      * ForbesWomen 
      * Franchises 
      * Leadership Strategy 
      * Small Business 
      * Under 30 
      * Workday BrandVoice 
    * Money
    
      * All Money 
      * Banking & Insurance 
      * Crypto & Blockchain 
      * ETFs & Mutual Funds 
      * Fintech 
      * Hedge Funds & Private Equity 
      * Investing 
      * Markets 
      * Personal Finance 
      * Retirement 
      * Taxes 
      * Impact Partners BrandVoice 
      * Wealth Management 
    * Consumer
    
      * All Consumer 
      * Food & Drink 
      * Hollywood & Entertainment 
      * Media 
      * Real Estate 
      * Retail 
      * SportsMoney 
    * Industry
    
      * All Industry 
      * Aerospace & Defense 
      * Energy 
      * Flexport BrandVoice 
      * Manufacturing 
      * Policy 
      * Transportation 
      * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries BrandVoice 
    * Lifestyle
    
      * All Lifestyle 
      * Arts 
      * Boats & Planes 
      * Capital One BrandVoice 
      * Cars & Bikes 
      * Cole Haan BrandVoice 
      * Dining & Drinking 
      * Forbes Travel Guide 
      * ForbesLife 
      * Watches & Jewelry 
      * Travel 
      * Vices 
    * BrandVoice
    
      * AppDynamics 
      * Capital One 
      * Cole Haan 
      * Crowe 
      * Deloitte 
      * ExtraHop 
      * Flexport 
      * Impact Partners 
      * Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
      * Oracle 
      * SAP 
      * ServiceNow 
      * T-Mobile 
      * Workday 
    * Lists 
    * Advisor
    
      * All Advisor 
      * Credit Cards 
      * Personal Loans 
      * Brokerage 
      * Checking Accounts 
      * Savings Accounts 
    * Featured
    
      * 30 Under 30 2019 
      * Daily Dozen Briefing 
      * Forbes8 
      * Forbes Daily Cover Stories 
      * Forbes Editors' Picks 
      * Forbes Finds 
      * Forbes Insights: AI 
      * Forbes Insights with ARM Treasure Data: The Path To Personalization 
      * Forbes Insights with Teradata: Forbes Analytics+ 
      * Forbes Video 
      * Microsoft 365 BrandVoice: Behind The Shift 
      * Newsletters 
      * PMI BrandVoice: 3 Ways To Future-Proof Your Business 
      * Tech MD 
      * Vanguard BrandVoice: The Future Of Work
    

# Poverty Does Not Have to Equal High Healthcare Spending

![Gary Price, MD, and Tim

Norbeck](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ebe3e7282763daf3f3cff742068558fa?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Gary Price, MD, and Tim Norbeck

Contributor

Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

Policy

##### Tweet This

    
        * Identifying how impoverished populations contribute to healthcare utilization and cost isn’t simple to nail down.
    
    * 28 percent of consumers had a medical problem in the last year, but did not visit a doctor because of the cost.
    
    * Share to facebook __
    * Share to twitter __
    * Share to linkedin __
    

_This post was contributed by Tim Norbeck, CEO of the Physicians Foundation,
and Walker Ray, MD, past president and current board member of the Physicians
Foundation._

Poverty and the Myths of Health Care Reform

Poverty and the Myths of Health Care Reform

“Los Angeles is no ordinary place.” These are the words of Dr. Richard “Buz”
Cooper whose life work explored the effects of poverty on healthcare.

Dr. Cooper used Los Angeles as one lens to explore the relationship between
income and healthcare costs in his 2016 book, Poverty and the Myths of Health
Care Reform. Ranking just behind New York in the number of millionaires, Los
Angeles ranks first in the number of poor. The cost of living in Los Angeles
is 30 percent above the national average, however, almost 30 percent of the
population – that’s more than the total population of Chicago – lives on an
income of less than $12,500.

What’s different from other areas in the U.S. affected by poverty is the broad
geographic dispersion of Los Angeles. Poverty is more widely spread across
many separate municipalities, versus concentrated to a specific region. In
L.A., Medicare spending per enrollee is 60 percent more than in the lowest
spending regions of the U.S.

Identifying how impoverished populations contribute to healthcare utilization
and cost isn’t simple to nail down. Dr. Cooper noted that the answer extends
across varied social and economic factors that have compounded over the years.
Elements like income, education, employment and disability have greatly
affected Los Angeles. Yet so have more elusive characteristics like
empowerment, economic security, social networks and trust relationships (or
the lack thereof). Also critical are overall living conditions – particularly
in areas where personal safety and adequate housing are challenged,
nutritional food is difficult to consistently or affordably access, air
quality is compromised and there are limited transportation options to get to
doctor appointments or other medical care.

Dr. Cooper observed that “poverty not only applies to people, it applies to
neighborhoods.” These living conditions and illnesses spread, creating their
own communities. Ultimately, he asserted that what we face is not an
unnecessary overuse of care by those in poverty, but rather “the necessary use
of extra care for patients who are unnecessarily poor.”

The dominant emphasis of healthcare reform over recent decades has been on
eliminating perceived waste and inefficiency. Dr. Cooper directly challenged
this paradigm by documenting how ignoring the impact of low income on
healthcare utilization has led policy makers to miss the bigger and more
relevant picture. He estimated that if the poorest areas utilized healthcare
at the rate of the most affluent, overall utilization and spending could be as
much as 30 percent less. Even more striking, life expectancy in poor
neighborhoods is a full 10 years shorter than in the richest areas. By shining
a light on the patterns of poverty, wealth and healthcare spending across our
country, we have the opportunity to finally address healthcare cost drivers
that, until recently, have been largely ignored.

The Physicians Foundation recently released a 2017 patient survey which
measured the attitudes of healthcare consumers on a number of different
issues, including the cost of healthcare and social determinants. Survey
results revealed that 28 percent of consumers had a medical problem in the
last year, but did not visit a doctor because of the cost. Twenty-five percent
did not fill a prescription for medicine because of the cost, and 19 percent
skipped doses of medicine because of the cost.

Social determinants exist both in and outside of the doctor’s office. While
patients and physicians must work together to navigate the hardships that
hinder proper care and drive up costs, they cannot do it alone. It’s time for
health policy experts and regulators to actively acknowledge and engage with
this issue. Neither the blame – nor the solution – can rest on one person or
group. It will require collective effort to change our thinking and help
Americans become healthier by becoming more economically secure.

![Gary Price, MD, and Tim

Norbeck](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ebe3e7282763daf3f3cff742068558fa?s=400&d=mm&r=g)

Gary Price, MD, and Tim Norbeck

Contributor

We write about physician trends and the changing healthcare landscape. Gary
Price, MD, is the current president of the Physicians Foundation, and a
practicing plastic su...

Read More

    
        * Print
    * Site Feedback
    * Tips
    * Corrections
    * Reprints & Permissions
    * Terms
    * Privacy
    * ©2019 Forbes Media LLC. All Rights Reserved.
    * AdChoices
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

