

Skip to Main Content

![Oxford University Press](//oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/UI/app/svg/umbrella/oxford-academic-logo.svg)

    
        * _Search_
    * _Account Menu_
    * _Menu_
    * Korea Advanced Inst of Science and Technology __
    
      * Korea Advanced Inst of Science and Technology
    
    * Sign In __
    
    * Register
    

Navbar Search Filter This issueAll BJA EducationSubject: Recovery and Post Op
Management All Journals Mobile Microsite Search Term

    
        * Sign In __
      *     * Korea Advanced Inst of Science and Technology  __
      * Korea Advanced Inst of Science and Technology 
      *     * Register
    

* * *
    
        * Issues
    * About ____
      * About BJA Education
    

![BJA Education](//oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/data/SiteBuilderAssets/Live/Images/bjaed/bjaed_title-1181164227.svg)

![British Journal of Anaesthesia](//oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/data/SiteBuilderAssets/Live/Images/bjaed/bjaed_h1979837110.svg)

* * *
    
        * Issues
    * About ____
      * About BJA Education
    

Close

search filter This issueAll BJA EducationSubject: Recovery and Post Op
Management All Journals search input

Advanced Search

__

Article Navigation

Close mobile search navigation

Article Navigation

__

![Issue Cover](https://oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/oup/backfile/Content_public/Journal/bjaed/Issue/11/4/1/m_cover.gif?Expires=1560399607&Signature=D8PRxtkhALcJHVVWvaVe30QbueKQkClkog04FptmcmzvAlbbKoY9SnJMlx9yUArYr9Ikho5hLpr0D-aTmmt2z0rXkWpbkT~UNJhESeLC3pkemBcF8XYn2cvfzj8rFt1qpGlYGuZUORpIagZNc5y2b1moTXqdi7oDL3URuJAVEdY~FDwUZHg~xYHQOwid~Z0j0Lo~mZtKfAa5nHIICdWd9d3lH2tPQPjS8uBNT8yfcgiz0RJqef448Gg~tEguC~IV1Tt4AgW~3Snqrh5Jr3ZsiJyAH49819U9RnYKnBhwyaKIcoLCgTo8ztsRo0URmzQ9kdsohutTC151EPl04bg5Hw__&Key-

Pair-Id=APKAIE5G5CRDK6RD3PGA)

Volume 11

Issue 4

August 2011

This article was originally published in

Continuing Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain

Article Contents

    
        * Key points
    
    * Negligence
    
    * Criminal negligence
    
    * Liability for negligence
    
    * Conclusions
    
    * Conflict of interest
    
    * References
    
    * < Previous
    * Next >
    

Article Navigation

# Duty of care and medical negligence __

Daniele Bryden, FRCA LLB (Hons) MML

Consultant in ICM/Anaesthesia

Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust

Herries Road

,

Sheffield S5 7AU

,

UK

Tel: +44 114 243 4343

E-mail: daniele.bryden@sth.nhs.uk (for correspondence)

Search for other works by this author on:

Oxford Academic

Google Scholar

Daniele Bryden, FRCA LLB (Hons) MML

Ian Storey, LLB (Hons)

Barrister (Gray's Inn)

,

Paradise Chambers

26 Paradise Square

,

Sheffield S1 2DE

UK

Search for other works by this author on:

Oxford Academic

Google Scholar

Ian Storey, LLB (Hons)

_Continuing Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain_, Volume 11, Issue
4, August 2011, Pages 124–127, https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mkr016

Published:

19 June 2011

    
        * ![pdf](/UI/app/svg/pdf.svg)PDF
    * __Split View
    * __
    

Views

__

    
          * Article contents
      * Figures & tables
      * Video
      * Audio
      * Supplementary Data
    * __Cite
    

Citation

Daniele Bryden, Ian Storey, Duty of care and medical negligence, _Continuing
Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain_, Volume 11, Issue 4, August
2011, Pages 124–127, https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mkr016

Download citation file:

    
          * Ris (Zotero)
      * EndNote
      * BibTex
      * Medlars
      * ProCite
      * RefWorks
      * Reference Manager
    

* * *

(C) 2019 Oxford University Press

__Close

    
        *     * __
    

Share

__

    
          * Email
      * Twitter
      * Facebook
      * More
    

Navbar Search Filter This issueAll BJA EducationSubject: Recovery and Post Op
Management All Journals Mobile Microsite Search Term

    
        * Sign In __
      *     * Korea Advanced Inst of Science and Technology  __
      * Korea Advanced Inst of Science and Technology 
      *     * Register
    

Close

search filter This issueAll BJA EducationSubject: Recovery and Post Op
Management All Journals search input

Advanced Search

__

Key points

    
        * Negligence arising from medical acts may result in a civil action by the injured party (claimant) or a criminal prosecution by the state.
    
    * Medical negligence is proved if all components of the three-part test are established on the balance of probabilities (civil suit) or beyond reasonable doubt (criminal prosecution).
    
    * The three-part test establishes that the doctor owed a duty of care to the patient, the duty of care was breached, and as a direct result of the breach the patient suffered harm.
    
    * Successful civil actions result in monetary compensation to the injured party or dependents which may be paid by the employing trust or the doctor's defence organization.
    
    * Successful criminal prosecutions may result in a custodial sentence for the doctor and an additional GMC fitness to practice hearing.
    
    * Good record keeping and adherence to established practice guidelines are important as negligence cases may take many years to be resolved.
    

The Department of Health estimates that 10% of hospital inpatient admissions
result in an adverse event,1 but <2% of claims for medical negligence handled
by the NHS Litigation Authority result in court action.2 However, both the
number of claims for negligence and the sums involved in settlement are
increasing and so it is important that anaesthetists understand the factors
leading to a possible civil claim for negligence and the potentially
considerably more serious charge of criminal negligence, both of which can
arise from failures to uphold a suitable standard of care. This article does
not consider claims of negligence in relation to consent which has been
considered in a separate article in the journal.

The principle of ‘duty of care’ was established by _Donoghue v Stevenson_ in
1932 wherein Lord Atkin identified that there was a general duty to take
_reasonable_ care to avoid _forseeable_ injury to a ‘neighbour’.3 In this
case, a woman in Paisley drank ginger beer from a bottle until she found a
decomposing snail at the bottom. As a result the woman became ill and a case
was brought against the ginger beer manufacturers for compensation. Lord Atkin
determined that the company producing the ginger beer had been negligent in
failing to ensure the woman's safety during the production process, even
though the ginger beer was not bought by the woman but by her friend. It was
established that a general duty of care was owed to a neighbour; a neighbour
was defined as ‘someone who may be reasonably contemplated as closely and
directly affected by an act’. In this case, it did not matter who had bought
the ginger beer, since it was reasonable to consider that anyone who drank the
beer would have suffered the same consequences and could therefore be
considered under the ‘neighbour’ principle.

## Negligence

Where a duty of care is breached, liability for negligence may arise. Medical
negligence is part of a branch of law called tort (delict in Scotland) derived
from the Latin verb ‘tortere’=to hurt. The idea of hurt is an important
consideration in establishing negligence, as the majority of tortious claims
for medical negligence that do not succeed fail because they cannot establish
that harm has occurred as a direct result of an act or a failure to act.

### The negligence test

To determine negligence, a three-stage test must be satisfied. The procedure
therefore relies on establishing fault on the part of the doctor, hospital,
etc. The person making the claim (the claimant) must establish on the balance
of probabilities that negligence has occurred by the hospital or doctor (the
defendant). Compensation is paid in order to return the claimant to the
position they would theoretically have been if the harm had not occurred. A
monetary value will attach not just to actual expenses incurred (to include a
loss of earnings) but additionally to the loss of amenity experienced and the
pain and suffering endured in consequence of the injury. There are also more
philosophical objectives of promoting accountability and ensuring that those
at fault are deterred from future acts of carelessness by the need to pay
compensation. This deterrent effect is somewhat reduced by a standard fee for
professional indemnity for NHS-employed doctors unless the doctor is engaged
in independent practice. The Clinical Negligence Scheme for Trusts (CNST) does
include such a deterrent element, since the premiums payable by a Trust to
indemnify its activities can be reduced by having appropriate measures in
place to reduce the likelihood of claims using a three-level rating system
that takes account of the robustness of safety and governance processes in
operation.4

    
        * A person is owed a duty of care.
    
    * A breach if that duty of care is established.
    
    * As a direct result of that breach, legally recognized harm has been caused.
    

### Medical duty of care

The relationship between a doctor and a patient is a special one. Most
anaesthetists work in a hospital environment and do not usually have patients
directly admitted under their care. When a patient is admitted to hospital, a
duty of care relationship is created, which can be applied to any doctor
coming into contact with the patient not just the admitting team. Hence, it
has been argued by medical law academics that any patient we come across in
our professional environment is owed a duty of care, not only by the doctors
the patient comes into contact with, but also by those who are employed by the
Trust to deliver patient care. For example, a patient who has a cardiac arrest
on a hospital corridor is owed a duty of care by any doctor who happens to be
passing, and provision of assistance in such circumstances would probably be
expected and would not be classed as a ‘good Samaritan’ act, however this
academic view has not currently been tested in a British court environment to
our knowledge.

### Breach of duty

This is established where a doctor's practice has failed to meet an
appropriate standard. The standard of the ‘reasonable man’ or the famous ‘man
on the Clapham omnibus’ who is said to be an ordinary person placed in the
same circumstances is usually applied for most tort cases. However, where
there has been a potential breach of professional duty, this is reinterpreted
as that of the standard of comparable professional practice. _Bolam v Friern
Hospital Trust_ is the most well-known case in relation to this professional
standard.5 It concerned a patient who sustained fractures during ECT treatment
and who alleged that care under anaesthesia had been negligent in part because
he had not been given muscle relaxation for the procedure, and had not been
restrained or warned of the risks of fracture. It was concluded, however, that
negligence could not be established, as evidence was provided that at the time
it was not universal practice to administer muscle relaxation, as contrasting
opinions existed as to the benefits of muscle relaxation balanced against the
increased risks of the relaxant. It was argued that if a doctor acted in
accordance with a practice that was considered acceptable by a responsible
body of doctors that was sufficient and the claimant must show that no
reasonable doctor acting in the same circumstances would have acted in that
way. The ‘Bolam standard’ (by which the alleged negligent practice is compared
with that of a doctor's peers) is subject to criticism and heavily dependent
on expert evidence for either side which may be in conflict; however, this is
the same test as for other professional groups where negligence is under
consideration (e.g. engineers). It has been argued that the presence of a body
of opinion that supports a doctor's actions is in favour of the medical
profession, handing responsibility for determining negligence back on to those
same professionals. Support from eminent professionals for a course of action
arguably makes it easier to defend claims of a breach of duty. The Bolam test
is still frequently considered in cases of medical negligence, but it is not
definitive, as subsequent cases have called in to doubt the idea that an
acceptable standard of care is judged by doctors commenting on practice
standards and that it may be part of the role of the court. ‘The court must be
vigilant to see whether the reasons given for putting a patient at risk are
valid … or whether they stem from a residual adherence to out of date ideas’.6
Since the case of Bolitho, where a child with intermittent croup was not
intubated by a paediatric registrar and subsequently suffered hypoxic brain
injury from a respiratory arrest, it is possible for the court to decide that
negligence has been proved even if a body of medical opinion suggests
otherwise.7 In Bolitho, it was accepted that failure by the paediatric
registrar to attend to the child during an earlier episode of croup was
negligent. However, it was argued that even if the registrar had attended, it
would not have been appropriate to intubate the child at that point, and that
therefore the final subsequent respiratory arrest and hypoxic brain injury
sustained by the child could not have been prevented by earlier action. The
judge reasoned that the argument that a failure to attend the child would not
have made any difference to the eventual outcome was inconclusive and asserted
that on some occasions, differing bodies of medical opinion could be
legitimately distinguished by the court. ‘It is not enough for a defendant to
call a number of doctors to say that what he had done or not done was in
accord with accepted clinical practice. It is necessary for the judge to
consider that evidence and [to] decide whether that clinical practice puts
that patient unnecessarily at risk’. Bolitho, however, is not universally
applied and many judgements of negligence still rely on the principles of peer
review outlined in Bolam, although the greater use of evidence-based medicine,
and the extensive practice guidelines produced by bodies like NICE, now allows
judges to have objective benchmarks of practice for comparison. It is less
easy for doctors to rely on providing a supporting body of opinion as a
defence for an alleged breach of duty for practice that is contrary to
recommendations and guidelines from external agencies.

There is, however, an understanding that progress in medical knowledge takes
some time to be disseminated and not every new change can be immediately put
in to practice. In _Crawford v Board of Governors of Charing Cross Hospital_ ,
a patient sustained a brachial plexus injury from being in one position for
too long a time period.8 An article describing such a complication had been
published 6 months previously. However, the anaesthetist had not read this
article and was not aware of its implications and so was found not to have
breached their duty of care to the patient.

Moreover, errors of judgement do not automatically amount to breaches of duty.
They only do so in circumstances where the doctor has not acted with a level
of care that would be expected from a reasonably competent professional. For
doctors in training, this is of particular relevance, as the standard is that
expected of the doctor in the same grade of that specialty or in that unit.
There is an assumption, established in _Nettleship v Weston_ where a learner
driver lost control of a car, that there should be a public expectation of
safety, and that doctors in training should be acting to the standard of the
grade they are operating in.9 There are therefore no concessions for a lack of
relevant experience, and a doctor in the first day of a new post is expected
to work to the same standard of public safety as one who is on the last day of
the post. The difference in performance of the two relates to the degree by
which the new doctor may be expected to consult and seek assistance to
compensate for their relative lack of knowledge or skill and the degree to
which they should expect to be supervised. We would argue that there is an
expectation that supervisors allow trainees to do work only that they believe
them to be capable of doing. The onus therefore is as much on the supervising
department/consultant to reassure themselves of the trainee's abilities to do
the case or procedure as it does for the trainee to consult (e.g. by
departmental/consultant reviews of log books on rotation changes, etc.).

### Harm and causation

Establishing causation can be difficult, as it must be demonstrated that ‘but
for’ the doctor's action/inaction harm would not have occurred. Anaesthetists
rarely work alone and it can sometimes be difficult to establish where the
harm occurred in relation to an episode of medical care (e.g. paralysis after
aortic aneurysm repair may be caused by the surgery or the provision of
epidural analgesia). Unsurprisingly, claims for medical negligence most
frequently fail due to an inability to establish causation as there are often
a variety of possible explanations for the outcome. However, if it can be
shown that the breach materially contributed to the damage or it is more
likely that the damage was due to negligence than another cause that is
usually sufficient.

Sometimes, in the absence of any other reasonable explanation for a
phenomenon, the principle of ‘res ipsa loquitur’ (literally ‘the thing speaks
for itself’) applies (e.g. the finding of a retained swab in the abdomen at
laparotomy can only be assumed to be due to its negligent loss during a
previous laparotomy). Such a situation would apply to procedures performed on
the wrong limb/side (e.g. brachial plexus block and if damage occurs from
that, then causation is assumed to be established unless the defendant can
show that there is another reasonable explanation).

## Criminal negligence

If negligence occurs as a result of carelessness, then where the carelessness
has been so severe that it is judged to be ‘gross’, the doctor may be subject
to a charge of criminal negligence. Although the requirement to prove criminal
negligence is a much higher one (i.e. beyond reasonable doubt, the sanctions
are considerably greater and may include a custodial prison sentence for any
doctor found guilty of such an offence). A doctor found guilty of criminal
negligence is also likely to be subject to fitness to practice procedures by
the General Medical Council.

Prosecutions for criminal negligence are rare, but the number of occasions
when doctors are investigated by the police for a potential linkage to a
charge of manslaughter after a serious untoward event are increasing. Conduct
which goes beyond the level of civil negligence almost invariably involves the
death of the patient but there are difficulties in establishing what actions
constitute this. Extreme subjective recklessness such as indifference to an
obvious risk to the patient or objective evidence of incompetence or ignorance
may all satisfy the requirement. It is also of concern that recent
prosecutions have generally been of doctors in training, where it is perhaps
easier to establish a sufficient degree of incompetence. Ultimately, the
decision rests with a jury as to whether a doctor's action/inaction was so bad
that it amounted to a crime. _R v Adomako_ concerned an anaesthetist who had
failed to notice his patient was disconnected from the ventilator whilst the
patient was undergoing an eye operation. The patient suffered a fatal cardiac
arrest and the anaesthetist was convicted of manslaughter. It is not clear
whether Dr Adomako was not in the theatre and had failed to make adequate
arrangements to monitor the patient in his absence or had been present and
grossly incompetent in delivering the anaesthetic and failing to notice the
disconnection as the cause of the patient's deterioration. However, the House
of Lords considered that either action was sufficient to uphold a conviction
as consistent with a consideration that ‘the extent to which the defendant's
conduct departed from the proper standard of care incumbent upon him,
involving as it must have done a risk of death to the patient, was such that
it should be judged criminal’.10 It is sobering to consider that anaesthesia—a
specialty associated with a significant risk of death from inadequate
actions—could meet such considerations of negligence in the way that other
specialties may not.

## Liability for negligence

The civil procedure rules in England and Wales allow for claims for medical
negligence to be started within 3 years of the alleged negligence occurring or
within 3 years of the victim becoming aware of possible negligence. This is of
relevance to minors where the 3 years starts when the minor reaches the age of
maturity (i.e. 18 years of age). Anaesthetists employed by the NHS and acting
within the scope of their employment will be indemnified by the CNST. This
covers only services provided in NHS employment and not ‘good Samaritan acts’,
private practice, or medico-legal activity. Medical defence organizations will
provide cover for these activities and also where appropriate for other
independent practice activties (e.g. medical report writing). It is recognized
that the deterrent effect on individual doctors of civil negligence claims is
weak, although the process is stressful for the individuals involved and time
consuming. In 2001, the National Audit Office identified that the average
clinical negligence case took 5½ years from inception to conclusion and that
22% of outstanding cases related to events over 10 years previously.11
Unsurprisingly the importance of comprehensive, contemporaneous anaesthetic
records is paramount in being able to defend any claim. It is also noteworthy
that in the Chief Medical Officer's 2003 consultation paper, ‘Making Amends’,
many victims of iatrogenic injury desire explanation, apology, and evidence of
learning from any mistakes as major outcomes and they are not content with
mere financial compensation.

## Conclusions

Medical negligence is a three-part test whereby a duty of professional care is
owed to a patient and as a consequence of a breach of that duty, the patient
suffers harm. All parts of the test must be satisfied.

Civil considerations of negligence require doctors to act to an appropriate
standard usually but not exclusively judged by the standard of their peers,
whereas for criminal negligence the standard of practice has to result in
serious harm from actions that could be considered to be incompetent or
grossly negligent. Due to the greater availability of practice guidelines to
guide the courts, doctors should always consider the implications and
justification for deviations from accepted practices should the patient suffer
harm, and doctors in training should be aware that they are expected to seek
advice and assistance where they lack experience in order to preserve public
safety. Adequacy of note keeping to help defend any claims is vital.

## Conflict of interest

None declared.

## References

1

Donaldson

L

.

,

Making amends: a consultation paper setting out proposals for reforming the
approach to clinical negligence in the NHS

,

2003

London

Department of Health

June

2

NHS Litigation Authority

Available from http://www.nhsla.com/Claims/ (accessed 11 March 2010)

3

_Donoghue v Stevenson_ 1932 AC 562

4

Clinical Negligence Scheme for Trusts (CNST)

Available from http://www.nhsla.com/Claims/Schemes/CNST/ (accessed 7 June
2010)

5

_Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee_ 1957 1 WLR 582

6

_Hucks v Cole_. 1968. The Times, 9 May, CA

7

_Bolitho v City and Hackney_ HA 1997 4 All ER 771, HL

8

,

1953

_Crawford v Board of Governors of Charing Cross Hospital_. The Times, 8
December

9

_Nettleship v Weston_ 1971 3 All ER 581

10

_R v Adomako_ 1995 1 AC 171 per Lord Mackay at 187

11

Handling Clinical Negligence Claims in England

,

2001

National Audit Office

3 May

© The Author [2011]. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Journal of Anaesthesia. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com

Subject

Recovery and Post Op Management

Issue Section:

Articles

Download all figures

    
        * About BJA Education
    

![Royal College of Anaesthetists](//oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/data/SiteBuilderAssets/Live/Images/bjaed/bjaed_f1-1809848475.svg)
![College of Anaesthetists of Ireland](//oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/data/SiteBuilderAssets/Live/Images/bjaed/bjaed_f2-2133274133.svg)
![Hong Kong College of Anaesthesiologists](//oup.silverchair-

cdn.com/data/SiteBuilderAssets/Live/Images/bjaed/bjaed_f31302405637.png)

    
        * Online ISSN 2058-5357
    * Print ISSN 2058-5349
    * Copyright (C) 2019 The British Journal of Anaesthesia Ltd
    
    * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Careers
    * Help
    * Access & Purchase
    * Rights & Permissions
    * Open Access
    

#### Connect

    
        * Join Our Mailing List
    * OUPblog
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * YouTube
    * Tumblr
    

#### Resources

    
        * Authors
    * Librarians
    * Societies
    * Sponsors & Advertisers
    * Press & Media
    * Agents
    

#### Explore

    
        * Shop OUP Academic
    * Oxford Dictionaries
    * Oxford Index
    * Epigeum
    * OUP Worldwide
    * University of Oxford
    

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It
furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide

![Oxford University Press](//oup.silverchair-cdn.com/UI/app/svg/umbrella/oup-

logo.svg)

    
        * Copyright (C) 2019 Oxford University Press
    * Cookie Policy
    * Privacy Policy
    * Legal Notice
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    * Get Adobe Reader
    

__Close

##### This Feature Is Available To Subscribers Only

Sign In or Create an Account

__Close

This PDF is available to Subscribers Only

View Article Abstract & Purchase Options

For full access to this pdf, sign in to an existing account, or purchase an
annual subscription.

__Close

![Scholarly IQ](//ouptag.scholarlyiq.com/ntpagetag.gif?js=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland

