

Skip to content

**open-menu**

![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/white-

house-logo-sm-wh.png) ![](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/white-house-logo-sm-bl.png) White House
Logo

**copy-url-to-your-clipboard** Share

    
        * Economy
    * National Security
    * Budget
    * Immigration
    * The Opioid Crisis
    

Search WhiteHouse.gov **open-search**

Healthcare

# Americans are Suffering Under Obamacare, Hear Their Stories

March 13, 2017

4 minute read

    
        * Share: 
    * **share-this-page-on-facebook**
    * **share-this-page-on-twitter**
    * **copy-url-to-your-clipboard**
    

![menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/menu-large.svg) All News

On Monday, President Donald J. Trump held a listening session at the White
House to hear directly from Americans that have experienced significant
hardship as a result of Obamacare’s poor coverage and rising prices.  
President Trump wants to hear from you, too. Share your Obamacare disaster
story with the President here.

Play

33:26

President Trump Leads a Listening Session on Healthcare

President Trump Leads a Listening Session on Healthcare

The individuals in attendance included:

**Ms. Kim Sertich of Arizona,** whose health insurance has been cancelled
three times since Obamacare became law. The plans now available to her have
limited networks and high deductibles. Even worse, she will only have one
insurer to choose from in 2017.

**Mrs. Carrie Couey of Colorado,** a mother of six from a cattle ranching
family whose youngest son is autistic. The pre-Obamacare cost for her family’s
insurance was $17,000 per year. After Obamacare became law, her insurance
costs skyrocketed to $52,500 per year for a lower quality plan. Additionally,
the cost for workers’ compensation insurance for her business’s employees
increased from approximately $17,000 per year to more than $70,000 per year.

**Mr. Elias Seife of Florida,** who has had to change his and his wife’s
health insurance every year for the past few years because his premiums have
increased 30-40 percent annually, and the deductibles are even worse than the
premiums. Mr. Seife said that the middle class has been particularly hard-hit
by Obamacare.

**Ms. Brittany Ivey of Georgia,** a working mother whose family has struggled
under Obamacare. Ms. Ivey was working part-time at a small business that
provided her family with health insurance until Obamacare raised her premiums
sharply. This drove the Ivey family into the individual market, where a mid-
level plan cost 65 percent of her monthly gross income, even accounting for a
federal subsidy.

**Mr. Greg Knox of Ohio,** the owner of Knox Machinery and Chairman of the
Dayton Region Manufacturers Association, which have both been significantly
affected by Obamacare’s rising prices. Mr. Knox expressed optimism that
President Trump will return free market principles to our Nation’s health care
system, which will benefit consumers by increasing options and lowering costs.

**Mr. Joel Brown of Tennessee,** a farmer whose costs for catastrophic
coverage has spiked in the wake of Obamacare, from $119 per month to more than
$500 per month. As a result, Mr. Brown was forced to settle for a much less
desirable plan provided through his church, which cost him $280 per month.

**Dr. Manny Sethi of Tennessee,** founder of Healthy Tennessee, a non-profit
organization designed to promote preventative healthcare and has seen first-
hand Obamacare’s negative effects on the medical profession. As an orthopedic
trauma surgeon and Assistant Professor at Vanderbilt University, Dr. Sethi is
well aware of how Obamacare has harmed patient care across the country.

**Dr. Robin Armstrong of Texas,** a medical doctor whose wife is a breast
cancer survivor. Dr. Armstrong strongly opposes Obamacare because its rising
premiums and deductibles have hurt his patients. Dr. Armstrong told the
President he is excited about the reforms in the American Health Care Act and
believes they will drastically improve the system.

**Hon. Stan Summers of Utah,** a local county commissioner whose family has
endured significant hardship as a result of Obamacare. Mr. Summers’ wife has
been very sick and his son has struggled with a rare disease. Their insurance
costs have skyrocketed as a result of Obamacare.

**Mr. Louis Brown of Virginia,** a 35-year-old attorney who currently works
for the Christ Medicus Foundation, a Catholic healthcare foundation. In 2009,
as Obamacare was moving through Congress, Mr. Brown was a staffer at the
Democratic National Committee. He told President Trump that after much prayer
and soul searching, he resigned from the DNC because he could not support a
party that wanted to include taxpayer funding of abortion in Obamacare. Today,
Mr. Brown supports the reforms in the American Health Care Act.

**Ms. Gina Sell of Wisconsin,** a young nurse who has had to work much longer
hours to afford her increased health insurance premiums under Obamacare. In
fact, her premiums now cost her more than her mortgage.

After hearing these stories, President Trump, Vice President Mike Pence, and
Secretary of Health and Human Services Tom Price each committed to fighting
for reforms that will bring costs down and increase access to care for all
Americans.

![White House Logo](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/white-house-logo-footer-sm.png)

The White House

* * *

* * *
    
        * Live
    * Jobs
    * Get Involved
    * Copyright Policy
    * Privacy Policy
    
    * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Instagram
    * Contact
    

![Close Menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/close.svg) ![Open

Menu](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/hamburger.svg) ![Close

Search](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/close.svg) ![Open

Search](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/search.svg)

    
        * News
      * Remarks
      * Briefings & Statements
      * Presidential Actions
      * Articles
      * All News
    * Issues
      * Education
      * National Security & Defense
      * Budget & Spending
      * Immigration
      * Healthcare
      * All Issues
    * The Administration
      * President Donald J. Trump
      * Vice President Michael R. Pence
      * First Lady Melania Trump
      * Mrs. Karen Pence
      * The Cabinet
      * Disclosures
    * Executive Offices
      * Council of Economic Advisers
      * Council on Environmental Quality
      * National Security Council
      * Office of Management and Budget
      * Office of National Drug Control Policy
      * Office of Science and Technology Policy
    * About The White House
      * Tours & Events
      * Past Presidents
      * Past First Ladies
      * The Grounds
      * Our Government
    * Get Involved
      * Write or Call the White House
      * White House Internship Program
      * White House Fellows
    * Contact
    * Live
    

![Presidential Crest](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-

content/themes/whitehouse/assets/img/presidential-crest-gray.svg)

Type Your Search Press enter to search

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

