
    
        * Skip to content The Atlantic
    * Popular
    * Latest
    * Sections
    

**Sections**

    
          * Politics
      * Culture
      * Technology
      * Ideas
      * Science
      * Books
      * Family
      * Business
      * Global
      * Health
      * Education
      * Letters
      * The Masthead
      * Our Towns
      * Photo
      * Podcasts
      * The Atlantic Crossword
      * Video
      * Events
      * Writers
      * Projects
    
    * Magazine
    

**Magazine**

    
          * Current issue 
      * All issues 
      * Manage subscription 
      * Give a Gift 
      * Subscribe
    
    * More Categories
    

**More**

    
          * Create account Your account
      * Sign in Sign out
      * Newsletters
      * The Atlantic Crossword
      * iOS App
      * Life Timeline
      * Events
      * Books
      * Shop
      * Help Center
    

View all

    
        * Subscribe
    * Search
    

**Search** **Quick Links**

    
          * Dear Therapist 
      * Crossword Puzzle 
      * Manage Subscription
    

Search The Atlantic

**Quick Links**

    
          * Dear Therapist 
      * Crossword Puzzle 
      * Manage Subscription
    

Health

# How Cubans Live as Long as Americans at a Tenth of the Cost

Lessons of physical prosperity in a despotic regime

James Hamblin Nov 29, 2016

![](https://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/mt/2016/11/RTR3K03X/lead_720_405.jpg?mod=1533691860)A
kindergarten student in Havana poses in a doctor costumeEnrique De La
Osa/Reuters

On public-access TV in 1985, Bernie Sanders defended an element of Fidel
Castro’s regime: It was rarely mentioned that Castro provided health care to
his country. Sanders grumbled that the same could not be said of then-
President Reagan.

The comment came back to haunt Sanders in the wake of Castro’s death. On
Sunday on ABC’s _This Week_ , host Martha Raddatz played the old clip and then
asked Sanders if he was aware that “this was a brutal dictatorship despite the
romanticized version that some Americans have of Cuba.” She reminded Sanders
that Castro rationed food and punished dissidents, then hit him with the big
question: “So have you changed your view of Castro since 1985?”

Sanders said he didn’t exactly remember the context for his comment (being 31
years ago) but that Cubans “do have a decent health-care system.”

Many consider it more than decent. After a visit to Havana in 2014, the
director-general of the World Health Organization Margaret Chan called for
other countries to follow Cuba’s example in health care. Years before, the
World Health Organization’s ranking of countries with “the fairest mechanism
for health-system finance” put Cuba first among Latin American and Caribbean
countries (and far ahead of the United States).

Cuba has long had a nearly identical life expectancy to the United States,
despite widespread poverty. The humanitarian-physician Paul Farmer notes in
his book _Pathologies of Power_ that there’s a saying in Cuba: “We live like
poor people, but we die like rich people.” Farmer also notes that the rate of
infant mortality in Cuba has been lower than in the Boston neighborhood of his
own prestigious hospital, Harvard’s Brigham and Women’s.

All of this despite Cuba spending just $813 per person annually on health care
compared with America’s $9,403.

In Cuba, health care is protected under the constitution as a fundamental
human right. As a poor country, Cuba can’t afford to equivocate and waste
money upholding that. This pressure seems to have created efficiency. Instead
of pouring money into advanced medical technology, the system is forced to
keep people healthy.

It’s largely done, as the BBC has reported, through an innovative approach to
primary care. Family doctors work in clinics and care for everyone in the
surrounding neighborhood. At least once a year, the doctor knocks on your
front door (or elsewhere, if you prefer) for a check-up. More than the
standard American ritual of listening to your heart and lungs and asking if
you’ve noticed any blood coming out of you abnormally, these check-ups involve
extensive questions about jobs and social lives and environment—information
that’s aided by being right there in a person’s home.

Then the doctors put patients into risk categories and determine how often
they need to be seen in the future. Unlike the often fragmented U.S. system
where people bounce around between specialists and hospitals, Cuba fosters a
holistic approach centered around on a relationship with a primary-care
physician. Taxpayer investment in education about smoking, eating, and
exercising comes directly from these family doctors—who people trust, and who
can tailor recommendations.

The system requires around twice as many primary-care doctors per capita as we
have in the U.S., made possible because the country also invested in medical
education, creating in 1998 what U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called
“the world’s most advanced medical school.” Cuba has become known for training
not just domestic doctors, but those from around the world—and sending its
doctors to help other, wealthier countries when needed. During the recent
Ebola crisis in Sierra Leone, more than 100 Cuban doctors and nurses were at
the front lines.

Castro justified sending so much support with a brutally holistic
understanding of disease as a global phenomenon. He wrote at the time: “By
completing this task with maximum planning and efficiency, our people and
sister peoples of the Caribbean and Latin America will be protected,
preventing expansion of the epidemic, which has unfortunately already been
introduced, and could spread, in the United States, which maintains many
personal ties and interactions with the rest of the world.”

That spirit also underlies Cuba’s vaccination program, implemented in 1962,
which has left the country with some of the world’s lowest rates of vaccine-
preventable infectious disease.

The much wealthier U.S. also has vaccines and primary-care check-ups, of
course. The key difference is that in Cuba, these things are mandatory.
They’re seen as akin to doing routine maintenance on a car to keep the
warranty valid. If the system is going to take care of people in dire
situations, people must also let the system take care of them before those
dire situations occur.

This is the opposite of the U.S., where people demand the former but forego
the latter. There are costly barriers to primary care and preventive medicine,
but showing up at an emergency room is easy.

While Cuba’s situation is far from ideal, it serves as an elegant counterpoint
to the three-trillion-dollar U.S. health-care system—which is controlled by
corporations (privatized insurance, pharmaceutical, medical-device, and
hospital systems) that drive people to pay exorbitant costs (either directly
or through taxes). Cuba offers a dire reminder that efficient health care can
be provided at much less cost to the people—when the focus is on primary care
and prevention.

As Salim Lamrani of Paris-Sorbonne University put it, excellent health care
can exist in the absence of wealth “if political will exists to put human
beings at the center of the project.”

In that light, Sanders’s comments were valid, then and now. After defending
Cuban health care on the ABC show on Sunday, he continued, “the Cuban economy
is a disaster.” And then, unequivocally, he added: “No, I do not praise Fidel
Castro.”

This exchange highlighted a fundamental barrier to progress in health care. Do
_you_ praise Fidel Castro? If you had to answer yes or no, the answer is no.
But good and bad co-exist here, as everywhere. The first step is overcoming
the human tendency toward ‘all-good’-or-‘all-bad’ dualism. It can be true that
Castro did horrible things, and that Cuba’s health-care system is lacking in
many ways, and also that there’s much to learn from it.

We want to hear what you think about this article. Submit a letter to the
editor or write to letters@theatlantic.com.

![](https://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/None/Jim_headshot_black_and_white2/200.jpg?mod=1522336479)

James Hamblin, MD, is a staff writer at _The Atlantic_. He hosts the video
series _If Our Bodies Could Talk_ and is the author of a book by the same
title. | More

Facebook Twitter Email

    
        * About
    
      * Our History
      * Staff
      * Careers
      * Shop
    
    * Contact
    
      * Help Center
      * Contact Us
      * Send a News Tip
      * Advertise
      * Press
    
    * Podcasts
    
      * Radio Atlantic
      * Crazy/Genius
      * The Atlantic Interview
      * Audio Articles
    
    * Subscription
    
      * Purchase
      * Give a Gift
      * Manage Subscription
      * Download iOS App
      * Newsletters
    
    * Follow
    
      *       *       *       *       *       *       *     * Privacy Policy
    * Advertising Guidelines
    * Terms Conditions
    * Responsible Disclosure
    * U.S. Edition
    * World Edition
    * Site Map
    

TheAtlantic.com Copyright (c) 2019 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights
Reserved.

The Atlantic

![](https://atlanticmedia.122.2o7.net/b/ss/atlanticprod/1/H.22--NS/0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

