

Free Case Evaluation

    
        * __No Cost to You Until We Win Your Case
    * __Over 40 years Experience
    * __Advertisement
    * __Hablamos Español
    
    * Rancho Mirage
    * Yucca Valley
    * Victorville
    * El Centro
    
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * ![](https://walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/avvo.png)
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/themes/walter-

clark/images/logo.png)

    
        * ![en](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/plugins/sitepress-multilingual-cms/res/flags/en.png)  English
    * ![es](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/plugins/sitepress-multilingual-cms/res/flags/es.png) Español
    

FREE CONSULTATION **760-777-7777**

    
        * Home
    * Our Firm
      * Walter T. Clark
      * Jessica A. Albert
      * David Vassalli
      * Scott Saunders
      * Matthew Baran
      * Our Team
      * Case Results
      * News
      * Walter T. Clark in the Community
      * Desert Gems
      * Scholarships
      * Careers
    * Legal Services
      * Auto Accident
      * Truck Accident
      * Motorcycle Accident
      * Slip And Fall
      * Drug Injury
      * Wrongful Death
      * Defective Product
      * Dog Attack
      * Social Security Disability
      * Veterans Disability Benefits
      * Legionnaires’ Disease FAQs
    * Blog
    * Legal Resources
      * Case Results
    * Videos
    * Testimonials
    * Contact Us
      * Free Case Evaluation
      * How Was Your Experience? Leave A Client Testimonial
      * Communities We Serve
        * Cathedral City
        * Coachella Valley
        * Indian Wells
        * Indio
        * La Quinta
        * Morongo Basin
        * Palm Desert
        * Palm Springs
        * Victor Valley
    
    * Home
    * Our Firm
      * Walter T. Clark
      * Jessica A. Albert
      * David Vassalli
      * Scott Saunders
      * Matthew Baran
      * Our Team
      * Case Results
      * News
      * Walter T. Clark in the Community
      * Desert Gems
      * Scholarships
      * Careers
    * Legal Services
      * Auto Accident
      * Truck Accident
      * Motorcycle Accident
      * Slip And Fall
      * Drug Injury
      * Wrongful Death
      * Defective Product
      * Dog Attack
      * Social Security Disability
      * Veterans Disability Benefits
      * Legionnaires’ Disease FAQs
    * Blog
    * Legal Resources
      * Case Results
    * Videos
    * Testimonials
    * Contact Us
      * Free Case Evaluation
      * How Was Your Experience? Leave A Client Testimonial
      * Communities We Serve
        * Cathedral City
        * Coachella Valley
        * Indian Wells
        * Indio
        * La Quinta
        * Morongo Basin
        * Palm Desert
        * Palm Springs
        * Victor Valley
    
    * ![en](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/plugins/sitepress-multilingual-cms/res/flags/en.png)  English
    * ![es](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/plugins/sitepress-multilingual-cms/res/flags/es.png) Español
    
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

FREE CONSULTATION 760-777-7777

# Are There Too Many Frivolous Lawsuits in the U.S.?

__Posted inBlog on January 4, 2019

![Are There Too Many Frivolous Lawsuits in the

U.S.?](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/claire-

anderson-60670-unsplash-1.jpg)

Have you heard the term “frivolous lawsuit” before? It sometimes comes up when
people discuss things like seemingly unnecessary warning labels on items—such
as “caution: hot coffee” on a coffee cup. You may roll your eyes and think,
“well, of course it’s hot. It’s coffee.” And you may wonder what would prompt
the company to print that label. Perhaps they have been sued before, or are
trying to prevent customers from suing them. And that may seem, on the
surface, to be a frivolous kind of lawsuit.

**But are frivolous lawsuits really rampant in the U.S., and are we truly an
overly litigious society?** In reality: no. Although insurance companies and
their lobbyists want to make it seem like Americans are recklessly litigious,
this is simply not the case. In fact, statistics actually show the
opposite—that this alleged explosion of frivolous lawsuits in America is just
a myth. According to the Rand Institute for Civil Justice, only 10% of
Americans who have been injured file a claim for compensation, and just 2%
file a lawsuit. And most of the time, these suits are settled outside of a
courtroom.

The reality is that many people who suffer injuries do not file lawsuits. They
may be intimidated by the potential cost of litigation, or the stigma that is
sometimes associated with personal injury cases. The injured person may also
be concerned that others will see the lawsuit as just an attempt to get money.

The National Center for State Courts (NCSC) analyzed civil lawsuit data for 26
states. The NCSC reported that tort cases—those involving an injured party
seeking damages from a negligent party—made up less than 3% of all civil cases
in 13 of those states, 3-5% of civil cases in 8 states, and 5-8.2% of civil
cases in 5 states. Moreover, product liability cases and medical malpractice
claims make up less than 1% of civil cases. The majority of civil caseload is
made up of contract and small claims cases. Overall, tort cases in the U.S.
are on the decline. In 13 states, tort filings decreased by 25% from 1999 to
2008.

## What About that Hot Coffee Lawsuit?

![hot coffee](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/adult-

beverage-coffee-999305.jpg)

The example at the beginning of this post is actually a real lawsuit that is
frequently cited by those claiming Americans file too many frivolous lawsuit.
But what actually happened in that case?

Stella Liebeck was 79 years old in 1992, when the incident occurred. She was a
passenger in a vehicle that was stopped in a McDonald’s parking lot in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. She had the cup of coffee between her legs as she was
adding cream and sugar to it. The cup then tipped over and spilled in her lap.
The coffee seared through her sweatpants and caused Liebeck to suffer third-
degree burns on her legs, which required skin grafts. The coffee was not just
hot—it was dangerously hot. Hot enough to cause the most serious type of burn.

At the time, McDonald’s had already received more than 700 reports of injuries
from its hot coffee and had already paid out several settlements. Liebeck
asked McDonald’s to settle the case for $20,000 to compensate her for medical
expenses and lost income. McDonald’s would not settle the claim for more than
$800, so the lawsuit proceeded to trial. The jury found Liebeck partially
responsible for her injuries, and the compensatory damages awarded were
adjusted accordingly. The award was eventually reduced by the judge, and
McDonald’s ultimately settled the claim with Liebeck confidentially to avoid
an appeal.

The evidence that was presented during the trial revealed just how _not_
frivolous this lawsuit was. According to the findings, McDonald’s required its
franchises to keep coffee at 180 to 190 degrees Fahrenheit. Liquids kept at
that temperature can cause third-degree burns in as quickly as three seconds.
Expert witnesses testified that the risk of harm presented by serving coffee
at this temperature was unacceptable. McDonald’s also admitted to being aware
of the risk of its hot coffee for more than a decade. However, the company’s
expert witness stated that the number of burns that actually occurred was
insignificant in the context of the billions of cups of coffee served each
year.

## What’s the Verdict on Frivolous Lawsuits?

Real data regarding litigation in the U.S. reveals that the idea that
Americans are prone to frivolous lawsuits is largely a myth. Most personal
injury lawsuits are legitimate claims for compensation due to injury and loss
caused by negligence. Moreover, the ability to file these types of claims is
crucial to maintaining justice and accountability in our society.

“Insurance companies promote myths about frivolous lawsuits because it serves
their agenda. Don’t be ashamed to stand up for your rights if you have been
injured. Sometimes a lawsuit is necessary to get the compensation you
deserve,” said Attorney Walter Clark, founder of Walter Clark Legal Group.

##### Check out this video on the myth of frivolous lawsuits provided by the

Trial Lawyers Association of Metropolitan Washington D.C.:

Our firm has been handling personal injury cases throughout the California Low
Desert and High Desert communities for over 30 years. With a 95% success rate,
the California personal injury attorneys at **Walter Clark Legal Group** will
fight to hold those responsible for your loss accountable and win compensation
to cover medical bills, lost wages, and pain and suffering. **If you have been
injured** and want to discuss your legal options, contact us today at **(760)
777-7777** for a free consultation with an experienced personal injury lawyer.
We have offices in **Indio, Rancho Mirage, Victorville, El Centro, and Yucca
Valley** , and represent clients through the entire California Low Desert and
High Desert communities.

DISCLAIMER: The Walter Clark Legal Group blog is intended for general
information purposes only and is not intended as legal or medical advice.
References to laws are based on general legal practices and vary by location.
Information reported comes from secondary news sources. We do handle these
types of cases, but whether or not the individuals and/or loved ones involved
in these accidents choose to be represented by a law firm is a personal choice
we respect. Should you find any of the information incorrect, we welcome you
to contact us with corrections.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

#### You may also like:

    
        * 7 Tips to Prepare for an Independent Medical Examination
    * 2 Pedestrian Fatalities Happen Over the Weekend
    * Is the NHTSA Behind on Regulating?
    * Do You Have a California Premises Liability Case?
    * State Farm Sues Amazon Over Defective Vape Battery
    * Is Your Jogging Stroller Included in Recall?
    * 2 Riverside County Drowning Incidents this Week
    * Pregnant Woman Loses Baby in Drunken Hit-and-Run
    * Deadly Train Accident Kills Mother and 3-Year-Old
    * 7 Arrested in High Speed Pursuit After Rialto Drive-By Shooting
    

###### Recent Posts

    
        * Walter Clark Legal Group Sponsors LYFT Promo Code for Cinco De Mayo May 3, 2019
    * Walter Clark Legal Group Sponsors LYFT Promo Code for St. Patrick’s Day March 15, 2019
    * NTSB was Unable to Investigate Several Fatal Crashes During Government Shutdown February 4, 2019
    * A Look at Autonomous Vehicle Safety February 1, 2019
    * More than 40,000 Toyota Tacoma Trucks Recalled for Braking Defect February 1, 2019
    * Johnson & Johnson Settles Deceptive Marketing Claims for $120 Million February 1, 2019
    * Why Do Drivers Keep Rear-Ending Self-Driving Vehicles? February 1, 2019
    * 1 Killed in I-10 Crash East of Coachella January 30, 2019
    * Are Motorized Scooter Rentals a Threat to Public Safety? Class-Action Says Yes January 30, 2019
    * What Are Your Options if You Were Injured by a Takata Airbag? January 29, 2019
    

## Popular Tags

    
        * auto accident auto recall big rig crash Caltrans car accident defective product distracted driving driving under the influence drunk driver drunk driving drunk driving crash DUI fatal accident fatal big rig crash fatal crash fatal I-10 crash fatal motorcycle accident fatal pedestrian crash fatal rollover crash FDA head-on collision head-on crash hit-and-run suspect Johnson & Johnson lawsuit medical malpractice motorcycle accident motorcycle crash motorcyclist killed negligence NHTSA opioid epidemic Palm Springs crash pedestrian crash pedestrian injured pedestrian killed pedestrian safety personal injury case personal injury claim personal injury lawsuit personal injury settlement rollover crash slip and fall tractor-trailer crash truck accident Victorville crash
    

### Our Credentials

Walter Clark is board-certified as a Civil Trial Specialist by the State of
California and the National Board of Trial Advocacy. He also has the highest
rating offered by Martindale-Hubbell and is a member of the prestigious
American Board of Trial Advocates. Mr. Clark has an Avvo rating of 10.0 and is
a member of the Million Dollar Advocates Forum.

    
        * ![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/credentials1.jpg)
    * ![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/credentials2.jpg)
    * ![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/credentials3.jpg)
    * ![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/credentials4.jpg)
    * ![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/credentials5.jpg)
    

### Have you read our latest NEWSLETTER?

![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/read-more.png)
![]()

### Sign up for Walter Clark Newsletter

Subscribe

### Have you read our latest NEWSLETTER?

![](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/read-more.png)
![]()

### Sign up for Walter Clark Newsletter

Subscribe

### Our Offices

    
        * **__Rancho Mirage (Main office)**
    

71861 Highway 111  
Rancho Mirage, CA 92270

**__Phone: (760) 862-9254**

    
        * **__Yucca Valley**
    

7328 Valley Vista Ave.  
Yucca Valley CA 92284

**__Phone: (760) 366-2486**

    
        * **__Victorville**
    

12138 Industrial Boulevard, Suite 100  
Victorville, CA 92392

**__Phone: (760) 862-9254**

    
        * **__El Centro**
    

1503 N Imperial Ave #202  
El Centro, CA 92243

**__(760) 777-7777**

### Communities We Serve

Walter Clark Legal Group helps injured people and their families in the
Southern California desert communities of:

    
        * Cathedral City 
    * Coachella Valley 
    * Indian Wells 
    * Indio 
    * La Quinta 
    * Morongo Basin
    
    * Palm Desert
    * Palm Springs
    * Rancho Mirage
    * Victor Valley
    * Victorville
    * Yucca Valley
    

### Contact Us

![](data:image/jpeg;base64,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)
Can't read the image? click here to refresh.

© 2019 Walter Clark Legal Group. All Rights Reserved. SitemapPrivacy Policy
Disclaimers

![Designed by Isning Gamez](https://www.walterclark.com/wp-

content/themes/walter-clark/images/designed-by-isning-gamez.png)

**Walter Clark**

Walter Clark Legal Group

Personal Injury Attorney

Our firm has been handling a variety of personal injury cases throughout the
California High Desert communities for over 30 years. Here you will find a
personal injury attorney who can help protect your rights and obtain
compensation for your injuries.

72-098 Highway 111

Rancho Mirage, California

92270

United States

WClark@walterclark.com

760-862-9254

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=244875956353889&ev=PageView

&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

