

![Listen to this

article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Sound-

icon.svg/20px-Sound-icon.svg.png)

# Immigration to Japan

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

According to the Japanese Ministry of Justice, the number of foreign residents
in Japan has steadily increased in the post Second World War period, and the
number of foreign residents (excluding illegal immigrants and short-term
foreign visitors and tourists staying less than 90 days in Japan) was more
than 2.23 million at the end of 2015.[1] With an estimated population of
127.11 million in 2015,[2] the resident foreign population in Japan amounts to
approximately 1.75% of the total population.

## Contents

    
        * 1 History
    * 2 Current immigration statistics
    * 3 Immigration to Japan by resident status
      * 3.1 Special Permanent Resident
      * 3.2 Permanent Resident
      * 3.3 Immigration through marriage
      * 3.4 Long term residents on limited duration employment or student visas
    * 4 Refugees and asylum seekers
      * 4.1 Closure of asylum application legal loophole
    * 5 Illegal immigration
    * 6 Immigrant integration into Japanese society
      * 6.1 Naturalisation
      * 6.2 Ethnicity and nationality
      * 6.3 Public opinion towards immigration
    * 7 See also
    * 8 References
    * 9 External links
    

## History[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Foreigners_in_Japan%2C_dec_2017.png/320px-

Foreigners_in_Japan%2C_dec_2017.png)

Foreigners in Japan as of the end of 2017, by country.

Due to geographic remoteness and periods of self-imposed isolation, the
immigration, cultural assimilation and integration of foreign nationals into
mainstream Japanese society has been comparatively limited. Historian Yukiko
Koshiro has identified three historically significant waves of immigration
prior to 1945; the 8th-century settlement of Korean artists and intellectuals;
the asylum offered to a small number of Chinese families in the 1600s; and the
forced immigration of up to 670,000[3] Korean and Chinese laborers during the
Second World War.[4]

After 1945, unlike the Gastarbeiter immigration encouraged in advanced
industrial economies such as Germany, Japan was for the greater part able to
rely on internal pools of rural labour to satisfy the manpower needs of
industry. The demands of small business owners and demographic shifts in the
late 1980s however gave rise for a limited period to a wave of tacitly
accepted illegal immigration from countries as diverse as the Philippines and
Iran.[5]

Production offshoring in the 1980s also enabled Japanese firms in some labour-
intensive industries such as electronic goods manufacture and vehicle assembly
to reduce their dependence on imported labour. In 1990, new government
legislation provided South Americans of Japanese ancestry such as Japanese
Brazilians and Japanese Peruvians with preferential working visa immigration
status. By 1998, there were 222,217 Brazilian nationals registered as resident
in Japan with additional smaller groups from Peru and Argentina. In 2009, with
economic conditions less favorable, this trend was reversed as the Japanese
government introduced a new programme that would incentivise Brazilian and
other Latin American immigrants to return home with a stipend of $3000 for
airfare and $2000 for each dependent.[6]

As of the second half of 2015, with an increasingly elderly Japanese
population and lack of manpower in key sectors such as construction, IT
services and health care, Japanese politicians are again debating the need to
expand temporary foreign labour pools, through the use of short-term trainee
programs.[7]

## Current immigration statistics[edit]

See also: Demography of Japan § Foreign residents

Resident foreign nationals in Japan that are counted in immigration statistics
of permanent residents and mid-long term residents (granted resident visas for
12 months or more) include individuals and their registered dependents with:

    
        * Special permanent resident status
    * Permanent Resident status
    * Status of Residence based on Status or Position (Descendants of Japanese nationals)
    * Individuals living in the country as registered spouses of Japanese nationals
    * Individuals granted limited duration employment visas
    * Individuals granted limited duration student or academic research visas
    * Individuals on limited duration Technical Intern Training Program visas
    * Registered refugee and asylum seekers
    

From 2013 published government reports, the proportion of foreign residents
granted permanent resident status in Japan exceeded 30%. Although, if foreign
residents granted special permanent resident status, spouses of Japanese
nationals, fixed domicile residents (those of Japanese ancestry) and ethnic
Koreans with residence in Japan are included, the number of resident
foreigners granted permanent residence effectively exceeds 60%.[8]

## Immigration to Japan by resident status[edit]

### Special Permanent Resident[edit]

Main article: Special Permanent Resident (Japan)

The published statistics on foreign nationals resident in Japan includes
zainichi Koreans with _tokubetsu eijusha_ Special permanent resident status,
of whom there were 354,503 (of a total of 358,409 of all nationalities with
such visas).[9]

### Permanent Resident[edit]

Foreign nationals already long term residents in Japan under another visa
category such as a working visa or as the spouse of a Japanese national are
eligible to apply for permanent residence status. The granting of permanent
residence status is at the discretion of the Immigration Bureau and dependent
on satisfaction of a number of detailed criteria such as length of stay,
ability to make an independent living, record of tax payments and documented
contributions to Japan in terms of public service or professional
activities.[10]

### Immigration through marriage[edit]

International marriage migration used to represent as much as 25% of permanent
migration flows to Japan, but this trend has been in decline since a peak in
2006. In the 1980s increasing numbers of Japanese men were registering
marriages in Japan to women from China, Korea and the Philippines.[11]

In 2006, according to data released by the Japanese Ministry of Health,
Labour, and Welfare, 44,701 marriages, or 6.11% of all marriages registered in
Japan were to a foreign national. In 2013, this number had fallen to 21,488
marriages or 3.25% of all marriages registered in Japan.[12] Of the 21,488
international marriages registered in Japan in 2013, 15,442 or 71.77% were
marriages involving a foreign bride, compared to 6,046 or 28.23% where the
groom was non-Japanese.

Japan registered marriage statistics alone may not present a comprehensive
picture of the numbers of international marriages in Japan as marriages
registered overseas may also contribute to total immigrant spouse numbers.
Once married, foreign spouses may also, if certain criteria are satisfied,
change their visa status to Permanent Resident or other visa categories. 2012
Ministry of Justice data indicates that of all foreigners in Japan, 7.5% are
resident in Japan under a visa designation as a spouse of a Japanese
national.[13]

### Long term residents on limited duration employment or student visas[edit]

At in the end of December 2014 there were 2,121,831 foreigners residing in
Japan. Of this number 677,019 (32%) were considered long-term, but non
permanent residents; those granted visas for a duration of 12 months or more.
The majority of long-term residents in Japan on limited duration work or study
visas were from Asia, totalling 478,953. Chinese made up the largest portion
of this group with 215,155, followed by Filipinos with 115,857, and Koreans
with 65,711. Thai, Vietnamese, and Taiwanese long-term residents totaled
47,956, and those from other Asian countries totaled 34,274. Individuals on
limited duration Technical Intern Training Program visas account for nearly
200,000 of the number of long-term residents in any given year.

## Refugees and asylum seekers[edit]

Japan is a signatory to the UN 1951 Refugee Convention as well as the 1967
Protocol. The country therefore has made a commitment to offer protection to
people who seek asylum and fall into the legal definition of a refugee, and
moreover, not to return any displaced person to places where they would
otherwise face persecution.

Japan has historically been one of the world's most generous donors to refugee
relief and resettlement programs overseas.[14] In 2014 it was the world's 2nd
largest financial contributor to UNHCR programs.[15] Japanese diplomat Sadako
Ogata served as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from
1991-2000.

As of December 2015 Japan had 13,831 asylum applications under review.[16] In
2016, more than 10,000 applications for refugee status in Japan were received
and in the same year 28 asylum applications were approved.[17] In 2015, more
than 7,500 people applied for refugee status and 27 asylum applications were
approved. In 2014, more than 5000 applications were made and 11 applications
were approved.[18] Recent low approval rates for asylum applications follow
historic trends; in a 22-year period from 1982 to 2004, a total of 330
applications for asylum were approved, an average of 15 per year.[19]

Overview of Asylum Applications in Japan 2012 - 2018[17][20][21][22] Year |
Total number of asylum applications received | Total number of asylum
applications approved  
---|---|---  
2012 | 2,545 | 18  
2013 | 3,260 | 6  
2014 | 5,000 | 11  
2015 | 7,686 | 27  
2016 | 10,901 | 28  
2017 | 19,628 | 20  
2018 | 10,493 | 42

Whereas in Germany and Canada around 40% of asylum applications are approved,
in Japan the number averages 0.2 per cent.[23] On occasion, where Japan has
stopped short of granting official refugee status, a limited number of
applicants have been granted permission to stay on humanitarian grounds.[24]
In 2016, 97 refugee applicants were granted permission to stay on this basis.
Decisions on refugee status in Japan are often slow, and confirmation of
deportation orders are not widely published. Resubmission of asylum claims by
previously unsuccessful applicants often occurs.[25]

### Closure of asylum application legal loophole[edit]

Between 2010 and January 2018, a rise in the number of asylum seekers in Japan
was attributed in part to a legal loophole related to the government
administered Technical Intern Training Program.[26] In 2015, 192,655
vocational trainees mainly from developing economies were working in Japan in
factories, construction sites, farms, food processing and in retail. Although
total numbers are small, following a change in rules in 2010, asylum
applications jumped four-fold, fueled by asylum seekers from Nepal, Turkey and
Sri Lanka.[27] Rising numbers of vocational trainees reportedly made formal
asylum applications in order to change employers and escape reported
employment abuses and low pay.[28] The government-backed vocational program
allows trainees to work on either one or three year contracts. Although the
chances of refugee status been granted in Japan are exceptionally small,
asylum applicants were permitted to get a job six months after applying for
refugee status and, significantly, to make their own choice of employer.

Permits enabling legal employment six months after application for refugee
status were discontinued by the Justice Ministry in January 2018. Workplace
inspections and illegal immigration deportation enforcement activities were
subsequently stepped up aimed at curbing alleged abuse of the refugee
application system.[29]

## Illegal immigration[edit]

According to Ministry of Justice (MOJ) estimates, the number of foreign
nationals staying illegally in Japan beyond their authorized period of stay
dropped to approximately 60,000 as of January 1, 2015.[30] Illegal immigrant
numbers had peaked at approximately 300,000 in May 1993, but have been
gradually reduced through both stricter enforcement of border controls,
workplace monitoring and an expansion of government run foreign worker
programs for those seeking a legal route to short term employment
opportunities in Japan.

Border controls at ports of entry for foreign nationals include examination of
personal identification documentation, finger printing and photo recording.
Security at both air and maritime ports is closely controlled. As a result,
according to MOJ data, the single largest source of illegal immigrants in
Japan are those foreign nationals found to have stayed illegally beyond the 90
day time period of the temporary visitor visa.

## Immigrant integration into Japanese society[edit]

See also: Cultural assimilation and Intercultural competence

### Naturalisation[edit]

In 2015 9,469 applications for Japanese citizenship were approved. The number
of foreign residents in Japan applying to naturalize and obtain Japanese
citizenship peaked in 2008 at more than 16,000, but declined to 12,442 in
2015. Processing of applications can take up to 18 months. Application
criteria are set deliberately high and inspectors are granted a degree of
discretion in interpretation of eligibility and good conduct criteria.[31]

Most of the decline in applications is accounted for by a steep reduction in
the number of Japan-born Koreans taking Japanese citizenship. Historically the
bulk of those taking Japanese citizenship have not been new immigrants but
rather Special Permanent Residents; Japan-born descendants of Koreans and
Taiwanese who remained in Japan at the end of the Second World War.

### Ethnicity and nationality[edit]

The concept of _minzoku_ (民族, "ethnic group") as represented in Japanese makes
no distinction between racial, ethnic, and national identities. Where the
census of the United Kingdom, for example, separates _ethnic or racial
background_ from nationality,[32] the Japanese Census and Statistics Bureau do
not distinguish between the two.[33]

The definition of ethnic and racial boundaries alongside national ones leads
many people to represent Japan as _tan’itsu minzoku kokka_ (単一民族国家, "an
ethnically homogeneous nation"), with an explicit purity of blood and
culture.[34] In 2005 Former Japanese Prime Minister Tarō Asō described Japan
as being a nation of "one race, one civilization, one language and one
culture"[35] and in 2012, this claim was repeated by former Governor of Tokyo
Shintaro Ishihara.[36]

The concept of a unified _minzoku_ retains a legal authority. A 1984 amendment
to the Japanese Nationality Act made citizenship jus sanguinis, tied to blood
rather than place of birth. [ _citation needed_ ]Japanese citizenship is
exclusive: those who naturalize must renounce their first nationality, and
those who are born Japanese but with a second citizenship must choose between
them by the time they are 20 years old.

### Public opinion towards immigration[edit]

A 1999 review article of opinion polls show attitudes broadly neutral and
actually less negative than other developed countries. In 1993 64% of
respondents supported allowing firms facing labor shortages to hire unskilled
foreign workers. [37] A 2017 poll by Gallup shows a similar attitude 30 years
later, with Japan middling among developed countries in terms of public
positivity towards immigration, ranking close to France, Belgium and Italy.
[38] One recent 2015 poll by the Asahi Shimbun found that 34% of its readers
opposed an expansion of immigration to maintain Japan's economic status in the
face of a shrinking and rapidly aging workforce, while 51% of its readers
supported increased immigration.[39] However, a large poll of 10,000 native
Japanese conducted later that year, between October and December 2015, found
more opposition to increasing foreign immigration.[40] Nearly half of Asahi
Shimbun's readers who responded to a 2016 poll said that immigrants should
respect Japanese culture and obey Japanese customs, while about one quarter
said that Japanese people should embrace diversity.[41] On the other hand, one
of the common arguments for restricting immigration is based on safeguarding
security, including public order, protecting welfare mechanisms, cultural
stability, or social trust. [42]

## See also[edit]

    
        * Japanese diaspora - Information on historical and current migration trends from Japan.
    

## References[edit]

    
        1. **^** Murai, Shusuke (11 March 2016). "Japan sees record high number of foreign residents: Justice Ministry". _The Japan Times_. Retrieved  28 August 2016.
    2. **^** See links to the Census and the monthly Population Estimate through the Japan Statistical Agency homepage.
    3. **^** "STATISTICS OF JAPANESE GENOCIDE AND MASS MURDER". Retrieved  15 February 2016.
    4. **^** Brody, Betsy (2002). _Opening the Door, Immigration, Ethnicity and Globalization in Japan_. New York: Routledge. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-415-93192-2.
    5. **^** Brody, Betsy (2002). _Opening the Door, Immigration, Ethnicity and Globalization in Japan_. New York: Routledge. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-415-93192-2.
    6. **^** Tabuchi, Hiroko (2009-04-23), "Japan Pays Foreign Workers to Go Home", _New York Times_ , retrieved 2009-08-18
    7. **^** Sekiguchi, Toko (14 April 2015). "Japan Skirts Immigration Debate by Offering 'Internships' to Foreigners". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
    8. **^** Kodama, Takashi (29 May 2015). "Japan's Immigration Problem" (PDF). _Daiwa_. Daiwa Institute of Research. p. 9. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
    9. **^** "統計表一覧 政府統計の総合窓口" [General counter of statistical tables list government statistics] (in Japanese). 2015-04-24. Retrieved  2015-12-26.
    10. **^** "Permission for Permanent Residence". _Immigration Bureau of Japan_. Retrieved  28 September 2016.
    11. **^** _International Migration Outlook 2012_. OECD Publishing. 2012. p. 190. ISBN 978-92-64-17723-9.
    12. **^** "A Look at International Marriage in Japan". Nippon Foundation. Nippon.com. 19 February 2015. Retrieved  26 September 2016.
    13. **^** "平成２３年末現在における外国人登録者統計について 法務省". Japan: Ministry of Justice. February 22, 2012.
    14. **^** Burke, Roland (28 September 2010). "Japan welcomes Burmese refugees". BBC News Online. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    15. **^** McCurry, Justin (9 September 2015). "Japan takes no Syrian refugees yet despite giving $200m to help fight Isis". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    16. **^** Townsend, Megan (15 August 2016). "Meet the asylum seekers who are building Japan's roads, despite being banned from working". The Independent. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Japan grants refugee status to 28 out of over 10,000 applicants". The Mainichi. Kyodo. 11 February 2017. Retrieved  12 February 2017.
    18. **^** Yamagishi, Chie (19 October 2015). "Seeking a Loophole". NHK World. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    19. **^** Ellington, Lucien (2009). _Japan_. Santa Barbara: ABC Clio. p. 333. ISBN 978-1-59884-163-3.
    20. **^** "法務省：平成２８年における難民認定者数等について（速報値）". _Ministry of Justice, Japan_. Retrieved  14 February 2017.
    21. **^** "Japan took in 20 asylum seekers in 2017 from nearly 20,000 applications". _Japan Today_. Retrieved  18 February 2018.
    22. **^** "No. of asylum seekers in Japan falls for 1st time in 8 years". _Japan Today_. Retrieved  3 March 2019.
    23. **^** Wingfield Hayes, Rupert (8 June 2016). "Seeking asylum in Japan 'like being in prison'". BBC News Online. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    24. **^** "No entry". The Economist. 14 March 2015. Retrieved  26 August 2016.
    25. **^** Harding, Robin (13 February 2017). "Japan Accepted 28 Refugees in 2016". Financial Times. Retrieved 14 February 2017.
    26. **^** Yamagishi, Chie (19 October 2015). "Seeking a Loophole". NHK World. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    27. **^** Wilson, Thomas (28 July 2015). "Subaru's secret: Marginalized foreign workers power a Japanese export boom". Reuters. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
    28. **^** Iwamoto, Kentaro (18 August 2016). "Abuses rampant in foreign trainee program, Japan labor ministry finds". Nikkei Asian Review. Retrieved 26 August 2016.
    29. **^** Osumi, Magdalena (27 February 2018). "Japan rounds up 341 in first crackdown on asylum seekers working illegally". The Japan Times. Retrieved 28 February 2018.
    30. **^** "Basic Plan for Immigration Control (5th Edition)" (PDF). _Immigration Bureau of Japan_. Japan Ministry of Justice. Retrieved  29 August 2016.
    31. **^** "Inspectors Knock". The Economist. 20 August 2016. Retrieved  8 October 2016.
    32. **^** "United Kingdom population by ethnic group". _United Kingdom Census 2001_. Office for National Statistics. 2001-04-01. Archived from the original on January 7, 2010. Retrieved  2009-09-10.
    33. **^** "法務省". Moj.go.jp. Retrieved  2014-03-10.
    34. **^** Dower, John W. (2012). _Ways of Forgetting, Ways of Remembering_. The New Press. pp. 48–64. ISBN 978-1595586186.
    35. **^** "Aso says Japan is nation of 'one race'". The Japan Times. October 18, 2005.
    36. **^** _Is Shintaro Ishihara the most dangerous man in Japan?_, Japan: Japan Times, November 2012 , retrieved 2013-05-21
    37. **^** Simon, Rita J.; Lynch, James P. (1999). "A Comparative Assessment of Public Opinion toward Immigrants and Immigration Policies". _The International Migration Review_. **33** (2): 455–467. doi:10.1177/019791839903300207. JSTOR 2547704.
    38. **^** "New Index Shows Least, Most Accepting Countries for Migrants". Retrieved  2018-10-25.
    39. **^** "51% of Japanese support immigration, double from 2010 survey - AJW by The Asahi Shimbun". Ajw.asahi.com. Retrieved  2015-09-06.
    40. **^** Facchini, G.; Margalit, Y.; Nakata, H. (2016), _Countering Public Opposition to Immigration: The Impact of Information Campaigns_ (PDF), p. 19, "Our findings indicate that among the non-treated sample, only 29% of the population supported an increase in levels of immigration, a finding that is consistent with the restrictive immigration policy stance currently pursued by the Japanese government."
    41. **^** "Asahi readers say foreigners should assimilate, but Japan must try harder". _Asahi Shimbun_. 17 February 2016. Retrieved  6 March 2016.
    42. **^** Rochel, Johan (2018). "Protecting Japan from immigrants? An ethical challenge to security-based justification in immigration policy". _Contemporary Japan_. **30** (2): 164–188. doi:10.1080/18692729.2018.1478938.
    

## External links[edit]

    
        * Points-based Preferential Immigration Treatment for Highly Skilled Foreign Professionals
    * Immigration Bureau
    * Immi-moj.go.jp
    

**Listen to this article** (info/dl)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Sound-icon.svg/45px-

Sound-icon.svg.png)

This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Immigration to
Japan" dated 2017-12-01, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article.
(Audio help)

**More spoken articles**

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Immigration to Japan

* * *

Americas|

    
        * Americans
    * Brazilians
    * Canadians
    * Peruvians
    

|

![Flag of

Japan](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/9e/Flag_of_Japan.svg/95px-

Flag_of_Japan.svg.png)

Asia|

    
        * Afghans
    * Bangladeshis
    * Burmese
    * Chinese
    * Filipinos
    * Indians
    * Indonesians
    * Iranians
    * Jews
    * Koreans
    * Kurds
    * Mongolians
    * Nepalis
    * Pakistanis
    * Sri Lankan
    * Syrians
    * Taiwanese
    * Thais
    * Turks
    * Uzbeks
    * Vietnamese
    

Europe|

    
        * Britons
    * French
    * Germans
    * Irish
    * Poles
    * Romanians
    * Russians
    * Ukrainians
    

Africa|

    
        * Ghanaians
    * Nigerians
    

Oceania|

    
        * Australians
    

See also|

    
        * Dekasegi
    * Ethnic groups of Japan
    * Gaijin
    * Japanese nationality law
    * Foreign-born Japanese
    * Fushūgaku
    * Alien registration in Japan
    * Illegal immigration to Japan
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Immigration_to_Japan&oldid=896758846"

Categories:

    
        * Spoken articles
    * Japanese society
    * Immigration to Japan
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)
    * Articles containing Japanese-language text
    * All articles with unsourced statements
    * Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018
    * Articles with hAudio microformats
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikimedia Commons
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * فارسی
    * 한국어
    * 日本語
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 12 May 2019, at 18:09 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

