
    
        * Today’s Paper
    
    * About Us
    
      * Careers
      * Contact us
      * Events
      * Historical Archives
      * Newsletters
      * Our Journalism Explained
      * Readers Rep
      * U-T Store
      * Careers
      * Contact us
      * Events
      * Historical Archives
      * Newsletters
      * Our Journalism Explained
      * Readers Rep
      * U-T Store
    
    * Subscription Services
    
      * Buy a subscription
      * Delivery
      * FAQ
      * Manage Subscription
      * Rewards
      * Buy a subscription
      * Delivery
      * FAQ
      * Manage Subscription
      * Rewards
    
    * Privacy and Terms
    
      * Privacy
      * Terms
      * Privacy
      * Terms
    
    * Advertising
    
      * Place an ad
      * Media kit
      * Rate card
      * Report an ad problem
      * Cars
      * Classifieds
      * Eldercare Directory
      * Jobs
      * Newspaper Ad Directory
      * Newspaper Special Sections
      * Real Estate 
      * Sponsored
      * Stats Digital
      * Place an ad
      * Media kit
      * Rate card
      * Report an ad problem
      * Cars
      * Classifieds
      * Eldercare Directory
      * Jobs
      * Newspaper Ad Directory
      * Newspaper Special Sections
      * Real Estate 
      * Sponsored
      * Stats Digital
    
    * News
    
      * Breaking 
      * Courts
      * Latest
      * Nation-World
      * Public Safety
      * Watchdog
      * Breaking 
      * Courts
      * Latest
      * Nation-World
      * Public Safety
      * Watchdog
    
    * Topics
    
      * Education
      * Environment
      * Health
      * Immigration
      * Military
      * Politics
      * Religion
      * Science
      * Transportation
      * Education
      * Environment
      * Health
      * Immigration
      * Military
      * Politics
      * Religion
      * Science
      * Transportation
    
    * Opinion
    
      * Editorials
      * Readers React
      * Commentary
      * Conversation
      * Steve Breen
      * Interviews
      * Chris Reed
      * Editorials
      * Readers React
      * Commentary
      * Conversation
      * Steve Breen
      * Interviews
      * Chris Reed
    
    * Columnists
    
      * Diane Bell
      * Karla Peterson
      * Michael Smolens
      * Mediate This
      * Phil Blair
      * Ernie Cowan
      * Dan Eaton
      * Irv Erdos
      * Richard Lederer
      * Kelly G. Richardson
      * Neil Senturia
      * Diane Bell
      * Karla Peterson
      * Michael Smolens
      * Mediate This
      * Phil Blair
      * Ernie Cowan
      * Dan Eaton
      * Irv Erdos
      * Richard Lederer
      * Kelly G. Richardson
      * Neil Senturia
    
    * Sports
    
      * Padres
      * Aztecs
      * Chargers/Rams
      * Columnists
      * Horse Racing
      * Pro Football Doc
      * Fantasy Sports
      * Toreros
      * High Schools / Preps
      * Gulls
      * NFL
      * MLB
      * Padres
      * Aztecs
      * Chargers/Rams
      * Columnists
      * Horse Racing
      * Pro Football Doc
      * Fantasy Sports
      * Toreros
      * High Schools / Preps
      * Gulls
      * NFL
      * MLB
    
    * Business
    
      * Biotech
      * Economy
      * Energy 
      * Growth & Development
      * Real Estate News
      * Restaurants
      * Technology
      * Tourism
      * Biotech
      * Economy
      * Energy 
      * Growth & Development
      * Real Estate News
      * Restaurants
      * Technology
      * Tourism
    
    * Entertainment
    
      * Books
      * Casinos
      * Classical Music
      * Movies
      * Music
      * Television
      * Theater
      * Things to Do
      * TV Listings
      * Visual Arts
      * Books
      * Casinos
      * Classical Music
      * Movies
      * Music
      * Television
      * Theater
      * Things to Do
      * TV Listings
      * Visual Arts
    
    * Lifestyle
    
      * Beer
      * CaregiverSD
      * Daily Meal
      * Dining
      * Food 
      * Guides
      * Home & Garden
      * People
      * SD Best
      * Style & Society
      * Travel
      * Beer
      * CaregiverSD
      * Daily Meal
      * Dining
      * Food 
      * Guides
      * Home & Garden
      * People
      * SD Best
      * Style & Society
      * Travel
    
    * Real Estate
    
      * News
      * Listings
      * Celebrity & Luxury
      * New Homes
      * Rentals
      * Open Homes
      * News
      * Listings
      * Celebrity & Luxury
      * New Homes
      * Rentals
      * Open Homes
    
    * Podcasts
    
      * San Diego News Fix
      * Border Dispatch
      * Padres Padcast: Hot Lava
      * The Conversation
      * Smart speaker: Flash briefing
      * San Diego News Fix
      * Border Dispatch
      * Padres Padcast: Hot Lava
      * The Conversation
      * Smart speaker: Flash briefing
    
    * U-T En Español
    
      * Deportes
      * Comunidad
      * Espectáculos
      * Fotogalerías
      * Noticias
      * Deportes
      * Comunidad
      * Espectáculos
      * Fotogalerías
      * Noticias
    
    * Obituaries
    
      * Death Notices
      * Place an obituary
      * Death Notices
      * Place an obituary
    
    * News by Region
    
      * San Diego
      * East County
      * North County 
      * South County
      * Border & Baja
      * Southwest Riverside County
      * California
      * San Diego
      * East County
      * North County 
      * South County
      * Border & Baja
      * Southwest Riverside County
      * California
    
    * Community Sites
    
      * Almanac
      * Carmel Valley News
      * Del Mar Times
      * Encinitas Advocate
      * La Jolla Light 
      * PB Monthly
      * Pomerado News 
      * Ramona Sentinel
      * RSF Review 
      * Solana Beach Sun 
      * Almanac
      * Carmel Valley News
      * Del Mar Times
      * Encinitas Advocate
      * La Jolla Light 
      * PB Monthly
      * Pomerado News 
      * Ramona Sentinel
      * RSF Review 
      * Solana Beach Sun
    
    * Games
    
      * Crossword
      * Jumble Daily
      * Crossword
      * Jumble Daily
    

Copyright © 2019, The San Diego Union-Tribune

Sections

![San Diego Union Tribune Logo](https://ca-

times.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/3c5a2d3/2147483647/strip/true/crop/1244x120+0+0/resize/1244x120!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fca-

times.brightspotcdn.com%2Ff8%2F73%2F81abbf5b42368becddfaae316e13%2Fsdut-

black-2x.png)

    
        * Today’s Paper
    * Traffic
    * Weather
    * Podcasts
    * Jobs
    * Real Estate
    * U-T en Español
    

Show Search

Search Query Submit Search

![Qualcomm](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Technology

FTC urges judge to enforce antitrust sanctions against Qualcomm during appeal

![Lemon

Grove](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Education

Three Learn4Life charter school sites will be shut down on judge’s order

![Golden

Hall](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Homelessness

Homeless to remain in Golden Hall, city to open fourth bridge shelter

![4.09ct

fib.jpg](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Watchdog

Brees and jeweler dispute terms of diamond purchases

![Feels like

summer](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Weather

Third day of heat ties, breaks records across inland San Diego County

![polarbearduck.png](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Tourism

Family’s vacation video captures polar bear killing duck at San Diego Zoo

Courts

2 plead not guilty in Lincoln Park fatal fight ; 3rd suspect at large

![Todd

Gloria](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Politics

Gloria bill that would end gun shows at Del Mar Fairgrounds advances past
Senate committee

Public Safety

SDPD seeks potential victims of North Park attempted kidnapping

![CA-

auditor.jpg](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Politics

State auditor visits San Diego recruiting for the 2020 Citizen’s Redistricting
Commission

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Opinion
    * Sports
    * Business
    * Entertainment
    
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Show more sharing options
    

Share Close extra sharing options

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * LinkedIn
    * Copy Link URLCopied!
    * Print
    

The Conversation

# Fact check | Trump: Three Border Patrol agents ‘badly hurt.’ Border Patrol

chief: No agent ‘seriously injured.’

![sd-1543342984-vlnl6548i5-snap-image](https://ca-

times.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/d8446e2/2147483647/strip/true/crop/1022x575+0+0/resize/840x473!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fca-

times.brightspotcdn.com%2F3b%2Fdd%2F8eb87fe2c5034c43936d1c710012%2Fsd-1543342984-vlnl6548i5-snap-

image)

U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers stand guard on the U.S. side of
the border along the U.S. and Mexico border in Tijuana, Mexico, on Sunday.

Bloomberg photo by Tomas Ayus

By Abby Hamblin

Nov. 27, 2018

1 PM

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Show more sharing options
    

Share Close extra sharing options

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * LinkedIn
    * Copy Link URLCopied!
    * Print
    

Monday night, President Donald Trump claimed three Border Patrol agents had
been “very badly hurt” Sunday by rocks and stones thrown by migrants massing
at the U.S.-Mexico border south of San Diego.

San Diego’s chief Border Patrol agent Rodney Scott had directly contradicted
that in an interview earlier in the day.

The San Ysidro Port of Entry was closed for five hours Sunday after hundreds
of the Central American migrants who have been arriving in Tijuana to seek
asylum in recent weeks rushed toward the border, in an apparent attempt to
make it to the U.S. side. Some migrants threw rocks, and U.S. Customs and
Border Protection officers responded with tear gas to disrupt the crowds.

San Diego’s chief Border Patrol agent Rodney Scott went on CNN on Monday to
discuss agents’ response.

While Trump would later say in Mississippi on Monday that three Border Patrol
agents were “very badly hurt through getting hit with rocks and stones,” Scott
said almost the exact opposite.

“Their shields and their bullet proof vests actually protected them from the
rocks,” he said. “We did have a few vehicles that were damaged, some windows
and quite a few dents, but none of the agents were seriously injured.”

Here are a few other points Scott raised in explaining how U.S. Customs and
Border Protection responded.

**On whether any migrants made it across the border:**

“To be completely frank, there were numerous people that actually made it
across the border. We’re in the process of building the new border wall* here,
but we don’t have it completed.

_*Editor’s note: Actually, what’s under construction along the border is
mostly replacement of existing border fencing, asreported this month by the
Arizona Republic. As it reported on Nov. 5, “none of the new barriers use the
designs that emerged from the construction of prototype ‘walls’ in San
Diego.”_

There were some sections that had the dilapidated border wall that was made
out of scrap metal the military gave us. The group breached a couple sections
of that, actually tore down one small section, started to rush across and
that’s another time they started assaulting our agents. We were able to hold
them back using riot techniques. But there were ultimately *42 arrests of
individuals, and again, as I mentioned, the vast majority of those were adult
males.”

_*Editor’s note: Kevin McAleenan, commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border
Protection,said that 69 migrants who managed to cross the border on Sunday
were being processed and could face criminal charges related to illegal entry
and assaults on agents._

**On whether the migrants at the border are really asylum seekers:**

“I do not believe that is true. I believe there are definitely people in that
group that are going to try to claim asylum. The vast majority of those, from
what we call the northern triangle, are economic migrants, though. They do not
meet the qualifications to get asylum here. They can still apply. That’s a
different issue. However, what I saw at on the border (Sunday) was not people
walking up to Border Patrol agents and asking to claim asylum. Matter of fact,
one of the groups that I watched — one of the groups that actually, several of
them were arrested — they passed 10 or 15 marked Border Patrol units walking
west to east, numerous uniformed personnel. They were chanting, waving the
Honduran flag and throwing rocks at the agents. If they were truly asylum
seekers, they would have just walked up with their hands up and surrendered
and that did not take place.”

**On the use of tear gas on women and children:**

“When the threat is to our personnel or to protect others, you’ve got to do
what you’ve got to do. What I find unconscionable is that people would
intentionally take children into this situation. What we saw over and over
(Sunday) was that the group, the ‘caravan’ as we call them, would push women
and children toward the front and then begin basically rocking our agents. So
there’s different types of tools we use, different types of CS (gas)
deployment. We try to target specifically the instigators, specifically the
person assaulting the agent, but as you saw from the video, once that chemical
is released it does go through the air. I was in an area where I actually
inhaled quite a bit of it (Sunday) as well. That’s what’s going to happen in
those situations.”

Watch the rest of the interview here.

**Email:abby.hamblin@sduniontribune.com**

**Twitter:@abbyhamblin**

**_*ALSO_** *

**Arrests, deportations and rising complaints follow Sunday's border
shutdown**

**If Trump closes the border, regional economy could suffer 'catastrophic
losses'**

**Facing no way into U.S., some caravan members head home**

* * *

The Conversation

![](https://ca-

times.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/56914bb/2147483647/strip/true/crop/682x682+171+0/resize/100x100!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fca-

times.brightspotcdn.com%2F8f%2Fff%2Fcc5b9a7361203591b3b8e4ead558%2Fimg-57b77c91-turbine-

sdut-abby-hamblin)

Abby Hamblin

Follow Us

    
        * twitter
    * email
    

More from this Author

    
        * ![Alex Morgan - World Cup](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

World Cup 2019: Where to watch games in San Diego

    
        * ![Untitled.jpg](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

News

Forum asked leaders from Charlottesville to Pittsburgh how they confronted
hate

    
        * ![Erica Alfaro 1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

SDSU graduate Érica Alfaro tells the story behind that instantly iconic photo
taken in a strawberry field with her parents

    
        * ![dogs posing.JPG](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

Yes, California veterinarians could soon recommend medical marijuana for
animals

More on the Subject

    
        * ![Protesters hold up signs, Friday, Aug. 15, 2014, in front of a convenience store that was looted and burned following the shooting death of teenager Michael Brown by police nearly a week ago in Ferguson, Mo. \(AP Photo/Charlie Riedel\)](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

What Wesley Lowery and The Washington Post have learned about fatal police
shootings in America

    
        * ![The Coronado bridge has suicide help-line signs, but no barriers. A local group would like to change that.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

Thousands of calls come into a San Diego County crisis hotline every month. We
talked to a counselor about seeking help.

    
        * ![high school.JPG](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

Gen Z is the most diverse generation in U.S. history. Help us understand what
that means.

    
        * ![A police body camera. \[U-T file\]](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

Here’s how facial recognition technology is used and why San Francisco banned
it

    
        * ![Game of Thrones](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
    

The Conversation

7 ‘Game of Thrones’ events in San Diego to celebrate the season finale

More on this subject

![The San Diego Union-Tribune

newspaper.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Connect with us

Subscribe to email newsletters from the Union-Tribune about news, sports,
opinion and more. Also sign up for our community newspaper newsletters, and
CaregiverSD.

Trending

![Rancho Santa Fe

fire](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

    
        1. Fire chars several acres along border of Rancho Santa Fe
    
    2. Women’s World Cup: Alex Morgan scores five goals as U.S. routs Thailand 13-0
    
    3. El Cajon man pleads guilty to clubbing 72-year-old housemate to death
    
    4. Jury in Kellen Winslow II case deadlocks on 8 counts; convictions on rape, indecent exposure stand
    
    5. Sheriff’s deputies investigating bomb threat received at Poway High School
    
    6. Carlsbad man, 47, arrested on suspicion of having sex with minor
    
    7. Canada to ban single-use plastics as early as 2021
    
    8. Greece: 7 dead after migrant boat capsizes off Lesbos
    
    9. Federal jury in San Diego convicts father-son duo on child prostitution charges
    
    10. Mira Mesa dentist charged with fraud, billing $592K for 623 unperformed root canals
    
    11. SDPD: Speed not factor when 2 police cars hit, killed pedestrian
    
    12. Weather service issues dry apology after second day of unexpectedly hot weather in greater San Diego
    

![sdutlogoinverse.png](https://ca-

times.brightspotcdn.com/dims4/default/47c5bc7/2147483647/strip/true/crop/600x58+0+0/resize/600x58!/quality/90/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fca-

times.brightspotcdn.com%2Ff3%2Fb7%2Fadf600f34fec9ffaaa61c95d0ec9%2Fsdutlogoinverse.png)

Privacy Policy  
Terms of Service  
Sign Up For Our Newsletters

    
        *       * About Us
      * Contact the Union-Tribune
      * Archives
      * E-Newspaper
    
    *       * Classifieds
      * Find a Job
      * Advertising
      * The Daily Meal
    
    *       * The Active Times
      * Sports
      * Business
      * Local
    

Copyright © 2019, The San Diego Union-Tribune

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

