

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

__

__

    
        * Research
    * Events
    * Publications
    * Commentary
    * Store
    * Support
    
    * About Cato
    * Blog
    * Our Experts
    * Our Centers
    * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    

## Search form

Search this site

Commentary

# Americans Used to Support a Border Wall. What Changed Their Minds?

By Emily Ekins

This article appeared in the _The Federalist_ on January 14, 2019.

If there is only one thing people know about Donald Trump, they know he wants
to build a border wall. And if there's only one thing people know about
Democratic lawmakers, it's that they rarely turn down multibillion-dollar
infrastructure projects.

> Averaging national public opinion polls conducted in 2018 reveals that 6 in
10 Americans oppose building a border wall. But just a few years ago, at least
that many supported a wall.

Yet since December 22, the federal government has been partially shut down
after President Trump and Democratic congressional leaders were unable to
compromise on $5.7 billion in funding for a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border.

Democratic House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) has called the border wall
"immoral, ineffective, and expensive," and Senate Minority Leader Chuck
Schumer (D-NY) said it was "wasteful" and "doesn't solve the problem."
Democratic leadership may feel confident holding their ground against Trump
during the shutdown in part because public opinion is on their side.

Averaging national public opinion polls conducted in 2018 reveals that 6 in 10
Americans oppose building a border wall. For instance, a CBS News poll
conducted in October 2018 found that 60 percent oppose "building a wall along
the US-Mexico border to try and stop illegal immigration," while 37 percent
favor building a wall.

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/images/ekins-fed1.jpg)

**Americans Used to Support a Border Wall**

But just a few years ago a majority of Americans _supported_ building a border
wall or fence. In 2013, an ABC News/Washington Post survey found that nearly
two-thirds (65 percent) of Americans supported building a 700-mile fence along
the border with Mexico and adding 20,000 border patrol agents.

The same survey found a slim majority (52 percent) still favored building a
wall even when told it would cost $46 billion--much higher than Trump's
current request. Similarly in 2011, a majority (57 percent) supported building
a security fence, even without additional patrol personal, a Quinnipiac poll
found.

Not only that, but in early 2006 a Time/SRBI poll found that a slim majority
(52 percent) _of Democrats_ also favored "building a security fence along the
2,000-mile US-Mexican border." Sixty-one percent (61 percent) of Republicans
also agreed. Between 2005 and 2015, polls show that nearly half of Democrats
continued to support building a border barrier of some kind.

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/images/ekins-fed2.jpg)

However, things changed in 2015 when Donald Trump announced his bid for the
presidency. Since then opposition rose upwards among the general public.
Analyzing more than 150 polls conducted between 2007 and 2018 from the Roper
Center iPoll Databank reveals that an average of 43 percent of Americans
opposed building a border wall between 2007-2014. Opposition increased to 48
percent in 2015, 58 percent in 2016, and 61 percent in 2017, and then back to
59 percent in 2018.

Democratic support shifted more swiftly starting in the fall of 2015 onward.
Now only about 12 percent of Democrats support a border wall or fence. As the
charts above demonstrate, Trump's entry into politics (and making immigration
issues salient) played a major role in turning the public against the border
wall.

**Why Did Americans Change Their Minds About the Wall?**

Here I offer four reasons that may explain why Americans turned against
building a border wall.

**1) Harsh Rhetoric Makes People More Sympathetic to Immigrants**

First, Americans may become more sympathetic of immigration when public
figures who want to reduce it, like Trump, Steve Bannon, or Pat Buchanan, are
on the offensive. Rhetoric from all sides becomes emotional, the media weighs
in, people make statements that give the impression they do not like
immigrants, and voters get upset.

Available survey data reveals two such instances, first in the mid-1990s and
next in the mid-2000s. Both were periods when the nation debated immigration
reform, with skeptics leading the charge.

In the mid-1990s, immigration became a hotly contested issue with California's
Prop 187, which sought to restrict unauthorized immigrants' access to social
services, and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility
Act President Clinton signed in 1996. Debate during this time centered on
expanding border security, cutting legal immigration, and preventing
unauthorized immigrant children from accessing public schools.

Emotions ran hot. For instance, in a televised interview in 1991 Buchanan
argued "there is nothing wrong with us sitting down and arguing that issue
that we are a European country" and in 1995 he described illegal immigration
as a "foreign invasion."

Gallup surveys conducted in 1993 and 1995 found about two-thirds of Americans
opposed a border wall or fence at that time. However, by the mid-2000s,
support for a border wall bounced back. A Time survey conducted in early 2006
found 56 percent supported building a 2,000-mile security fence.

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/images/ekins-fed3.jpg)

Polls reveal another period where the nation intensely debated immigration and
support for a border wall plummeted. Starting in the spring of 2006,
majorities once again came to oppose a wall. For instance, a Gallup survey
found 56 percent opposed a border barrier by May 2006, just a few months after
the Time survey. This was precisely the time Congress debated immigration
reform, particularly in relation to H.R. 4337, which sought to build a
700-mile border fence and classify unauthorized foreign citizens and those who
provide them assistance as felons.

To give a taste of the rhetoric of the time, Buchanan lamented in his book
"State of Emergency: The Third World Invasion and Conquest of America," that
white people would become the minority by 2050 and that by then "America will
be a Third World country."

One could see how many people were offended. Unauthorized foreign citizens and
their supporters organized mass protests across the country, "A day without an
immigrant," to demonstrate what the economy would be like without their
contributions.

But once the debate subsided, support for the border wall bounced back and
majorities supported it again. That is, until Trump entered the presidential
race and made the border wall a centerpiece of his policy agenda.

Like in the mid-1990s and 2000s, the public today has turned against building
a border wall. The more immigration restrictionists push for building a border
wall, the more impassioned the rhetoric, and the more salient it becomes in
the news, the more people get offended, and voters turn against it.

**2) People Feel Differently About a 'Wall' than a 'Fence'**

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/images/ekins-fed4.jpg)

Second, some people make a distinction between building a border "wall" and a
border "fence." Indeed, analyzing 150-plus polls conducted over the past 13
years available in the iPoll Databank archive shows that 49 percent supported
a border "fence" while 38 percent supported a border "wall"--an 11-point
difference. However, Trump has emphasized building a _wall_ rather than a
fence, whereas lawmakers in the past largely discussed erecting fences.

Why do people make the distinction between a fence and a wall? People may
simply think a wall means no one can cross it and thus it would completely
halt all immigration across the Southern border.

Furthermore, people may perceive nefarious motives from people who wish to
build a border "wall" rather than a "fence." You might not care much if your
neighbor built a _fence_ between your house and theirs. But what would you
think if your neighbor erected a large, tall, thick concrete _wall_ between
your house and theirs? You might think they don 't like you or want to
interact with you. You probably wouldn't be inviting them over for dinner any
time soon either.

Walls give the impression of exclusion and that they cannot be crossed, even
legally. Fences, on the other hand, often have gates and give the impression
that they can be crossed using the proper channels.

Many supporters of building a border wall may think that a wall can also be
crossed if done legally. However, in the minds of the median voter, a wall may
_sound_ permanent and impermeable. For some voters this is a feature, but for
others it 's a bug.

This conception of what a wall means is demonstrated through a very poorly
written survey question from pollsters Greenberg Quinlan and Rosner Research,
when they asked voters if they favored or opposed: "Building a fence along the
Mexican border to keep Mexicans from entering the country." No serious
Republican lawmakers are calling for a wall to prevent all Mexicans from
immigrating to the United States. The fact that these pollsters misinterpreted
the intentions of the wall show that many Americans believe the wall is
motivated by animus toward Hispanic migrants and their descendants.

**3) The Border Wall Has Become a Symbol**

This leads to the third likely reason for the recent shift against building a
border wall: In the minds of many Americans--although not all--the wall has
become symbolic of attitudes toward immigrants and racial minorities. As
political scientists may put it, the wall has become "racialized."

Particularly Democrats have come to believe that support for a border wall
indicates animus toward immigrants and people of color more generally. House
Speaker Nancy Pelosi's contention that the border wall is "immoral," not just
cost-ineffective, demonstrates that for many the wall is about values, not
number-crunching.

This clearly wasn't the case several years ago when majorities of Americans,
as well as Democrats, supported erecting a border wall or fence. How did
framing of the border wall shift from being about security to being about
race?

When Trump announced his bid for the presidency, he declared Mexico is
"sending people that have lots of problems…They're bringing drugs. They're
bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people."

Many people interpreted Trump's remarks to mean that he thinks a _majority_ of
immigrants from Mexico are criminals while the _minority,_ or only "some," are
law-abiding. This led many to conclude that Trump's motivation for building a
border wall was driven by animus toward a majority of Mexican and Latino
immigrants.

Trump further fueled this impression when he claimed that the "Mexican
heritage" of the judge presiding over Trump University lawsuits was incapable
of impartiality _because of_ his Mexican heritage. Even if Trump didn 't mean
to give this impression, it's understandable how millions concluded that a
dislike of Mexican immigrants--here legally or otherwise--motivated Trump's
promise of a border wall.

Surveys show that many Americans reacted negatively to Trump's comments. An
NBC/WSJ poll conducted soon after Trump's presidential campaign announcement
found 37 percent thought his comments were "insulting" and "racist." Even in
2018, a Quinnipiac poll found that 41 percent believe the "main motive behind
President Trump's immigration policies" is "racist beliefs."

To be clear, many Americans who support the border wall do not view it as
exclusionary or symbolic of animus toward immigrants. However, many people did
come to view it this way, and that has significantly contributed to the public
turning swiftly against it.

Further evidence that the wall has become a symbol is the fact that Hispanics
have consistently opposed building a wall or fence along the border with
Mexico for at least the past decade, even though most are U.S. citizens born
in the United States or are legal residents. In 2008 only 11 percent supported
"building a fence along 670 miles of border between the United States and
Mexico," an AP/Ipsos poll found.

This shows that Latino attitudes about the border wall are not about Trump,
because this survey was conducted seven years before Trump ran for president.
Latino attitudes have persisted, with only 13 percent in support of a wall in
2018, according to a Washington Post/ABC survey. The fact that most Hispanics
are U.S.-born citizens yet still oppose the border wall indicates they view it
as a symbolic gesture saying they and people like them aren't wanted.

**4) Democrats Will Oppose What Trump Supports**

Trump is a polarizing figure, particularly for Democrats. Survey experiments
conducted by Reuter/Ipsos found that simply telling Democrats Trump supports a
policy turns them against it--even universal health care. For instance, 68
percent of Democrats ordinarily would agree that when it comes to health care
"government should take care of everybody and the government should pay for
it." But among another sample of Democrats who were told Trump made that
statement, only 47 percent supported government guaranteed health care--a
21-point drop.

Republicans given the same treatment moved only by 6 points. A third (33
percent) of Republicans supported government-guaranteed health care when they
were not told that Trump once supported it. But among those who were told
Trump made that statement, 39 percent supported it.

Thus, even on an issue as central to the Democratic policy agenda as
government-guaranteed universal health subsidies, Trump can turn Democrats
against it. So certainly he can turn them against a border wall too.

But one of the reasons Democrats and the media turned against Trump so
intensely was because of the language he chose to use to talk about
immigrants. Partisanship alone can't explain why more than just Democrats, but
the median voter also turned against a border wall. In a world where Trump had
not gone on the offensive to curb both _legal_ and illegal immigration and had
not used inconsiderate language in the process, it 's likely that fewer people
would oppose him with such zeal.

**Democrats Will Resist Compromise**

Democrats talk a lot about the benefits of compromise. In fact 75 percent of
Democrats in a 2016 VOTER Survey said they'd rather lawmakers "compromise to
get things done" rather than stick to principles. Yet Democratic leadership
hasn't shown signs of budging on building a wall, at least for now.

It's not particularly credible for Democrats to say they oppose the wall
because it's not "cost-effective." If they opposed it for that reason, why did
many support a border barrier just a few years ago? It's equally cost-
_ineffective_ today as it was then.

But Pelosi calling the wall "immoral" is a more credible explanation for why
Democrats oppose the wall now but not before. It's also indicative that she
doesn't view the wall like other public policy disagreements. As Democratic
constituents have come to see the border wall as a symbol of animus toward
immigrants, they can't allow leadership to compromise without violating deeply
held values.

**What All This Might Mean**

There are useful lessons here about how Americans changed their minds on the
border wall. Facts and numbers about the cost- _ineffectiveness_ of building a
2,000-mile wall across diverse geological terrain were available before 2015
and did not change many minds. Telling people that it costs money the country
doesn 't have didn't work. Explaining that unauthorized immigration will still
continue despite a tremendous amount of money spent also hasn't been
particularly persuasive.

Instead, many people changed their minds about a border wall when they came to
view it as a symbol of exclusion and animus toward immigrants and racial
minorities and thus immoral. While many advocates of the border wall insist
the wall is a humanitarian cause and is necessary for border security, they
are talking past those who view it as a racialized symbol.

Perhaps there's something to be learned here. Sometimes persuasion requires
more than simply facts and reason. But persuasion needs the flavor of
righteousness for people to care enough to change their minds and for it to
stick.

    
        * __Tweet
    * __Like
    * __Submit
    * __Share
    

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/styles/resp__img__pubauthor-2x/s3/authors/crops/emily_ekins-

cropped_1.jpg?itok=lEtXUOwC&timestamp=1430335167)

Emily Ekins is a research fellow at the Cato Institute. Her research focuses
primarily on American politics, public opinion, political psychology, and
social movements, with an emphasis in survey and quantitative methods.

## Related

### ![The 14 Most Common Arguments against Immigration and Why They’re

Wrong](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/download-remote-images/no-
cache.hubspot.com/81979052289/f07c7be7-1bec-42b4-ad17-b31d16b4ce87.png)

These are the main arguments against immigration — and they’re all wrong.

### ![Why the Wall Won’t

Work](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/download-remote-images/no-
cache.hubspot.com/81979052289/fd89bd8c-8a67-47d9-9982-b3e82c2a7809.png)

The legal, practical, and moral case against President Trump’s border barrier.

### ![Trump Is Against Legal Immigration

Too](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/download-remote-images/no-
cache.hubspot.com/81979052289/e6868ab6-26ed-400f-9b04-9efbd45dbfaf.png)

President Trump has been mostly consistent on legal immigration: He wants to
cut it.

### Cato Today Newsletter

_Daily dose of liberty delivered straight to your inbox._

View full list of newsletters

### Also from Cato

    
        * Internships and Student Programs
    * DownsizingGovernment.org
    * Libertarianism.org
    * HumanProgress.org
    * Cato Unbound
    * Unlawful Shield
    * Freedom in the 50 States
    * Overlawyered
    * ElCato.org
    * Alt-M
    

### Social Media

    
        * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    * __YouTube
    * __LinkedIn
    * __Instagram
    * __Tumblr
    * __RSS
    

![](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

Cato Institute  
1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW  
Washington, DC 20001-5403

    
        * Phone (202) 842 0200
    

Privacy Policy

Contact Us

Media Contact

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id= 454916984694808&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

