

![PRRI](https://www.prri.org/wp-content/themes/prri-theme/images/logo-

standard.svg) ![PRRI](https://www.prri.org/wp-content/themes/prri-

theme/images/logo-white.svg) Research Spotlight About Data Vault Press Room
Donate

Search Website

Search Survey Questions

Research  
Overview

    
        * Abortion & Reproductive Health
    * Climate Change & Science
    * Economy
    * Immigration
    * Law & Criminal Justice
    * LGBT
    * Politics & Elections
    * Race & Ethnicity
    * Religion & Culture
    * Sports
    

Spotlight  
Overview

    
        * How Americans Feel About DREAM, the Wall, and Family Separation
    * Republicans, White Evangelical Protestants Most Likely to Believe Capitalism is Important for Being Truly American
    

About  
PRRI

    
        * Our Team
    * Careers
    * PRRI Public Fellows Program
    * Partnerships
    * Contact Us
    

Data Vault Press Room Donate

Home > Spotlight Analysis > Data Shows How Passionate and Partisan Americans
are About the Border Wall

Data Shows How Passionate and Partisan Americans are About the Border Wall

PRRI,

01.08.2019

Topics: Immigration

Tags: border Donald Trump

President Trump’s insistence on “building the wall” along the southern U.S.
border divides Americans along partisan, religious, racial and generational
lines, according to PRRI research from the 2018 American Values Survey. Among
all Americans, 58 percent oppose building a wall between the U.S. and Mexico,
compared to 41 percent who favor the policy.

Partisans are deeply divided on this issue. Eight in ten (80 percent)
Republicans favor building a wall along the border, including nearly half (45
percent) who strongly favor such a policy. By contrast, eight in ten (80
percent) Democrats oppose building a wall along the border, including more
than six in ten (61 percent) who are strongly opposed. Only about one in five
(19 percent) Democrats favor building a wall along with U.S.-Mexico border.
Independents’ views (62 percent oppose) mirror those of the general public.
Over the last two years, Republicans and Democrats have become increasingly
polarized in their attitudes toward building a wall between the U.S. and
Mexico. In 2016, about two-thirds (66 percent) of Republicans favored building
a wall, including three in ten (30 percent) who strongly favored this policy,
while three-quarters (75 percent) of Democrats were opposed, including nearly
half (48 percent) who were strongly opposed.

Among religious groups, white Christian groups—especially white evangelical
Protestants—stand out as the group most in favor of building a wall. Two-
thirds (67 percent) of white evangelical Protestants favor building the wall,
up from 58 percent in 2016. A majority of white mainline Protestants (52
percent) also favor building the wall. Catholics are strongly divided by race
and ethnicity, with 56 percent of white Catholics in favor of building the
wall, while nearly three-quarters (73 percent) of Hispanic Catholics oppose
it.

Nearly nine in ten (85 percent) Trump supporters who attend church weekly
support the wall, compared to 78 percent of Trump supporters who attend church
less often.

While more than seven in ten Hispanic (72 percent) and black (72 percent)
Americans oppose building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border, just half (50
percent) of white Americans hold the same view. Roughly the same number (48
percent) of white Americans favor building a wall along the border. Among
white Americans, those without a four-year college degree are more likely than
those with a degree to favor this policy (55 percent vs. 35 percent). Over
half (55 percent) of white men favor the wall, compared to 42 percent of white
women.

![](https://www.prri.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/AVS-Border-Wall-

Table-V2-550x1024.png)

Press Coverage

![](https://www.prri.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/USA-Today-150x150.png)

USA Today

01.10.2019

Trump's border wall isn't about national security. It's about stoking racial
resentment.

![](https://www.prri.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/ABS-150x150.png)

ABC NEWS

01.10.2019

Shutdown fight is not about the wall. It's about Donald Trump: ANALYSIS

Thanks for signing up!

Like this article? Sign up to receive  
updates about our latest analyses

Morning Buzz (Daily)

New Research

PRRI Monthly

Sign Up

PRRI

1023 15TH ST NW, 9th Floor  
Washington, DC 20005

General Information

info@prri.org

202-238-9424

Media Inquiries

Jioni Palmer

press@prri.org

202.688.3259

Terms of Use Privacy Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

