

×

# Welcome back!

Sign in to start taking action.

Not a Global Citizen yet? Sign up

__Sign in with Facebook

* * *

or

* * *

SubmitRemember meForget your password?

×![Global

Citizen](https://static.globalcitizen.org/static/img/gc_logo.11b725af7068.png)

Thanks for signing up as a global citizen. In order to create your account we
need you to provide your email address. You can check out our Privacy Policy
to see how we safeguard and use the information you provide us with. If your
Facebook account does not have an attached e-mail address, you'll need to add
that before you can sign up.

__Rerequest with Facebook

×![Global

Citizen](https://static.globalcitizen.org/static/img/gc_logo.11b725af7068.png)

**This account has been deactivated.**

Please contact us at contact@globalcitizen.org if you would like to re-
activate your account.

    
        * Issues
      * Girls & Women
      * Health
      * Education
      * Finance & Innovation
      * Food & Hunger
      * Water & Sanitation
      * Environment
      * Citizenship
    * About
      * Who We Are
      * Impact
      * FAQs
      * Contact Us
      * Jobs
    * Rewards
    * Global Citizen Events
    * Partners
    * Global Citizen Programs
      * Waislitz Global Citizen Awards
      * Curtis Scholarship
        * Curtis Scholarship Terms and Conditions
      * Fellowship Program
    * Videos
    * Store
    

About Us

![](https://static.globalcitizen.org/static/img/gc_logo.dd8b5cee3479.svg)![](https://static.globalcitizen.org/static/img/gc-

logo_horizontal.699546b1e2b5.svg)

__Search

Take ActionRewardsFestivalImpact

Girls & WomenHealthEducationFinance & InnovationFood & HungerWater &
SanitationEnvironmentCitizenship

__

#### Global Citizen is a community of people like you

People who want to learn about and take action on the world’s biggest
challenges. Extreme poverty ends with you.

Learn more

![](https://static.globalcitizen.org/static/img/x-white.458730349893.svg)

    1. Get Informed

Check out original content and videos published every day to help you learn
about the issues that mean the most to you.

    1. Take Action

Send petitions, emails, or tweets to world leaders. Call governments or join
rallies. We offer a variety of ways to make your voice heard.

    1. Connect with Others

Meet other Global Citizens who care about the same issues you do. Keep updated
on what they're doing to change the world.

Sign Up

Find out more about Global Citizen

![Joe

McCarthy](https://media.globalcitizen.org/15/e2/15e2fd3e-fcfc-496d-95a2-1d91d4c66982/aaeaaqaaaaaaaarjaaaajdy2otu4zgm4ltyzmjatngm0zs1hytvhltnkmmuxzmy4ztexyg.jpg)

By Joe McCarthy

July 13, 2018

Photo by Elias Castillo on Unsplash

Citizenship

# 5 Ways Immigration Actually Enhances a Country's Culture

## Trump said that immigration is a "shame."

Share ShareTweetEmail

![Joe

McCarthy](https://media.globalcitizen.org/15/e2/15e2fd3e-fcfc-496d-95a2-1d91d4c66982/aaeaaqaaaaaaaarjaaaajdy2otu4zgm4ltyzmjatngm0zs1hytvhltnkmmuxzmy4ztexyg.jpg)

By Joe McCarthy

July 13, 2018

* * *

**Why Global Citizens Should Care**

_Trump’s comments on immigration defy the general consensus that immigrants
boost economies, expand cultures, and become good citizens. The United
Nations’ Global Goal 10 calls on countries to promote humane immigration laws.
You can take action on this issuehere._

* * *

US President Donald Trump has criticized UK Prime Minister Theresa May, London
Mayor Sadiq Khan, and the country’s defense budget during his state visit to
the United Kingdom this week, The Hill reports.

His main fixation, however, has been immigration. On multiple occasions, the
president has railed against immigration in the UK, Europe, and the US.

“I think what’s happened to Europe is a shame,” he told the British tabloid
_The Sun_. “I think the immigration ... I think it changed the fabric of
Europe.”

“Allowing millions and millions of people to come into Europe is very, very
sad,” he said.

**Take Action:Raise Your Voice for a World That Is Open, Equal and Fair**

Trump expounded upon these ideas in a press conference alongside May on
Friday, suggesting that all problems facing Europe can be attributed to
immigration.

> This is ugly.

>

> Trump says that immigration is not "good for our country" because it is
"changing the culture." pic.twitter.com/7zTXE9Miyh

>

> — Judd Legum (@JuddLegum) July 13, 2018

These comments fit the worldview that Trump has articulated since campaigning
for office — one in which immigrants are a menace.

But they don’t line up with the facts.

Countries, especially the United States, have long benefited from immigration
and diversity. Here are just five reasons why immigration is a good thing.

**Read More:7 Ways You Can Celebrate Immigrants This July Fourth**

* * *

##### 1. Immigrants Expand Culture by Introducing New Ideas and Customs

![A Day Without Immigrants, Lansing

5.1.17.jpg](https://media.globalcitizen.org/thumbnails/78/41/7841efcd-8d9d-49cd-85e0-b1aa0ee90964/a_day_without_immigrants_lansing_5117.jpg__4540x3026_q85_crop_subject_location-2270%2C1513_subsampling-2_upscale.jpg)
Image: Abdul El-Sayed

Trump said that immigrants change the fabric of a society’s culture.
Technically, they do. But so does the passage of time, new technology, social
media, a native-born population, and much more.

In reality, immigrants change culture for the better by introducing new ideas,
expertise, customs, cuisines, and art. Far from erasing the existing culture,
they expand it.

Nowhere is this more clear than in the United States, where hundreds of
different ethnic groups live in harmony under the banner of the American flag
building a collective culture.

**Read More:14 Photos That Show America's Long History of Immigration**

Immigrants have brought blue jeans, Google, tacos, Apple, hip-hop, and way too
many other things to the US than we can list here.

* * *

##### 2. Immigrants Improve Economies Through Hard Work and Entrepreneurship

![DACA-United-States-

Immigration.jpg](https://media.globalcitizen.org/thumbnails/05/2e/052e77e1-40a0-4bf0-aa4c-51a166ca0c28/daca-

united-states-

immigration.jpg__1200x800_q85_crop_subject_location-600%2C400_subsampling-2_upscale.jpg)Image:
Jose Luis Magana/AP

Lots of research has been done showing the positive effect immigrants have on
local and national economies.

A common misconception, however, is that immigrants steal jobs from native-
born citizens.

“Immigrants and US-born workers generally do not compete for the same jobs,”
the economists Michael Greenstone and Adam Looney wrote for the Hamilton
Project. “Instead, many immigrants complement the work of US employees and
increase their productivity.”

**Read More:How One Word Could Change the Makeup of Immigrants in the United
States**

In the US, immigrants are generally concentrated in highly skilled STEM fields
such as software development and medicine, according to the George W. Bush
Institute, while undocumented immigrants are often employed in low-wage labor
jobs that would otherwise go unfilled.

Overall, immigrants boost wages, expand the economy, and are more likely to
start businesses than the average US citizen, according to the Mercatus
Center.

* * *

##### 3. Immigration Funds Government Activity, Helping All Citizens

![nitish-

meena-198784-unsplash.jpg](https://media.globalcitizen.org/thumbnails/20/70/2070a6ac-2aad-4b7e-a11c-705a8c6f4923/nitish-

meena-198784-unsplash.jpg__3000x2000_q85_crop_subsampling-2_upscale.jpg)Photo
by Nitish Meena on Unsplash

By expanding the economy, and paying taxes, immigrants fund government actions
like building roads, improving schools, modernizing water systems, and running
courthouses.

Immigrants are also less likely to use welfare than the average US citizen,
and that includes undocumented immigrants, who pay more in taxes than they
receive in benefits.

**Read More:17 Famous Immigrants Who Helped Shape America**

* * *

##### 4. Immigration Makes the World More Connected

![jerry-

kiesewetter-197146-unsplash.jpg](https://media.globalcitizen.org/thumbnails/72/af/72af229b-b37e-4e08-8f73-56f2052de4ec/jerry-

kiesewetter-197146-unsplash.jpg__3687x2950_q85_crop_subsampling-2_upscale.jpg)
Photo by Elias Castillo on Unsplash

It’s become a cliche, but the world becomes more interconnected each year as
people share cultures, engage in global commerce, and develop friendships with
people from different backgrounds.

This interconnectedness, in turn, fosters global progress on causes like
ending poverty, hunger, and gender inequality, according to Ian Goldin, the
Director of the Oxford Martin School at the University of Oxford.

Immigration is a key ingredient to this dynamic, Goldin writes. As people move
across borders and participate in new countries, progress is spread and the
world becomes more open.

**Read More:Africans Are Among the Best Educated US Immigrants, Study Finds**

* * *

##### 5. Immigration Benefits Immigrants

![zoltan-

kovacs-272633-unsplash.jpg](https://media.globalcitizen.org/thumbnails/17/2a/172ad648-1178-4f46-a1d0-97cd7d60156c/zoltan-

kovacs-272633-unsplash.jpg__6000x4000_q85_crop_subsampling-2_upscale.jpg)
Photo by Zoltan Kovacs on Unsplash

Immigrants travel to new countries for a variety of reasons — to seek
opportunity, to reunite with family and friends, to fulfill a dream. Refugees
and asylum seekers, on other hand, travel to new countries to escape life-
threatening situations.

In all cases, people looking to resettle in a new country are seeking a better
life, just as people have done for millennia. Creating an environment — both
legally and socially — where they’re allowed to build a new life is a way to
promote the general betterment of humanity.

TopicstrumpCurrent eventsCitizenshipEuropeImmigrationUS President Donald
TrumpImmigrantsUnited Kingdom

Comments __

Share ShareTweetEmail

Photo by Elias Castillo on Unsplash

##### Most Read

## Read more

##### ABOUT

    
        * Who We Are
    * Impact
    * FAQ
    * Contact Us
    * Jobs
    

![](https://static.globalcitizen.org/static/img/gc_footer_logo.fb6bf5fa6b68.png)

##### JOIN THE CONVERSATION

    
        *  __
    *  __
    *  __
    *  __
    *  __
    
    * Privacy
    * Terms & Conditions
    

(C) 2012-2019 Global Poverty Project, Inc All Rights Reserved

English (en) Deutsch (de) français (fr) español (es)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

