

Skip to main content

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/all/themes/MPI/logo.png)

    
        * Newsroom
    * Multimedia
    * Donate
    * Contact
    * Sign Up
    

All MPIResearch PublicationsArticlesMultimediaEventsNews

Refine by Date

Date

E.g., 06/11/2019

Date

E.g., 06/11/2019

    
        * Menu
    
      * Research & Initiatives
        * Topics
        * Regions
        * Data
        * Programs
      * Publications
        * All Publications
        * Reports
        * Fact Sheets
        * Policy Briefs
        * Books
        * Articles
        * Commentaries
        * Explainers
      * Events
      * News
        * Newsroom
        * Press Releases
      * About Us
        * Mission
        * Staff
        * Trustees
        * Funders
        * Work at MPI
        * Intern at MPI
        * Contact MPI
      * MPI Europe
        * Mission
        * Staff
        * Internships
        * Contact
    

Stay

    
        * Research & Initiatives
    

### Programs

    
          * Programs
        * International Program
        * Migrants, Migration, and Development
        * National Center on Immigrant Integration Policy
        * U.S. Immigration Policy Program
      * Initiatives
        * Migration Data Hub
        * E Pluribus Unum Prizes
        * Labor Markets Initiative
        * Language Access: Translation and Interpretation Policies and Practices
        * Migration Information Source
        * Regional Migration Study Group
        * Transatlantic Council on Migration
      * Projects
        * Moving Europe Beyond Crisis
        * ELL Information Center
        * Labor Market Integration in Europe
      * MPI Europe
    

### Topics see all >

    
          * Border Security
      * Education
      * Employment & the Economy
      * Illegal Immigration & Interior Enforcement
      * Immigrant Integration
      * Immigrant Profiles & Demographics
      * Immigration Policy & Law
      * International Governance
      * Migration & Development
      * Refugee & Asylum Policy
    

### Regions see all >

    
          * Africa (sub-Saharan)
      * Asia and the Pacific
      * Central America & the Caribbean
      * Europe
      * Middle East & North Africa
      * North America
      * South America
    

### Data

    
          * International Data
      * U.S. Data
      * Maps
    

Stay

    
        * Publications
    
      * Reports
      * Fact Sheets
      * Policy Briefs
      * Books
      * Articles
      * Commentaries
      * Explainers
    

### Featured Publication

![How Many Unauthorized Immigrants Graduate from U.S. High Schools

Annually?](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/publication_thumbnail/public/pub_covers/Coverthumb-

UnauthorizedImmigrant-HS-Graduates-FactSheet.png?itok=GIQNLHOx)

Fact Sheets

April 2019

##### How Many Unauthorized Immigrants Graduate from U.S. High Schools

Annually?

By Jie Zong and Jeanne Batalova

Stay

    
        * Events
    * About Us
    

### Programs

    
          * International Migration
      * Migrants, Migration, and Development
      * National Center on Immigrant Integration Policy
      * U.S. Immigration
    
      * Mission
      * Staff
      * Trustees
      * Funders
      * Work at MPI
      * Intern at MPI
      * Contact MPI
    

Stay

    
        * MPI Europe
    
      * Mission
      * Staff
      * Jobs
      * Internships
      * Contact
    

Stay

# Mexico: The New Migration Narrative

## You are here

Home » Migration Information Source

![Migration Information Source logo](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/source-

header.jpg)

Adjust Font |

(+) Increase Font  
(-) Decrease Font  
Reset Font

Print | RSS | Copyright & Reuse

# Mexico: The New Migration Narrative

April 24, 2013

Profile

By Francisco Alba

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/source_images/mexico-

apr13-324.jpg)

New economic, political, and demographic realities on the ground in Mexico
open a window of opportunity to harness the results of an improving
educational picture and rising skill levels. (Photos: Emma T photography and
campuspartymexico)

Mexico's contemporary migration narrative is being rewritten as a result of
significant developments within the country, as well as evolving trends among
its neighbors to the north and south. New economic, demographic, and political
realities have coalesced to dramatically slow the large Mexican flows that had
made their way to the United States over recent decades. And Mexico now is
also confronted with the task of re-integrating many of its citizens and their
U.S.-born children, and is reshaping its legislative and political reality to
deal with its role as a country of transit and, presumably, increasingly of
destination.

For the first time ever, transit migration from Central America to the United
States is a significant policy priority in Mexico today—both from a security
and human-rights standpoint. Prior to 2010, mention of migration into Mexico
or of transit migration through the country was relatively marginal. But the
Mexican government's adoption of a new migration law in 2011 was a ground-
breaking recognition not only of the scale of transit migration but also of
government accountability to ensure migrants' rights, including those of
transmigrants. Nevertheless, implementation of this law may prove to be a
significant challenge, and managing migration that comes from the south,
whether temporary or permanent, has become increasingly hazardous and a source
of regional tension.

Mexico's relations with the United States, where roughly one in ten of its
citizens currently resides—more than half in unauthorized status—have evolved
somewhat as well. Border enforcement, deportations, and migrant deaths
dominated Mexico's migration agenda with the United States in the years
immediately following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, putting strain
on the bilateral relationship. While those irritants remain in to an extent,
new political realities have emerged. Chief among them: the prospect of U.S.
immigration reform, which stalled earlier this decade, was back on the table
in Congress in a serious way in spring 2013, holding the potential to bring an
estimated 11 million unauthorized immigrants, including approximately 6.8
million from Mexico, out of the shadows and into the mainstream of U.S. life.

Mexico, whose migration history from the 1970s onward was largely one of flows
to the United States, now embodies several dimensions of the migration
phenomenon: emigration, still primarily to the United States; transit
migration, mainly by Central Americans headed northward; and not
insignificantly, temporary and permanent immigration from Central America and
other countries.

This updated profile examines Mexican migration to the United States and
Mexicans in the United States, U.S. immigration policy affecting Mexican
immigrants, Mexico's role as a transit country, remittances, government policy
toward the Mexican diaspora, migration into Mexico, and refugee and asylum
policy in Mexico.

**Mexican Migration to the United States**

_History of Flows: World War II to Economic Crisis of Late 2000s_

Although many new trends are emerging, Mexico remains tied to its northern
neighbor through a decades-long history of migration that dates back to World
War II, when U.S. officials approached the Mexican government in search of
temporary agricultural labor. Through the resulting Bracero program (which
spanned 1942 to 1964), Mexico supplied an estimated 4.5 million workers to the
United States, peaking at almost 450,000 workers per year during the late
1950s.

Although the Bracero program was halted, “go north for opportunity" was an
idea that remained deeply embedded in the Mexican mindset. Migration
networks—relatives, friends, and employers, in particular—established in the
1940s, ‘50s, and early ‘60s laid foundations for sustaining Mexico-U.S.
migration. And until recently, U.S. enforcement measures did little to curb
the flows drawn by opportunities in the U.S. labor market, and the widely held
perception of a more promising future in “el norte.”

After the Bracero program ended, U.S. border enforcement began to increase; in
small measure at first, then rising in the mid-1990s, and taking on new
urgency after 9/11. Over time, Mexican migration, which used to be mostly
circular and temporary, changed. Although the shift in behavior began
gradually during the 1980s, the move became more permanent after stepped-up
border enforcement began in the mid-1990s, initiated through well-known Border
Patrol actions such as Operation Gatekeeper. Increased enforcement made it
more difficult and costly (in terms of smuggler fees among other factors) for
Mexicans to cross back and forth.

Thus, the number of Mexicans settling permanently in the United States
annually—with or without legal status—increased steadily from the 1970s
onward. The Mexican population settling in the United States grew from less
than 250,000 per year in the 1980s to well above the 300,000 mark in the
1990s, and approached the half-million mark in the early 2000s. The size of
the Mexican immigrant population doubled from 2.2 million in 1980 to 4.5
million in 1990, and more than doubled to 9.4 million in 2000, at which point
Mexican immigrants made up 29.5 percent of all immigrants in the United
States. According to some calculations, the Mexican immigrant population
surpassed the 12 million mark in 2007—just before the onset of the economic
recession; the Census Bureau estimated the Mexican-born population at 11.7
million in 2011, the most recent year for which figures are available.

Mexicans have become an increasing share of the U.S. immigrant population,
which overall has risen sharply over the past four decades. Over the course of
the 1970s, Mexican immigrants became the largest immigrant group in the United
States, with about 16 percent of the total immigrant population in 1980.
Today, they represent 29 percent of all immigrants to the United States—a
larger share than the eight next top origin countries combined.

_Current Flows and Implications of Near-Zero Net Migration_

Since 2010, there has been a net standstill in the growth of the Mexican
population in the United States, as a result of increased outflows and reduced
inflows that manifested themselves after the onset of the softening of the
U.S. construction sector in 2007 and recession the following year (see Table 1
and Figure 1). Population estimates for the Mexican born in the United States
in 2011 are not significantly different from the 2010 total. According to
official Mexican statistics, an estimated 317,000 Mexicans crossed the
country's northern border to enter the United States in 2011, down 36 percent
from the estimated 492,000 individuals in 2010.

Mexico's National Survey of Occupations and Employment ( _ _Encuesta Nacional
de Ocupación y Empleo__ , ENOE) reports that Mexico's immigration rate, which
calculates the number of people (Mexican or not) who move to Mexico from
another country, most of whom are return migrants, has dropped from 3.7 per
1,000 in fall 2008, to 2.1 per 1,000 in fall 2012 (see **Frequently Requested
Statistics on Immigrants and Immigration in the United States** ). While data
from Mexico's Border Survey of Mexican Migration show decreased flows of
unauthorized migrants by quarter from 2008 to 2011, a slight uptick was
detected during the first two quarters of 2012.

**Table 1. Net Migration Rate: Mexicans Leaving and Entering Mexico, Second
Quarter Each Year 2006-12 (per 1,000)**

* * *

| | | Year | Departing | Entering | Net Rate  
---|---|---|---  
2006 | 144.0 | 34.0 | -110.0  
2007 | 106.9 | 33.1 | -73.7  
2008 | 83.1 | 36.9 | -46.3  
2009 | 54.8 | 32.7 | -22.1  
2010 | 45.8 | 33.0 | -12.7  
2011 | 39.4 | 20.9 | -18.6  
2012 | 41.9 | 14.3 | -27.6

Source: INEGI, 2012. Estimates based on Mexico's National Occupation and
Employment Survey ( _Encuesta Nacional de Ocupación y Empleo_ , ENOE).

**Figure 1. New Migration Rate: Mexicans Leaving and Entering Mexico, Second
Quarter Each Year 2006-12 (per 1,000)**

* * *

## | | ![](../images/mexico-apr13-fig1.jpg)

Source: INEGI, 2012. Estimates based on Mexico's National Occupation and
Employment Survey ( _Encuesta Nacional de Ocupación y Empleo_ , ENOE).

The near-zero net migration from Mexico to the United States that manifested
itself in 2010 represents a new trend. There is no one single factor
accounting for this change. One driver is the decrease in outmigration, a
confluence of economic factors in the United States and Mexico—still high
unemployment in the former, paired with Mexico's improving economic stability,
modest growth (in per capita terms), and ongoing social improvements.
Increased immigration enforcement at the U.S.-Mexico border and within the
U.S. interior also have played a role.

The U.S. recession and labor market trends may have caused a longer-term shift
in migration flows. Whether this change is cyclical or structural remains to
be seen, and will be put to a test once the U.S. economy experiences a full
recovery and returns to dynamic growth. Another factor will be the growth
pattern of the Mexican economy and its ability to incorporate still rising
numbers of labor force entrants and the unemployed.

Stepped-up immigration enforcement in the United States has also had a direct
effect on Mexicans, who represent 59 percent of all unauthorized immigrants in
the United States. The increased pace of deportations that began during the
Bush administration and have continued under President Obama has been felt
most keenly by Mexicans. In 2011, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
deported 391,953 individuals, 75 percent (nearly 294,000) of whom were
Mexican.

**Drivers of Mexico-U.S. Migration**

Migration from Mexico to the United States is primarily economically
motivated. Nominal wage differentials have been hovering for years at about a
10-to-1 ratio, in favor of the United States, for manual and semi-skilled
jobs. Moreover, a dynamic U.S. economy led to a strong demand for workers in
seasonal agriculture, high-turnover manufacturing, construction, and the
service industry. On the Mexican side, there have been enormous economic
transformations, but not pronounced enough to absorb the growing working-age
population.

Until the 1970s, Mexican migrants originated mainly from the rural areas of
central Mexico and were mostly confined to the U.S. agricultural sector,
largely in the U.S. southwest. After the 1970s, Mexican migrants also
originated from small, medium, and large cities, with a wide range of work
experiences, skills, and qualifications, and found employment in the United
States in construction, food processing, sundry services, and agriculture,
which remains a mainstay employment niche.

More recently, U.S.-bound migration has originated in nearly every corner of
the country and has spread throughout the United States, especially in
California and Texas. The south, southeast, and other nontraditional emigrant
regions of Mexico rapidly also became "high emigration areas." According to
2011 Census Bureau American Community Survey data, the main industries
attracting Mexican-born immigrants are service and personal care;
construction, extraction, and transportation; and manufacturing, installation,
and repair.

The U.S. recession and slow economic growth since 2007 seem to be changing
previous patterns. U.S. demand for immigrant workers (Mexican or not) has
dropped substantially, and circumstances in Mexico might be perceived as more
favorable—though perhaps not enough to significantly alter the status quo.
Mexico has a growing middle class, but it is not yet a middle-class society.
Employment in informal sectors remains significant, and Mexico's minimum wage
has experienced, on average, negative growth in real terms over the past few
decades.

Poverty, in terms of income capacity ( _pobreza de patrimonio_ )—a telling
indicator of Mexico's economic distress—continues to affect roughly half of
the population. Even though poverty has slightly decreased in relative terms,
from 53.6 percent of the population in 2000 to 51.2 percent in 2010 (the most
recent year for which statistics are available), it affects more people (52.7
million, a net increase of 5 million since 2000). Estimates of extreme poverty
( _pobreza alimentaria_ , or inability to buy basic food) also show a similar
pattern for the same period, falling from 21.4 percent (18.6 million Mexicans)
to 18.8 percent (21.2 million).

On Mexico's demographic side, the number of working-age people will continue
to expand well into the 2030s. The pace of growth in the number of working-age
Mexicans has become controversial as fertility decline has stalled in recent
years. Estimated net additions to the working-age population between 2010 and
2030 could fluctuate between 10 million and 15 million or more.

It is nearly impossible to gauge future U.S. demand for immigrant labor, and
more so if future economic growth uncertainties continue. As far as the
capacity of the Mexican economy to absorb a demographically slowing Mexican
labor supply, the prospects are relatively promising for the moment, opening a
window of opportunity that can seek to harness the results of an improving
educational picture and rising skill levels.

Although not a driver of Mexico-U.S. migration, U.S. immigration and
enforcement policies will also have an impact on the quantity, modalities, and
types of future Mexican migration.

**Changing Composition of Mexican Migration Flows**

Mexican migration flows have changed in many ways over the years. Recent
indicators suggest that the characteristics of migrants are becoming as
diverse, in terms of migrants' origin and educational and occupational levels,
as the characteristics of the Mexican population at large. According to
Mexican municipal-level data, less than a dozen municipalities out of over
2,400 failed to register some type of migratory activity—defined as households
with at least one migrant abroad (whether or not the household receives
remittances), or households with at least one returnee—between 2005 and 2010.

Mexicans continue to migrate to the United States mainly in search of work. As
of 2011, 88 percent of Mexican migrants in the United States were in the 16-64
age group, according to the Mexican Migration Monitor. The share of Mexican-
born immigrants ages 16 and over participating in the civilian labor force in
the United States (70 percent) is slightly higher than that of the total U.S.
immigrant population of similar ages (67 percent) and U.S.-born population of
those ages (63 percent).

The migration flows include greater numbers of professionals and skilled
persons. According to migration experts José Luis Ávila and Rodolfo Tuirán,
who examined Census Bureau Current Population Survey data, the number of
Mexican immigrants with some level of professional education or equivalent
experience more than doubled between 2000 and 2010, from a little over 400,000
to more than 1 million; and the number with postgraduate education increased
at a higher rate, from 62,000 to almost 151,000.

Between 1997 and 2007, the number of Mexicans with a bachelor's degree or
higher rose at an average annual growth rate of 6 percent in Mexico, but the
number of Mexican-born professionals living in the United States rose at the
rate of 11 percent, according to researchers Elena Zúñiga and Miguel Molina.
If this trend continues, at some point it may become a factor hampering
Mexico's potential economic and social development.

Increasingly, the distinction between circular and settled migrants is
becoming blurred. Indeed, many permanent migrants began their journey to the
United States as circular migrants, often although not exclusively as
unauthorized immigrants.

Circular migrants tend to be younger and predominantly male, while settled
migrants are more evenly split between men and women, more urban, and better
educated (meaning more than eight years of schooling).

**Mexicans in Canada**

Canada's Seasonal Agricultural Worker Program (SAWP), which began over 40
years ago, originally relied on workers from Caribbean countries, but has
included Mexican workers since 1974. Mexicans currently account for roughly
two-thirds of total workers in this program. Between 2009 and 2011, a little
more than 18,000 Mexicans came, on average, to work temporarily on Canadian
farms.

Although the Mexican immigrant population in Canada is tiny compared to the
population in the United States, it has increased mainly since the 1990s, more
than doubling from 22,000 in 1991 to about 50,000 in 2006, the most recent
year for which data are available. Approximately 3,200 Mexican immigrants
arrived in Canada for permanent residence in 2007; 2,800 in 2008; 3,100 in
2009; 3,900 in 2010; and 3,600 in 2011, according to official Canadian
estimates.

Economist Richard Mueller has argued that a good portion of Canada's Mexican
population consists of the descendants of Canadian Mennonites who settled in
Mexico in the 1920s and have since “returned,” enabled in part by claims to
Canadian citizenship. However, Mueller finds that the number of non-Mennonite
Mexican born has grown faster.

Some recent arrivals likely include Mexicans who entered through Canada's
points system for highly skilled immigrants. In 2005, enterprising Canadian
immigration lawyers saw an opportunity when border enforcement became a hot
political topic in the United States. They began advertising legal migration
to Canada, both in Mexico and Arizona.

Also, as fear of deportations became stronger, many Mexicans asked for asylum
in Canada. Similarly, as the Mexican government stepped up its fight against
organized crime and violent drug gangs, more Mexicans fled home and asked for
asylum in Canada. Thus, Mexico became Canada's top source country for asylum
applications in 2008. Although claims from Mexico almost tripled between 2005
and 2008, from 3,446 to 9,527, only 11 percent of claims reviewed in 2008 were
accepted.

In response to an apparent abuse of asylum applications, Canada in July 2009
began requiring Mexican citizens to have visas before they can travel to
Canada. Since then asylum applications have decreased. In 2011, there were
fewer than 1,000 refugee claimants from Mexico.

**Immigration Policy in the United States and Mexico and Its Consequences**

As a reflection of the importance attached to policy as potential drivers of
migration flows, their characteristics, and modalities, the Mexican government
closely monitors changes in U.S. immigration policy. In early 2013, all eyes
were focused on the improved prospects in Congress for a major overhaul of
U.S. immigration law that held the promise of some form of legalization for
the nation's estimated 11 million unauthorized immigrants.

The current circumstances are quite different from those prevailing in 2001,
when momentum on immigration reform was associated with high-level bilateral
talks and negotiations between the administrations of Presidents George W.
Bush and Vicente Fox.

Today, U.S. internal political, economic, and demographic factors are driving
the push for reform, perhaps none more significant than growing pressures in
both the Democratic and Republican parties to deliver on this issue. Vocal
business demands for immigrant workers, rejection of self-deportation as a
viable strategy, and growing public support for legalization also are playing
key roles in driving the debate. Nevertheless, as of this writing, it remained
an open question whether reform would be accomplished and if so, what shape it
would take.

The Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) of 1986 was the first serious
attempt to curtail illegal migration, but its promise of increased enforcement
did not take hold until years later and migration simply continued in various
irregular forms, in the context of a permissive attitude by both countries.
IRCA's legalization programs, which granted status to 2.7 million unauthorized
immigrants, had an important long-term unintended consequence: its
contribution to the transformation of Mexican migration from a predominantly
circular pattern into a more permanent one.

Together with earlier events, including U.S. Border Patrol operations in
1993-94, U.S. enactment in 1996 and beyond of robust immigration-control
policies prompted the Mexican government to openly seek a routine dialogue
with Washington.

Although the dialogue enhanced information exchanges, the effectiveness of
consular protection, and the expansion of certain forms of cooperation at the
Mexico-U.S. border, it did not prevent the expansion of Border Patrol
operations or the enactment of the restrictive Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) in 1996.

This legislation, together with the strong message sent in 1994 by
California's Proposition 187, convinced many permanent Mexican residents to
naturalize as a way to protect themselves from curtailments of many of their
social rights.

This restrictive climate also motivated Mexico to pass a law in 1998 allowing
its citizens to have dual citizenship.

As the United States stepped up border enforcement, one of the unintended
consequences has been an increase in the number of deaths as migrants take
ever-greater risks to reach the United States. This has become an important
source of tension in the U.S.-Mexico relationship, and has also strengthened
Mexico's determination and resolution to protect its nationals abroad.

Since the Bracero program, but particularly since the 1980s, Mexico has built
out its consular network in the United States. As of 2013, Mexico had 51
consulates tasked with reaching out to all Mexicans, regardless of their legal
status.

Among the policies the Mexican government implemented, and continues to
implement, is the issuance of hundreds of thousands of _matrícula_ consular
identification cards for migrants. After 9/11, Mexico increased its efforts to
provide these ID cards. Nearly 1 million _matrículas_ were issued in 2003. The
_matrícula_ , which is valid for five years, had many more uses — from getting
driver's licenses to opening bank accounts at hundreds of U.S. financial
institutions—than is currently the case.

In parallel, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) provided a more
detailed framework for bilateral immigration dialogue and understandings.

_High-Level Bilateral Relations and Migration Since 2000_

In February 2001, Presidents Fox and Bush engaged their administrations to
find mutually acceptable responses to a lingering migration issue that often
had placed the two countries at odds.

The high-level discussions centered on regularizing Mexicans already residing
in the United States, establishing a guestworker program, enhancing border
enforcement, and increasing the number of visas available for Mexicans.
Expectations of arriving at a far-reaching agreement were high until the
September 11 attacks.

The approach to manage the Mexico-U.S. migration relationship radically
changed: After 9/11, security, border control, and counterterrorism shaped the
new reality and discourse governing U.S. immigration policymaking. The Bush
administration, especially during its last years, oversaw stricter enforcement
of existing laws, reinforced boundaries—real and virtual—with Mexico, and
conducted highly visible worksite enforcement raids.

It took Mexico some time to realize that 9/11 had dramatically changed the
U.S. government's priorities and, consequently, that U.S.-Mexico relations
were entering a new era. In 2005-06, at the end of President Fox's term, the
Mexican government made an unprecedented effort to update Mexico's migration
policy on topics such as “undocumented migration” (the term used in _A Message
from Mexico about Migration_ ), border and regional security, human smuggling
and trafficking, and international cooperation. The result was codified in a
high-level message in which Mexico advanced a key concept of “shared
responsibility”—indicating its willingness to do its part with regard to
migration management.

In particular, Mexico accepted explicit responsibility for improving economic
and social opportunities in the country, recognizing the important
implications migration represents for its development, through a “more
directly productive use of remittances” as well as enhanced relations with
Mexicans abroad. Mexico also committed to encourage and ease the return and
reintegration of Mexicans into their origin communities.

This new approach had many aims, including securing new U.S. engagement to
manage Mexican migration bilaterally, and influencing legislative discussions
on various immigration reform bills introduced in Congress in 2006 and 2007.
This approach did not have the intended effects, however.

Probably as a reaction to such developments, newly elected President Felipe
Calderón in December 2006 opted to use a subtler, more low-key approach on
migration matters. The government posited that development and job creation in
Mexico were key to breaking Mexico's migration cycle. However, many Mexicans
felt as though economic development and job creation were still lagging by the
end of his tenure in 2012.

Nevertheless, the Calderón administration did seem aware that U.S. policy was
unlikely to change, even though his government had prioritized national
security concerns and the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime.

The Calderón administration, looking at the same time toward Mexico's southern
border with Guatemala, made several attempts to reinforce Mexico's border
patrol and modernize migration facilities to better handle transit migration.
Several programs were also enacted to regularize labor migration in the
southern regions.

The Obama administration, upon taking office in 2009, placed its focus on
enforcement, keeping up the Bush administration's record pace of removals, to
the dismay of immigrant communities and immigrant-rights advocates.

In December 2012, Enrique Peña Nieto was sworn in as Mexico's president after
a campaign in which migration was not a central issue nor does it appear to be
one of his administration's top priorities. Consequently, it seems that the
strategy of the new administration to deal with the U.S.-Mexico migration
issue will not be one of open and direct confrontation and intervention in the
U.S. immigration debate. Certainly, migration continues to be a very important
and visible component within Mexico's complex relationship with the United
States, and the Peña Nieto administration will probably continue the mostly
discreet migration approach of the Calderón administration.

The Peña Nieto administration also faces the challenges of implementing
Mexico's 2011 migration law. The task will not be an easy one due to the
reality on the ground regarding the rule of law in general and the real
possibility of full fruition of migrants' rights enshrined in the law vis-a-
vis principally immigrant detention conditions, duration of detention, and
access to translators. The administration will also face difficult choices if
it attempts to put some order at the southern border, like beefing up border
personnel and modernizing control infrastructure, or if it embraces an
attitude of _de facto_ free migration.

Although it is too early to know whether the Peña Nieto administration brings
a new approach to this issue of migration, it will be heavily influenced by
U.S. legislative action on immigration reform. Nevertheless, the likelihood
that any U.S. immigration policy in the near future could provide an explicit
answer to the Mexico-U.S. migration issue is low.

**Transit Migration and its Management**

Historically, the seasonal economic migration of Guatemalans to Mexico was
mostly seen as a regional and localized phenomenon, with no major national
spillovers.

However, civil wars in the 1980s in El Salvador and Nicaragua, and Guatemala's
36-year war that began in 1960 meant that many displaced Central Americans
transited through Mexico to seek asylum or look for jobs in the United States.
Over the years, migrants from other parts of the world, particularly from
South America (e.g., Ecuador) have used Mexico as a transit country. The
number of transmigrants rose through the 1990s and into the first part of the
2000s, to the point that it became a cause of concern for the Mexican
government.

More recently, as is the case with Mexican migration to the United States,
transit migration declined with the onset of economic difficulties in 2007 and
recession the following year (see Table 2 and Figure 2). Between 2009 and
2011, transit migration appeared to have leveled off, with preliminary 2012
data, however, indicating an increase. This increase is in line with more non-
Mexican unauthorized migrants (most of whom are Central American) being
apprehended at the U.S. border. There are also many more Central American
unaccompanied minors being apprehended at the U.S.-Mexico border than in the
past.

One may estimate the flows that come from the south by looking at two numbers.
The first is the number of border workers, primarily Guatemalans. Between 2001
and 2006, the number of the permits issued to border workers hovered between
40,000 and 45,000. Following a seemingly inexplicable drop (perhaps related to
the looming recession) in 2007, they have fluctuated between 25,000 and
30,000.

The second way to measure transit migration flows is the number of
_aseguramientos_ (also recently known as _alojados_ , migrants in shelters),
which are primarily apprehensions or seizures of potentially deportable
foreigners. (Note: these are counted as events, not as individuals. In these
figures are also counted those Central Americans who resort to voluntary
repatriation). _Aseguramientos_ generally increased between 1999 and 2005, but
have declined relatively steeply since 2007. In 2011, the number of
_aseguramientos_ (66,583) was roughly one-quarter of its peak of 240,269 in
2005 (see Table 2 and Figure 2). On average, around 90 percent of these events
ended in actual deportations.

**Table 2. Seizures of Potentially Deportable Foreigners (Aseguramientos) and
Border Workers in Mexico, 1999-2011**

* * *

| | | Year | Aseguramientos | Border Workers  
---|---|---  
1999 | 131,486 | 64,691  
2000 | 166,457 | 69,036  
2001 | 150,530 | 42,475  
2002 | 138,061 | 39,321  
2003 | 187,614 | 45,055  
2004 | 215,695 | 41,894  
2005 | 240,269 | 45,518  
2006 | 182,705 | 40,244  
2007 | 120,455 | 27,840  
2008 | 94,723 | 23,535  
2009 | 69,033 | 30,678  
2010 | 70,102 | 28,629  
2011 | 66,583 | 29,998

Source: Mexico's National Migration Institute.

**Figure 2. Seizures of Potentially Deportable Foreigners (Aseguramientos) and
Border Workers in Mexico, 1999-2011**

* * *

## | | ![](../images/mexico-apr13-fig2.jpg)

Source: Mexico's National Migration Institute.

The distribution of these apprehensions by country of origin shows clearly
that Central Americans constitute the overwhelming majority of those
intercepted by Mexican authorities. Of the 88,500 _aseguramientos_ reported in
preliminary 2012 data, 45.3 percent were from Guatemala, 32.6 percent from
Honduras, 14 percent from El Salvador, and at some distance Nicaragua and
Ecuador with 0.8 percent each. The remaining 6.5 percent was divided among all
other countries. With minor variations this distributive pattern has been the
norm for years.

In the 1990s, transit migration gained importance as the United States
reinforced security at its border with Mexico. This in turn put pressure on
Mexico to control its southern border so that fewer Central Americans could
enter the United States irregularly via Mexico.

Rather than concentrating on controlling its southern border, Mexico chose to
increase interior enforcement by, for example, setting up checkpoints along
major highways, and by expanding detention facilities. Mexico more than
doubled the number of such facilities from 22 to 48, between 2000 and 2008. It
also stepped up deportations, since 2006 signing agreements with Guatemala and
other Central American countries that allow Mexico to turn over all
unauthorized Central Americans to their countries of origin.

The strategy of interior enforcement may have had its successes. However it
also became apparent that there were insufficiencies—in training and
numbers—of border and migration personnel, especially when smuggling and
trafficking of humans and drugs began to increase, following the stricter U.S.
border controls in the 1990s and Mexico's fight against drug cartels in the
second half of the 2000s.

Despite executive orders that outline detainees' rights and procedural
obligations, many human-rights and civil-society groups, including Mexico's
National Human Rights Commission, have complained and issued reports pointing
out that many detention facilities are overcrowded and unhygienic, and that
detainees receive poor treatment. They also point out that corruption among
government officials has not been eliminated and that organized criminal
groups prey on many migrants.

Partly as a response to such reports, Mexico's National Migration Institute
(Instituto Nacional de Migración or INM) in 2006 began implementing new
detention procedures that allow citizens of Central American countries to sign
a repatriation form that may expedite their removal from Mexico. Later on, in
2008, Mexico passed legislation that decriminalized irregular presence. And in
2011, Mexico enacted an unprecedented new migration law as a more explicit
answer to deteriorating circumstances for migrants in transit, recognizing its
own obligation to ensure humane conditions for migrants through Mexico. In the
debate leading to the passage of this law, the Mexican government also
weighted the consideration that its policies should be congruent with what it
asks from the U.S. government in terms of treatment of Mexican migrants.

Indeed, transit through the country became hazardous and unauthorized migrants
became highly vulnerable and were subject to serious and frequent
victimization. The most notorious and highly publicized incident occurred in
August 2010, when 72 migrants were found dead in Tamaulipas state (100 miles
from Brownsville, TX) at the hands of one of many drug cartels known to extort
migrants passing through their territories.

This shocking event eventually led to the approval by the Mexican Congress—in
a rare unanimous vote—of the migration law that was enacted in May 2011. This
law is meant to reverse the pattern of calamities suffered by migrants in
transit. It is also intended to fully comply with the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families (ICMW), ratified by Mexico in 1999, and that entered into force in
2003.

The law is unambiguous in its defense of the rights of migrants irrespective
of their legal status, be they in transit or with Mexico as their destination.
The law also aims to ensure equality between Mexican natives and immigrants,
recognizes the acquired rights of long-term immigrants, and promotes family
unity and migrant integration. It also intends to facilitate the international
movement of people, to meet the country's labor needs, and to facilitate the
return and reintegration of Mexican emigrants.

It is not yet possible to judge the full range of the law's impacts, given the
law's broad objectives and the delayed release of its operable regulations or
_reglamento_ in November 2012. However, the law has already reduced bilateral
tensions with Central American governments. With regulations only recently
issued, there will be an institutional learning curve as INM agents and other
law enforcement officials must relearn procedures for enforcing immigration
laws.

Enforcing these changes could prove particularly difficult given the climate
of heightened security concerns, generalized violence, and weak
professionalization of Mexican enforcement agencies. However, the law
represents an important step in Mexico's acknowledgment of the basic rights to
which unauthorized migrants are entitled.

**Immigrants in Mexico and Return Migration**

Immigration to Mexico is meager compared to emigration of its nationals and
transit migration.

Mexico's foreign-born population almost doubled between 2000 and 2010 (493,000
to 961,000), and comprised just under 1 percent of the total population in
2010 (the most recent year for which data are available). However, more than
three-quarters of immigrants were born in the United States, and the vast
majority of the U.S. born were children were under the age of 15 (see Table 3
and Figures 3a and 3b). According to a Pew Hispanic Center report using
Mexican Census data, around 500,000 U.S.-born children resided in Mexico in
2010. Some have been raised and resided in Mexico since a young age, but
others have returned more recently to Mexico and experience difficulties
integrating into Mexican society and its educational system. Mexico is also
home to a small number of U.S. retirees.

**Table 3. Foreign-Born Population of Mexico by Age, 2010**

* * *

| | | Age | U.S. Born | Non-U.S. Foreign Born  
---|---|---  
Female | Male | Female | Male  
0-4 | 97,500 | 102,273 | 2,887 | 3,015  
5-9 | 102,132 | 106,036 | 4,126 | 4,251  
10-14 | 55,865 | 57,639 | 4,524 | 4,482  
15-19 | 38,828 | 36,820 | 5,504 | 5,040  
20-24 | 17,287 | 16,299 | 8,416 | 6,906  
25-29 | 10,797 | 10,410 | 12,335 | 9,982  
30-34 | 8,297 | 8,730 | 14,294 | 12,720  
35-39 | 6,185 | 7,031 | 12,806 | 12,905  
40-44 | 4,276 | 5,066 | 9,663 | 11,515  
45-49 | 3,518 | 4,070 | 7,776 | 10,001  
50-54 | 3,424 | 3,958 | 6,513 | 8,199  
55-59 | 2,996 | 3,504 | 5,137 | 6,327  
60-64 | 3,308 | 3,704 | 4,740 | 5,540  
65-69 | 2,193 | 2,815 | 3,310 | 3,961  
70-74 | 1,510 | 2,009 | 2,711 | 3,023  
75 and older | 5,201 | 4,421 | 5,455 | 4,952  
Total | 363,317 | 374,786 | 110,198 | 112,820

Source: Mexico's 2010 Population and Housing Census.

**Figure 3a. U.S.-Born Population of Mexico, 2010**

* * *

## | | ![](../images/mexico-apr13-fig3a.jpg)

Source: Mexico's 2010 Population and Housing Census.

**Figure 3b. Non-U.S. Foreign-Born Population of Mexico, 2010**

* * *

## | | ![](../images/mexico-apr13-fig3b.jpg)

Source: Mexico's 2010 Population and Housing Census.

The age structure of the non-U.S. foreign-born population is concentrated in
the working ages, as is the case among most immigrant populations worldwide.
It is widely acknowledged that this population contributes greatly, if
selectively, to the country's economy, considering its relatively high levels
of education or qualifications. Based on administrative records of almost
250,000 foreign-born residents ages 16 years and older, migration experts
Ernesto Rodríguez Chávez and Salvador Cobo estimate that in 2009, 33.3 percent
worked; 20.1 percent were pensioners; and 6.3 percent were students. The
remaining 40.2 percent did not specify their activity. Among the foreign born,
it is presumed that there is a relatively small component of foreign born who
had adjusted their status from refugee to permanent resident.

Guatemala, in a very distant second place after the U.S.-born population,
accounted in 2010 for 3.7 percent of all foreign born, followed by Spain, with
2 percent. The remaining 17.5 percent came from the rest of the world.

**The Importance of Remittances and the Diaspora**

The Mexican diaspora in the United States, which includes people who self-
identify as Mexican immigrants or who trace their family ancestry to Mexico,
was estimated at 34.8 million in 2011—the third-largest diaspora group in the
United States after Germans and Irish immigrants and their descendants.

Remittances, like migration, had important but mostly regional effects until
the 1980s, when emigration became more common across Mexico. Since then,
recorded remittances increased steadily in volume and importance, from $6.6
billion in 2000 to $26.1 billion in 2007, then decreased in 2012 to $22.4
billion, according to the Bank of Mexico.

The severe recession in the United States, which has especially affected
sectors with a large number of Mexican immigrants such as construction, has
dampened remittance flows. Remittances inflows to Mexico declined 3.6 percent
in 2008 but more steeply in 2009 (-15.7 percent) to $21.2 billion. Thereafter,
they stabilized and have even compensated for some of the lost ground: In
2011, remittance inflows were 7 percent higher than in 2010 (see Table 4 and
Figure 4).

**Table 4. Remittances, 2000-11 (in Millions of U.S. Dollars)**

* * *

| | | Year | Remittances | Annual % Change  
---|---|---  
2000 | 6573 | 11.2  
2001 | 8895 | 35.3  
2002 | 9814 | 10.3  
2003 | 15139 | 54.2  
2004 | 18332 | 21.1  
2005 | 21688 | 18.3  
2006 | 25567 | 17.9  
2007 | 26059 | 1.9  
2008 | 25145 | -3.5  
2009 | 21306 | -15.3  
2010 | 21304 | 0.0  
2011 | 22803 | 7.0  
2012 | 22446 | -1.6

Source: Bank of Mexico.

**Figure 4. Remittances 2000-12 (in Millions of U.S. Dollars)**

* * *

## | | ![](../images/mexico-apr13-fig4.jpg)

Source: Bank of Mexico.

Remittances have important macroeconomic and indirect effects. Although they
represent less than 4 percent of Mexico's GDP, remittances have become the
second largest source of foreign income, after oil exports, and ahead of
tourism or foreign direct investment. The stronger and most direct effects,
however, occur at the local and household levels. Thus, the drop might mean a
relapse into poverty for many families, particularly in rural areas, and a
slowdown of economic activity mostly felt at the community level.

Researcher Jesús Arroyo's findings on the use of remittances in 2007 reflect
what has been a long-term pattern: About three-quarters of remittances were
spent on everyday expenses, like food and rent, about 8 percent on house
acquisition and improvement, 6 to 7 percent on debt repayment, and 3 to 4
percent on land acquisition, agricultural implements, and business-related
expenses. The remainder included other expenses and purchases of items such as
cars and electric appliances.

Since 1986, the government has been trying to encourage a more development-
oriented and productive use of remittances. In 1999, earlier programs evolved
into the Three-for-One Program (Programa 3 x 1), which matches every dollar
from a migrant with one dollar each from federal, state, and municipal
governments. In the 2005-08 period, between two-thirds to three-quarters of
program funds went to infrastructure projects—from road pavement to school
improvements—and other social works, including public buildings and church
restoration. However, the program accounts for less than 1 percent of all
remittance dollars.

In 1990, the Program for Mexican Communities Abroad ( _Programa para las
Comunidades Mexicanas en el Exterior_ or PCME) was established with the
objectives of helping migrants maintain cultural links with their country,
encouraging investments in their communities of origin, and helping them to
secure their rights while abroad.

In 2003, PCME and another initiative were merged to create the Institute of
Mexicans Abroad ( _Instituto de los Mexicanos en el Exterior_ or IME). The
Institute includes all Mexicans communities, namely the hometown associations
of Mexican nationals and U.S. citizens of Mexican origin. In addition to
previous objectives, one of IME's goals is to collect proposals from with the
aim of improving these individuals' living conditions abroad. (For more on
IME, see the MPI report **Protection through Integration: The Mexican
Government's Efforts to Aid Migrants in the United States** ).

These programs reflect the importance the Mexican government attaches to the
Mexican and Mexican-American populations, as well as their economic and
political importance.

**Refugee and Asylum Policy**

At very specific junctures in history, Mexico has had generous policies
regarding refugees and asylum seekers, most notably in the 1930s for exiles of
the Spanish Civil War, and in the 1980s and 1990s for people fleeing their
political systems in several South and Central American countries.

In 2000, Mexico ratified the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of
Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. In March 2002, the Mexican government began
adjudicating asylum claims on its own, thus replacing the eligibility
determinations of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
place since 1982.

In 2011, Mexico granted refugee status to 262 persons. One-third (88) came
from El Salvador, and one-third (89) were from other Latin American countries
(Honduras, Colombia, and Guatemala, with roughly 30 refugees each). It is also
possible for asylum applicants to be granted humanitarian visas and remain
legally in Mexico.

A common complaint by rights advocates is that there is lack of transparent
regulation regarding the adjudication process. However, within the Mexican
Commission to Help Refugees ( _Comisión Mexicana de Ayuda a Refugiados_ or
COMAR), a coordination unit has been established to better monitor and improve
the process of adjudication of the status of refugees.

**Changing Contexts, Changing Concerns**

Two to three decades from now, the number of workers entering and leaving the
Mexican labor market may level off, which would be a fundamental departure
from the demographic reality from the 1940s forward that pushed millions of
Mexican workers in search of better economic opportunity outside their
country.

Until then, and in light of the inability of the Mexican labor market to fully
absorb workers and pay wages that sustain better living standards, unless the
U.S. economy stagnates for a sustained period of time, the lure of migration
will remain, albeit weakened from its peak in the 2000s. Together, the
recession and the earlier 9/11 attacks have fundamentally changed the history
and the narrative of Mexican migration.

In some respects, Mexico has already undertaken efforts to retain its
population instead of encouraging and accepting its traditional role as a
long-time labor force provider for the rest of North America. The Mexican
government has expanded and improved safety nets for the entire population.
Access to health care services improved during de Calderón administration
through the expansion of the _Seguro Popular_ program. The Peña Nieto
administration has been able to forge a promising _Pacto Por Mexico_ (Pact for
Mexico) with major political parties. This pact is a pledge to move toward
universal health care, a pension for all adults, unemployment insurance, and
other life insurance provisions. These plans, if successfully implemented, may
reduce emigration pressures.

The pact calls for specific actions and reforms that would put the economy on
a course of growth of at least 5 percent annually, which would be higher than
what the country has experienced in over three decades. Were Mexico to follow
the envisioned path, it could change the balance sheet of potential benefits
and drawbacks that would-be migrants must weigh before deciding whether to the
leave the country.

Educational reform is also a key component of the pact, although its focus
does not include English language and proficiency. Still, English is being
introduced in educational curricula nationwide, and many point to such actions
as improving would-be migrants' chances for success.

In terms of migration-related government entities, at the end of the Calderón
administration, a Unit for Migration Policy ( _Unidad de Política Migratoria_
, UPM) was created with the aim of improving coherence between the different
migration actions of the Mexican government, and to more effectively comply
with the objectives of the 2011 migration law.

Regardless of the outcome of U.S. legislative efforts to reform immigration
law, Mexico-U.S. migration undoubtedly will continue to be an important and
pressing bilateral issue that will demand continued diplomatic and political
attention, as will the issue of reintegration of return migrants, including
deportees.

Contexts have also changed structurally for transit migration. With net
migration from and through Mexico at very low levels, and the U.S. border far
less porous than in the past, ensuring that transit migration is a regular and
safe process and reassessing control of Mexico's southern border will be
priorities.

Transit migration and attention to migrants' rights (in no small measure) made
heavy imprints on Mexico's 2011 migration law, but the law ignores other
migration dimensions. An integral discussion of goals or strategies on matters
of emigration, transit migration, immigration, or return migration has yet to
take place.

Slowly but steadily, Mexican and Central American flows have created a
regional migration system that places Mexico squarely in a greater context — a
regional one.

There are no easy policy responses to emerging migration trends in Mexico. The
challenges ahead are serious; responses are difficult; uneasy trade-offs will
certainly be involved; and no guaranteed solutions are in sight.

**_Sources_**

Alba, Francisco. 2011. Hacer virtud de la necesidad. Hacia una nueva
generación de políticas para la migración México-Estados Unidos. October 2011.
_Este País_ 246: 8-12.

Alba, Francisco. 2010. Rethinking Migration Responses in a Context of
Restriction and Recession: Challenges and Opportunities for Mexico and the
United States. _Law and Business Review of the Americas_ 16 (4): 659-72.

Alba, Francisco. 2010. Respuestas mexicanas frente a la migración a Estados
Unidos, in _Migraciones Internacionales_ , eds. Francisco Alba, Manuel Angel
Castillo and Gustavo Verduzco. El Colegio de México, pp. 515-546.

Alba, Francisco. 2009. Migration Management: Policy Options and Impacts on
Development in Mexico. Unpublished study prepared for the OECD Development
Centre, Paris.

Alba, Francisco. 2008. The Mexican Economy and Mexico-U.S. Migration, in
Escobar _Mexico-U.S. Migration Management_ , eds. Latapí, Agustín and Susan F.
Martin. Lexington Books, pp. 33-59.

Alba, Francisco. 2007. La reconsideración de la política migratoria
internacional in _México: los retos ante el futuro_ , Gustavo Vega. El Colegio
de México, pp. 57-74.

Alba, Francisco. 2003. Del diálogo de Zedillo y Clinton al entendimiento de
Fox y Bush sobre migración, in _México-Estados Unidos-Canadá_ , 1999-2000, ed.
Bernardo Mabire. México: El Colegio de México, pp. 109-164.

Alba, Francisco and Manuel Ángel Castillo. 2012. _New Approaches to Migration
Management in Mexico and Central America_. Washington, DC: Migration Policy
Institute. **Available online**.

Alba, Francisco, Manuel Ángel Castillo and Gustavo Verduzco, eds. 2010.
_Migraciones Internacionales, Los grandes problemas de México_ , vol. III. El
Colegio de México.

Armijo Canto, Natalia. 2011. Frontera sur de México: los retos múltiples de la
diversidad, in _Migración y seguridad: nuevo desafío en México_ , Natalia
Armijo Canto, ed. Mexico: CASEDE, pp. 35-51.

Arroyo, Jesús. 2010. Migración, remesas y desarrollo regional: trinomio
permanente, in _Migraciones internacionales_ , Francisco Alba, Manuel Ángel
Castillo and Gustavo Verduzco, eds. El Colegio de México, pp. 227-270.

Arvizu Arrioja, Juan. 2011. Disminuye migración a EU por mejor calidad de
vida: SEGOB. El Universal, July 11, 2011.

Ávila, José Luis and Rodolfo Tuirán, 2012. La migración internacional
calificada: el crecimiento de mexicanos a Estados Unidos. Paper presented at
the Seminar _Las políticas migratorias en México y el Mundo_. SEGOB and El
Colegio de México, November 5-6, 2012.

Banco de México. Sistema de Información Económica (SIE), Indicadores
Económicos. **Available online**.

Castillo, Manuel Angel. 2012. Extranjeros en México, 2000-2010. July 2012.
_Coyuntura Demográfica_ , 2: 57-61.

Cave, Damien. 2012. American Children, Now Struggling to Adjust to Life in
Mexico. _The New York Times_. June 18, 2012. **Available online**.

Cave, Damien. 2011. Better Lives for Mexicans Cut Allure of Going North. _The
New York Times_. July 5, 2011. **Available online**.

Citizenship and Immigration Canada. 2012. _Facts and figures 2011-Inmigration
overview: Permanent and temporary residents_. **Available online**.

Comisión Nacional de los Derechos Humanos de México 2005. [Mexican National
Human Rights Commission] (CNDH). _Informe Especial de la Comisión Nacional de
los Derechos Humanos sobre la situación de los derechos humanos en las
estaciones migratorias y lugares habilitados del Instituto Nacional de
Migracíón en la república mexicana_ [Special Report of the National Human
Rights Commission on the Human Rights Situation in Migrant Detention Centers
of Mexico's National Migration Institute]. Mexico City: CNDH.

Commission on Immigration Reform and Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores.
1997. _Binational Study on Migration Between Mexico and the United States_.
Mexico. **Available online**.

Consejo Nacional de Población. 2012. índices de intensidad migratoria México-
Estados Unidos, 2010. Mexico. **Available online**.

Cornelius, Wayne A. 2001. Death at the border: Unintended consequences of U.S.
immigration control policy. December 2001. _Population and Development Review_
27 (4): 661-685.

Corona, Rodolfo and Rodolfo Tuirán. 2008. Magnitud de la emigración de
mexicanos a Estados Unidos después del año 2000. _Papeles de Población_. July-
September 2008. pp. 9-38.

Délano, Alexandra. 2011. _Mexico and Its Diaspora in the United States_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Escobar Latapí, Agustín and Susan F. Martin, eds. 2008. _Mexico-U.S. Migration
Management_. Lexington Books.

Fernández de Castro, Rafael. 2006., Seguridad y migración: un nuevo paradigma.
_Foreign Affairs en Español_ 6 (4): 2-9.

Giorguli, Silvia, Selene Gaspar and Paula Leite. 2006. _La migración mexicana
y el mercado de trabajo estadounidense_. Consejo Nacional de Población.
Mexico. **Available online**.

González-Barrera, Ana, Mark Hugo Lopez, Jeffrey S. Passel and Paul Taylor.
2013. _The Path Not Taken: Two Thirds of Legal Mexican Immigrants are not U.S.
Citizens_. Pew Hispanic Center. February 2013. **Available online**.

Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI). 2012. Boletín de prensa
núm. 330/12. Tasas brutas de migración internacional y saldo neto migratorio
según periodo 2006-2012". **Available online**.

Instituto Nacional de Migración (National Migration Institute). _Estadísticas
Migratorias_. Various issues. Mexico. **Available online**.

Leite, Paula, and Silvia Giorguli. 2009. _Las políticas públicas ante los
retos de la migración mexicana a Estados Unidos_. CONAPO, Mexico.

Lopez, Mark Hugo and Daniel Dockterman. 2011. U.S. Hispanic Country of Origin
Counts for Nation, Top 30 Metropolitan Areas. Pew Research Hispanic Center.
**Available online**.

Meissner, Doris, Donald M. Kerwin, Muzaffar Chishti, and Claire Bergeron.
2013. _Immigration Enforcement in the United States: The Rise of a Formidable
Machinery_ , Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. **Available online**.

Mexican Migration Monitor. 2012. Tomás Rivera Policy Institute and El Colegio
de la Frontera Norte.

Mueller, Richard. 2005. Mexican Immigrants and Temporary Residents in Canada:
Current Knowledge and Future Research. January 2005. _Migraciones
Internacionales_ 3 (1): 32-56. **Available online**.

Papademetriou, Demetrios. 2012. Migration Meets Slow Growth. _Finance and
Development_. September 2012. pp. 18-22.

Passel, Jeffrey, D'Vera Cohn, and Ana González-Barrera. 2012. _Net Migration
from Mexico Falls to Zero-and Perhaps Less_. Pew Hispanic Center. April 2012.

Payán, Tony. 2011. Ciudad Juárez: la Tormenta Perfecta, in _Migración y
seguridad: nuevo desafío en México_. Natalia Armijo Canto, ed. Mexico, CASEDE,
pp. 127-143.

Rodríguez Chávez, Ernesto and Salvador Cobo. 2012. _Extranjeros Residentes en
México_. Centro de Estudios Migratorios, INM, SEGOB.

Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores. 2005. _México frente al fenómeno
migratorio (Mexico and the Migration Phenomenon)_. October 2005.

Simanski, John and Lesley M. Sapp. 2011. Immigration Enforcement Actions:
2011. DHS Office of Immigration Statistics Annual Report, September 2012.
**Available online**.

Sin Fronteras. 2009. _Situación de los derechos humanos de las personas
migrantes y solicitantes de asilo detenidas en las Estaciones Migratorias de
México_ , 2007-2009. Mexico City: Sin Fronteras. **Available online**.

Suro, Roberto, and René Zenteno. 2012. Collapse and Convalescence: The Great
Recession and Mexican Migration Flows. _Mexican Migration Monitor_.

Terrazas, Aaron, Demetrios G. Papademetriou and Marc R. Rosenblum, 2011.
_Evolving Demographic and Human-Capital Trends in Mexico and Central America
and their Implications for Regional Migration_ , Washington, DC: Migration
Policy Institute. **Available online**.

Tuirán, Rodolfo, and José Luis Ávila. 2010. La migración México-Estados
Unidos, 1940-2010, in _Migraciones Internacionales_ , Francisco Alba, Manuel
Angel Castillo and Gustavo Verduzco, eds. El Colegio de México. pp. 93-134.

The U.S.-Mexico Migration Panel. 2001. _Mexico-U.S. Migration: A Shared
Responsibility_. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace/Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México.

Zúñiga, Elena, and Miguel Molina. 2008. _Demographic Trends in Mexico: The
Implications for Skilled Migration_. Washington, DC: Migration Policy
Institute. **Available online**.

IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS ABOUT THIS ARTICLE, CONTACT US AT
**Source@MigrationPolicy.org**

Newsletter Signup

## Author

    
        * Francisco Alba is Professor and Researcher at El Colegio de México.
    

## Related Articles

    
        * The 2012 Mexican Presidential Election and Mexican Immigrants of Voting Age in the United States
    * The Under-Registration of Births in Mexico: Consequences for Children, Adults, and Migrants
    * Mexican Immigrants in the United States
    

## In the Spotlight

**Special Issue: Regional Migration Perspectives: Trends, Patterns, and
Policies in Central America, Mexico, and the U.S.**

![](http://mpi.hifrontier.com/sites/default/files/source_images/honduras-

apr13-324.jpg)

The Migration Information Source has launched a special issue that focuses on
the topic of migration in the United States, Mexico, and the Northern Triangle
of Central America.

Learn More

## Contact

Source@MigrationPolicy.org

    
        * Research & Initiatives
    * Publications
    * Events
    * News
    * About Us
    
    * Contact Us
    * Site Map
    * Privacy Policy
    * Experts
    * Email Sign Up
    

1400 16th St NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20036 | ph. 202-266-1940 | fax.
202-266-1900

![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-twitter.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-facebook.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-linkedin.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-podcasts.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-vimeo.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-rss.png)

Copyright © 2001-2019 Migration Policy Institute. All rights reserved.

1400 16th St NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20036  
ph. 202-266-1940 | fax. 202-266-1900

![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-twitter-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-facebook-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-linkedin-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-podcasts-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-vimeo-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-rss-41.png)

Copyright © 2001-2019 Migration Policy Institute. All rights reserved.

    
        * Contact
    * Site Map
    * Experts
    * Sign Up
    * Donate
    

![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/logo-footer.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

