

Accessibility links

    
        * Skip to main content
    * Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
    
    * ![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg)
    *     *     * NPR Shop
    *     * Open Navigation Menu
    

Close Navigation Menu

    
        * Home
    
    * News Expand/collapse submenu for News
    
      * National
      * World
      * Politics
      * Business
      * Health
      * Science
      * Technology
      * Race & Culture
    * Arts & Life Expand/collapse submenu for Arts & Life
    
      * Books
      * Movies
      * Television
      * Pop Culture
      * Food
      * Art & Design
      * Performing Arts
    * Music Expand/collapse submenu for Music
    
      * Tiny Desk 
      * All Songs Considered 
      * Music News 
      * Music Features 
      * New Music 
      * Best Music Of 2019 
    * Shows & Podcasts Expand/collapse submenu for Shows & Podcasts
    

Daily

    
          * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/morning-edition.jpg) Morning Edition 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesat_sq-cbde87a2fa31b01047441e6f34d2769b0287bcd4-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Saturday 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/02/26/we_otherentitiestemplatesun_sq-4a03b35e7e5adfa446aec374523a578d54dc9bf5-s100-c85.png) Weekend Edition Sunday 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/all-things-considered.png) All Things Considered 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/fresh-air.png) Fresh Air 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/chrome/programs/logos/up-first.jpg) Up First
    

Featured

    
          * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hibt_podcasttile_sq-98320b282169a8cea04a406530e6e7b957665b3f.jpg?s=100) How I Built This with Guy Raz 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2019/05/23/screen-shot-2019-05-23-at-8.46.21-am_sq-7dcea391e7a87ca3569fe3d2047dda0144e5d86f.png?s=100) Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me! 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/02/npr_planetmoney_podcasttile_sq-7b7fab0b52fd72826936c3dbe51cff94889797a0.jpg?s=100) Planet Money 
      * ![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_hiddenbrain_podcasttile_sq-270ab642de6948802f485c6ad1f087239ef6e324.jpg?s=100) Hidden Brain 
      * More Shows & Podcasts
    
    * Search
    
    *     * NPR Shop
    
    * ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-dark.svg) ![NPR Music](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/music-logo-light.svg)
    * Tiny Desk 
    * All Songs Considered 
    * Music News 
    * Music Features 
    * New Music 
    * Best Music Of 2019
    
    * About NPR
    * Overview
    * Support
    * Careers
    * Connect
    * Press
    * Ethics
    

**For Undocumented Immigrants, Getting A Driver's License Could Spell Trouble
With ICE** **In 12 states and Washington, D.C., people in the country
illegally can still get a driver's license. The process is meant to keep roads
safe, but may put undocumented people at risk of deportation.**

![NPR logo](https://media.npr.org/chrome_svg/npr-logo.svg) **For Undocumented
Immigrants, Getting A Driver's License Could Spell Trouble With ICE**

### National

# For Undocumented Immigrants, Getting A Driver's License Could Spell Trouble

With ICE

    
        * **Facebook**
    * **Twitter**
    * **Flipboard**
    * **Email**
    

January 1, 20195:34 AM ET

John Dillon

**From**![Vermont Public

Radio](https://media.npr.org/images/stations/logos/vpr.gif)

![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/12/31/farmworkersuit-

leconnors-1114_wide-37c0a261b770b0dcac5d90fb7eb272c985a6baef-s1100-c15.jpg)

Enlarge this image

Farmworkers marched to the federal courthouse in November in Burlington, Vt.
to file a lawsuit that alleges their leaders were targeted by ICE, with the
help of the state DMV. **Liam Elder-Connors/VPR** **_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

Liam Elder-Connors/VPR

Farmworkers marched to the federal courthouse in November in Burlington, Vt.
to file a lawsuit that alleges their leaders were targeted by ICE, with the
help of the state DMV.

Liam Elder-Connors/VPR

Federal immigration authorities searching for people in the country illegally
have found a willing partner in state motor vehicle departments, according to
immigration activists.

In a dozen states and Washington, D.C., undocumented people can still get a
license to drive. The idea is that roads are safer if everyone using them has
passed a driver's test.

But that licensing process may put undocumented people at risk of deportation.

In Vermont, migrant dairy farmworkers were targeted for deportation after they
obtained drivers licenses, according to a federal lawsuit filed by Migrant
Justice, a local activist group. The suit cites documents obtained under the
state access to public records law that show the state Department of Motor
Vehicles forwarded names, photos, car registrations, and other information on
migrant workers to Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE.

In one email, a state worker passed along "south of the border names" to ICE.
In another email, ICE says a DMV worker should be recognized as an honorary
agent _._

![Pediatricians Voice Concerns About Care Following Two 'Needless' Migrant

Deaths

](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/12/28/ap_18358567263297_sq-20dd33d414c3e19f7e1655be71d2f3f591e77a0e-s100-c15.jpg)

### National

### Pediatricians Voice Concerns About Care Following Two 'Needless' Migrant

Deaths

![Trump Blames Democrats For Deaths Of Migrant Kids As DHS Secretary Visits

Border](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/12/29/el-

paso_sq-8230559e901851c45e91c20b86f31d2deda1aca3-s100-c15.jpg)

### National

### Trump Blames Democrats For Deaths Of Migrant Kids As DHS Secretary Visits

Border

Routine information sharing between the Vermont DMV was supposed to stop under
a 2016 settlement with the state Human Rights Commission. But Lia Ernst, a
lawyer with the Vermont ACLU, which brought the case that led to the
settlement, said the cooperation has continued. Ernst is also among a team of
lawyers who filed the federal lawsuit.

"What DMV has been sharing are photos, all the application materials, even
going so far as to advise when people are coming in for appointments so that
ICE come in and detain them there," she said.

This kind of Information sharing happens around the country, according to an
investigation by the National Immigration Law Center. The pro-immigration
nonprofit found that ICE accesses a national database of licenses and also
gets more detailed information through relationships with state DMV employees.

![](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/12/31/enriquebalcazar_johndillon_wide-33fac3a7b6831ec5d4b1b94279006db89f6f43d5-s1100-c15.jpg)

Enlarge this image

Enrique Balcazar, a leader of a local group called Migrant Justice, faces
deportation. He says records show his immigration status was flagged to ICE by
a DMV worker in emails. ICE says it does not target political activists.
**John Dillon/VPR** **_*hide caption_** *

**_*toggle caption_** *

John Dillon/VPR

Enrique Balcazar, a leader of a local group called Migrant Justice, faces
deportation. He says records show his immigration status was flagged to ICE by
a DMV worker in emails. ICE says it does not target political activists.

John Dillon/VPR

Enrique Balcazar, a farmworker and a leader of a local group called Migrant
Justice, now faces deportation after his arrest by ICE in March, 2017.

He said the records show he was flagged by a DMV worker in emails to ICE.

"And when sending my information from DMV to ICE, a DMV official had written
on it clearly that I was undocumented," he said.

The Migrant Justice lawsuit says ICE targeted leaders of this organization,
with the DMV's help. Balcazar said in the past two years, 40 people associated
with his organization were arrested by federal immigration authorities.

"Many of them have since been deported, and in nine of these cases, we have
clear evidence that these arrests were retaliatory, targeting people because
of their involvement in Migrant Justice," he said.

Migrant Justice sued ICE, the Department of Homeland Security and the Vermont
DMV, alleging that the agencies worked together to unlawfully target, harass
and detain farmworkers and Migrant Justice activists. The group claims that
ICE also used electronic surveillance and an undercover informant to track and
ultimately detain and deport its members. The suit alleges that the tactics
were aimed at depriving the farmworkers of their Constitutional rights of free
speech and freedom to petition the government, and it seeks a court order
barring the alleged surveillance and harassment.

DMV officials would not comment, and the court has given the state until late
February to respond to the allegations. An ICE spokesman also declined to
comment on the farmworker litigation, though he said the agency did not target
people because of their political activism. He said enforcement priorities are
based on border security, public safety and terrorism.

Vermont's Republican Gov. Phil Scott said his office is investigating the
cooperation between DMV employees and ICE.

"It wasn't my understanding that anything was being forwarded that couldn't be
forwarded," he said. "We're going to look into that as well."

Yet the information sharing has added a new level of worry for the 1,500
migrants who work on the state's dairy farms.

Many of the farmworkers are from Mexico. So the Mexican government comes to
the state a few times a year to help its residents renew passports or obtain
other documents. In December, the mobile consulate set up shop in a church
hall in Middlebury, near the heart of the state's dairy country.

Workers drove here from all over the state, some to get their passport photos
taken, while others came just to meet old friends and share a meal of takeout
pizza or home cooked tamales.

One dairy worker didn't need any government documents, but came instead for
the food and camaraderie. Like many of his co-workers, he's in the country
illegally, so asked to remain anonymous.

He's lived in the state for 14 years, and got his license soon after the 2014
law passed. "You can't live without [a] car. People live on cars," he said,
citing a truism of life in Vermont. "You know, you don't have the grocery
store like two-three minutes away, or five minutes away ... You got it like 10
minutes away — but driving."

Now he thinks more people will be afraid to go to the DMV.

"People are just going to think about more trying to get a license if the
information goes to another place, you know what I mean," he said.

Another farmworker who also asked to remain anonymous drove down to Middlebury
from near the Canadian border. He said people may choose to stay on the farms,
or drive without a license.

"Some people they say 'oh, I'm not going to get a license because my
information maybe go direct to Border Patrol, or any department," he said.

    
        * **Facebook**
    * **Twitter**
    * **Flipboard**
    * **Email**
    

#### Tuesday, June 11th, 2019

**_*_** ** _Listen_ * ** * 13:18 **** ** 13:18

**_*_ *Toggle more options**

    
        * ******Download**
    * ********Embed****
    

**_*_ *Embed** **`**<** iframe
src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/731545443/731548267" width="100%"
height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio
player">` **

##### Up First

#### NPR's Up First is the news you need to start your day.

The biggest stories and ideas — from politics to pop culture — in 10 minutes.

![Up First

logo](https://media.npr.org/assets/img/2018/08/03/npr_upfirst_podcasttile_sq-9bcafe819b7297c2d92839ec8110cf5ca5fcf04f-s400-c85.jpg)

###### Read & Listen

    
        * Home
    * News
    * Arts & Life
    * Music
    * Podcasts
    * Programs
    

###### Connect

    
        * Newsletters
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * Contact
    * Help
    

###### About NPR

    
        * Overview
    * Finances
    * People
    * Press
    * Public Editor
    * Corrections
    

###### Get Involved

    
        * Support Public Radio
    * Sponsor NPR
    * NPR Careers
    * NPR Shop
    * NPR Events
    * Visit NPR
    
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy
    * Your Privacy Choices
    * Text Only
    * NPR thanks our sponsors
    

Become an NPR sponsor

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

