
    
        * Dictionary.com
    * Thesaurus.com
    * Everything After Z
      * Word of the Day
      * Video
      * Word Facts
      * Grammar
      * Crossword Solver
      * Daily Crossword
    * All The Words
      * Slang
      * Emoji
      * Gender & Sexuality
      * Acronyms
    
    * Dictionary.com
    * Thesaurus.com
    

Try Our Apps

![Dictionary.com](https://www.dictionary.com/assets/dictionary_logo_white-90c1e2eaf84c6abcb80d08d6eb0b6c60.svg)

definitions

Search

    
        * synonyms
    

# anarchy

[ an-er-kee ]SHOW IPA

/ ˈæn ər ki /PHONETIC RESPELLING

EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGIN

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR anarchy ON THESAURUS.COM

* * *

### noun

a state of society without government or law.

political and social disorder due to the absence of governmental control: The
death of the king was followed by a year of anarchy.

anarchism(def 1).

lack of obedience to an authority; insubordination: the anarchy of his
rebellious teenage years.

confusion and disorder: Intellectual and moral anarchy followed his loss of
faith. It was impossible to find the book I was looking for in the anarchy of
his bookshelves.

## RELATED CONTENT

WROLRead more in this article about some frequently asked questions and fun
facts related to our definitions.

READ MORE

pansexualRead more in this article about some frequently asked questions and
fun facts related to our definitions.

READ MORE

## RELATED WORDS

turmoil, riot, confusion, hostility, chaos, rebellion, unrest, nihilism,
disorder, disregard, misrule, revolution, disorganization

## Nearby words

    
        1. anarchism, 
    2. anarchist, 
    3. anarchistic, 
    4. anarcho-syndicalism, 
    5. anarcho-syndicalist, 
    6. anarithmia, 
    7. anarthria, 
    8. anarthrous, 
    9. anasarca, 
    10. anasazi
    

## Origin of anarchy

1530–40; (< Middle French anarchie or Medieval Latin anarchia) < Greek,
anarchía lawlessness, literally, lack of a leader, equivalent to ánarch(os)
leaderless (an- an-1 + arch(ós) leader + -os adj. suffix) + -ia -y3

Related formshy·per·an·ar·chy, nounpro·an·ar·chy, adjective

Can be confusedanarchism anarchy

Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, ©
Random House, Inc. 2019

## Examples from the Web for anarchy

    
        * Letting humans use their common sense is not an invitation to anarchy.
    

Red Tape Is Strangling Good Samaritans|Philip K. Howard|December 27,
2014|DAILY BEAST

    
        * I had the opportunity to appear on the popular Sons of Anarchy series in their final season.
    

Porn Stars on the Year in Porn: Drone Erotica, Belle Knox, and Wild Sex|Aurora
Snow|December 27, 2014|DAILY BEAST

    
        * There are quite enough sons of anarchy in Syria and Iraq already.
    

Dutch Biker Gangs Vs. ISIS|Nadette De Visser, Christopher Dickey|December 9,
2014|DAILY BEAST

    
        * The notion of anarchy so appalled the conservative Reagan, he came out against Briggs, and it was defeated.
    

Gay Activist David Mixner: I Mercy Killed 8 People|Tim Teeman|October 29,
2014|DAILY BEAST

    
        * This little slice of anarchy is a 24-hour bus ride from Panama City, with plenty of rainforest-y scenery along the way.
    

A Man, a Plan, a Canal: Panama Turns 100|Bill Schulz|August 17, 2014|DAILY
BEAST

    
        * One-half of the empire was lost, and the other thrown into a state of anarchy and confusion.
    

The Loyalists of America and Their Times, Vol. 1 of 2|Egerton Ryerson

    
        * His absence left the field free for mutual jealousies, and for the remainder of the year anarchy reigned in France.
    

Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th Edition, Volume 11, Slice 2|Various

    
        * Government and co-operation are in all things the laws of life; anarchy and competition, the laws of death.
    

Dictionary of Quotations from Ancient and Modern, English and Foreign
Sources|James Wood

    
        * The worst part wanted to replace organized society with anarchy, but this extreme party never succeeded in their purpose.
    

Daybreak: A Romance of an Old World|James Cowan

    
        * Applied to the industrial or political machinery of modern society, anarchy must always reduce itself speedily to absurdity.
    

The Perfect Wagnerite|George Bernard Shaw

**SEE MORE EXAMPLES** **SEE FEWER EXAMPLES**



Explore Dictionary.com

    
        * ![It’s OK To Use “They” To Describe One Person: Here’s Why](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/1000x700-they-150x150.jpg)
    

It’s OK To Use “They” To Describe One Person: Here’s Why

    
        * ![9 Different Ways To Say “Stupid”](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/dork_dweeb_nerd4-150x150.jpg)
    

9 Different Ways To Say “Stupid”

    
        * ![Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1000x700-empathy-vs-sympathy-150x150.jpg)
    

Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When

    
        * ![Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-bisexual-150x150.jpg)
    

Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?

    
        * ![Become A \(Dungeon\) Master Of These D&D Slang Terms](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/default_logo_800x800-150x150.jpg)
    

Become A (Dungeon) Master Of These D&D; Slang Terms

    
        * ![Spanish Expressions You May Have Overheard In Casual Conversations](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-spanish-1-150x150.jpg)
    

Spanish Expressions You May Have Overheard In Casual Conversations

## British Dictionary definitions for anarchy

## anarchy

/ (ˈænəkɪ) /

* * *

### noun

general lawlessness and disorder, esp when thought to result from an absence
or failure of government

the absence or lack of government

the absence of any guiding or uniting principle; disorder; chaos

the theory or practice of political anarchism

Derived Formsanarchic (ænˈɑːkɪk) or anarchical, adjectiveanarchically, adverb

## Word Origin for anarchy

C16: from Medieval Latin anarchia, from Greek anarkhia, from anarkhos without
a ruler, from an- + arkh- leader, from arkhein to rule

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition ©
William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998,
2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012

## Word Origin and History for anarchy

## anarchy

* * *

n.

1530s, from French anarchie or directly from Medieval Latin anarchia, from
Greek anarkhia "lack of a leader, the state of people without a government"
(in Athens, used of the Year of Thirty Tyrants, 404 B.C., when there was no
archon), noun of state from anarkhos "rulerless," from an- "without" (see an-
(1)) + arkhos "leader" (see archon).

> Either the State for ever, crushing individual and local life, taking over
in all fields of human activity, bringing with it its wars and its domestic
struggles for power, its palace revolutions which only replace one tyrant by
another, and inevitably at the end of this development there is ... death! Or
the destruction of States, and new life starting again in thousands of centers
on the principle of the lively initiative of the individual and groups and
that of free agreement. The choice lies with you! [Prince Peter Kropotkin
(1842-1921)]

Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2010 Douglas Harper

Others Are Reading

    
        * ![Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-misunderstood-emoji-1-150x150.jpg)
    

Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?

    
        * ![The Greatest Language Hits Of Black Music](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-universal-music-1-150x150.jpg)
    

The Greatest Language Hits Of Black Music

WORD OF THE DAY

esprit de l'escalier _noun_ | [es-pree duh le-skahl-yey]SEE DEFINITION

    
        * ![What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ie-eg-video_v3-1000x700-150x150.jpg)
    

What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?

    
        * ![This Week’s Quiz Will Fuel Your Inner Fictioneer](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/wotd_1-150x150.gif)
    

This Week’s Quiz Will Fuel Your Inner Fictioneer

    
        * Browse the Dictionary:
    * #
    * A
    * B
    * C
    * D
    * E
    * F
    * G
    * H
    * I
    * J
    * K
    * L
    * M
    * N
    * O
    * P
    * Q
    * R
    * S
    * T
    * U
    * V
    * W
    * X
    * Y
    * Z
    * Browse by Category:
    * Slang
    * Emoji
    * Acronyms
    * Pop Culture
    * More
    
    * About
    * Careers
    * Contact Us
    * Cookies, Terms, & Privacy
    

© 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

