

Sections

SEARCH

Skip to contentSkip to site index

New York

SubscribeLog In

Log In

Today’s Paper

New York|El Chapo Trial Shows That Mexico’s Corruption Is Even Worse Than You
Think

    
        *     *     *     *     * Advertisement
    

Supported by

# El Chapo Trial Shows That Mexico’s Corruption Is Even Worse Than You Think

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2018/12/29/nyregion/29chapocorruption/29chapocorruption-

articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

In two months of testimony in the trial of Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the drug lord
known as El Chapo, nearly every level of the Mexican government has been
depicted as being on the take.CreditCreditStephanie Keith for The New York
Times

By Alan Feuer

    
        * Dec. 28, 2018
    *       *       *       *       *       * Leer en español
    

_[What you need to know to start the day:_ _Get New York Today in your inbox._
_]_

It is no secret that Mexico’s drug cartels have, for decades, corrupted the
authorities with dirty money. But as bad as the graft has been, the New York
trial of Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the drug lord known as El Chapo, has suggested
that the swamp of bribery runs even deeper than thought.

In two months of testimony, nearly every level of the Mexican government has
been depicted as being on the take: Prison guards, airport officials, police
officers, prosecutors, tax assessors and military personnel are all said to
have been compromised.

One former army general, Gilberto Toledano, was recently accused of routinely
getting payoffs of $100,000 to permit the flow of drugs through his district.

Even the architect of the government’s war on Mr. Guzmán and his allies —
Genaro García Luna, the former public security director — was suspected to
have taken briefcases stuffed with cartel cash.

Federal prosecutors have charged Mr. Guzmán, a longtime leader of the Sinaloa
drug cartel, with taking part in a continuing criminal enterprise by shipping
more than 200 tons of heroin, cocaine and marijuana across the United States
border from the 1980s until his arrest in Mexico two years ago.

To prove its case, the government plans to call as witnesses at least 16 of
the kingpin’s underlings and allies, some of whom served as cartel bag men.

While tales of violence have been common at the trial (which is on hiatus for
the holidays), the accounts of graft have been even more extensive.

The jurors have been told that Mr. Guzmán was practiced in the business of
corruption from the earliest days of his career. In the late 1980s, witnesses
have said, he started funneling millions of dollars to the first official on
his payroll: Guillermo González Calderoni, the chief of Mexico City’s federal
police.

Mr. Calderoni, who was partly raised in Texas, eventually became a legendary
officer in Mexico, perhaps best known for having helped the American
authorities crack the case of Enrique Camarena Salazar, an agent for the Drug
Enforcement Administration who was captured, tortured and killed by
traffickers in 1985. But within two years, according to evidence at Mr.
Guzmán’s trial, the lawman was already accepting cartel bribes.

One witness, Miguel Angel Martínez, told the jurors that Mr. Calderoni
provided Mr. Guzmán with secret information on an almost daily basis,
including an invaluable tip in the early 1990s that the United States
government had built a radar installation on the Yucatán Peninsula to track
his drug flights from Colombia.

Mr. Martínez also testified that Mr. Calderoni once informed Mr. Guzmán that
the Mexican authorities had discovered a smuggling tunnel he had dug beneath
the Arizona border. Before the police could raid the tunnel, Mr. Guzmán was
able to make off with a huge supply of cocaine.

But as useful as he was to the kingpin’s operation, Mr. Calderoni met a
violent end. In 2003, a gunman approached his silver Mercedes, as it sat
parked on a street in McAllen, Tex., and shot him in the head. The authorities
have never identified his killer.

Mexico is not the only country to emerge from the trial with its reputation
stained. Last month, Juan Carlos Ramírez Abadía, one of Mr. Guzmán’s Colombian
suppliers, appeared in Federal District Court in Brooklyn and admitted to
having paid off everyone from journalists to tax officials in his country.

A former chief of the North Valley drug cartel, Mr. Ramírez calmly told the
jurors that an entire wing of his organization was devoted to doling out
payments. “It’s impossible to be the leader of a drug cartel in Colombia
without having corruption,” he explained. “They go hand in hand.”

The list of those who took his money was impressive: prison guards, border
agents, lawyers and several officers with Colombia’s national police.

Mr. Ramírez boasted from the stand that in 1997, he spent more than $10
million bribing what amounted to the entire Colombian Congress to change the
country’s extradition laws in his favor. He also claimed to have paid as much
as $500,000 to Ernesto Samper, the former president of Colombia, when he was
running for office.

Even people in the private sector, witnesses have said, took cash from the
cartels.

A few weeks ago, the jurors learned that Mr. Guzmán had once reached a deal
with a Colombian catering firm to sneak cocaine past security officials at the
Bogotá airport onto planes owned by a Venezuelan airline, Aeropostal. When the
planes arrived in Mexico City, the jurors were informed, a crew of corrupt
employees would move the drugs onto trucks for the cartel.

Jorge Cifuentes Villa, a Colombian trafficker who also shipped cocaine to Mr.
Guzmán, recently testified that, during his career, he laundered up to $15
million in drug-trade profits through a crooked debit card company.

Mr. Cifuentes also said he once paid off a professional gemologist to
fraudulently certify that there were emeralds in a mine he had invested in and
was using as a drug front.

Some of the most egregious evidence of corruption has not been heard by the
jury, and likely never will be.

In November, for example, one of Mr. Guzmán’s former operations chiefs, Jesus
Zambada García, was poised to reveal that two Mexican presidents — neither of
whom was named — had taken massive bribes from the cartel. But the testimony
was shut down before it could be heard by Judge Brian M. Cogan, who ruled that
it would needlessly embarrass certain “individuals and entities.”

But further tales of payoffs may be coming.

In his opening statement, Jeffrey Lichtman, one of Mr. Guzmán’s lawyers,
promised jurors that a witness who has not yet appeared at the trial, Cesar
Gastelum Serrano, could — if asked — talk about bribing presidential
candidates in Guatemala and buying off a president of Honduras.

Then there was another potential witness, Dámaso López Núñez, one of Mr.
Guzmán’s top lieutenants, who allegedly had Mexican Marines, intelligence
officers and local politicians on his payroll.

“There is no part of the Mexican government or law enforcement apparatus,” Mr.
Lichtman said, “that Dámaso did not control.”

A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A22 of the New York
edition with the headline: El Chapo Trial Reveals An Abyss of Corruption.
Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

    
        *     *     *     * ### Related Coverage
    

## An Average Day at the El Chapo Trial — Far Away From Earth

Dec. 28, 2018

Image

## El Chapo’s Cartel: Killings, Jealousy and Shifting Alliances

Dec. 11, 2018

Image

## El Chapo Trial: How Many Gory Details Can One Jury Take?

Dec. 6, 2018

Image

## El Chapo’s Main Supplier: A Survivor and ‘Hands-On Boss’

Dec. 3, 2018

Image

Advertisement

## Site Index

Go to Home Page »

news

    
        * home page
    * world
    * U.S.
    * politics
    * New York
    * business
    * tech
    * science
    * climate
    * sports
    * obituaries
    * the upshot
    * today's paper
    * corrections
    

opinion

    
        * today's opinion
    * op-ed columnists
    * editorials
    * op-ed Contributors
    * letters
    * sunday review
    * video: opinion
    

arts

    
        * today's arts
    * art & design
    * books
    * dance
    * movies
    * music
    * Pop Culture
    * television
    * theater
    * watching
    * video: arts
    

living

    
        * automobiles
    * Cooking
    * crossword
    * education
    * food
    * health
    * jobs
    * magazine
    * parenting
    * real estate
    * style
    * t magazine
    * travel
    * weddings
    

listings & more

    
        * Reader Center
    * Wirecutter
    * Live Events
    * The Learning Network
    * tools & services
    * N.Y.C. events guide
    * multimedia
    * photography
    * video
    * Newsletters
    * NYT store
    * times journeys
    * manage my account
    

### news

    
        * home page
    * world
    * U.S.
    * politics
    * New York
    * business
    * tech
    * science
    * climate
    * sports
    * obituaries
    * the upshot
    * today's paper
    * corrections
    

### opinion

    
        * today's opinion
    * op-ed columnists
    * editorials
    * op-ed Contributors
    * letters
    * sunday review
    * video: opinion
    

### arts

    
        * today's arts
    * art & design
    * books
    * dance
    * movies
    * music
    * Pop Culture
    * television
    * theater
    * watching
    * video: arts
    

### living

    
        * automobiles
    * Cooking
    * crossword
    * education
    * food
    * health
    * jobs
    * magazine
    * parenting
    * real estate
    * style
    * t magazine
    * travel
    * weddings
    

### more

    
        * Reader Center
    * Wirecutter
    * Live Events
    * The Learning Network
    * tools & services
    * N.Y.C. events guide
    * multimedia
    * photography
    * video
    * Newsletters
    * NYT store
    * times journeys
    * manage my account
    

### Subscribe

    
        * home delivery
    * digital subscriptions
    * Crossword
    * Cooking
    * email newsletters
    * corporate subscriptions
    * education rate
    * mobile applications
    * replica edition
    

## Site Information Navigation

    
        * © 2019 The New York Times Company
    * Contact Us
    * Work with us
    * Advertise
    * Your Ad Choices
    * Privacy
    * Terms of Service
    * Terms of Sale
    * Site Map
    * Help
    * Help
    * Subscriptions
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

