

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/default/files/cis-logo-flat-header.png)

Center for Immigration Studies

Low-immigration, Pro-immigrant

Center for Immigration Studies Twitter Account

Center for Immigration Studies Facebook Page

Toggle navigation

    
        * Home
    * Topics 
      * RAISE Act (S.354)
      * Chain Migration
      * Current Numbers
      * Immigration Costs
      * Population and Environment
      * Illegal Immigration
      * Legal Immigration
      * National Security
      * Migrant Caravans
      * Refugees
      * Sanctuary Cities
      * Welfare Use
    * Publications 
      * Authors
      * Press Releases
      * Reports
      * Books
      * Fact Sheets
      * Litigation
      * Maps
      * Op-eds
      * Transcripts
      * Testimony
      * Videos
    * Blog 
      * Full Author List
      * Andrew R. Arthur
      * Todd Bensman
      * Dan Cadman
      * Jerry Kammer
      * Mark Krikorian
      * David North
      * Nayla Rush
      * Matthew Sussis
      * Jessica M. Vaughan
    * Data Portal
    * E-mail Updates 
      * E-Mail Update Descriptions
      * E-mail Update Sign Up
      * Immigration Events
    * About 
      * Staff List
      * Katz Award
      * Internship
      * Careers
    * Contact
    * Donate
    

Search

Search

Enter the terms you wish to search for.

    
        1. Home
    2. Jon Feere
    3. GAO Report: Illegal Aliens Start Forest Fires
    

# GAO Report: Illegal Aliens Start Forest Fires

By Jon Feere and Jon Feere on November 26, 2011

Earlier this year, Sen. John McCain stated a fact – namely, that open borders
lead to illegal aliens starting forest fires – and the usual suspects
responded with the usual indignation. A new GAO report confirms that McCain
was indeed correct.

At a press conference in June, McCain said: "There is substantial evidence
that some of these fires have been caused by people who have crossed our
border illegally. The answer to that part of the problem is to get a secure
border."

ABC News claimed that McCain set off a "firestorm." Amnesty groups said the
factual comment amounted to "fanning the flames of intolerance." La Raza board
chairman Daniel Ortega said that McCain "owes it to us to not spread fear and
hate." Angelo Falcon, president of the National Institute for Latino Policy
reasoned, "With the lack of evidence, he might as well also blame aliens from
outer space for the fires."

A McCain staffer responded: "The facts are clear. For years, federal, state
and local officials have stated that smugglers and illegal immigrants have
caused fires on our southern border."

McCain released a joint statement with Sen. Jon Kyl (R-Ariz.), and Reps. Jeff
Flake (R-Ariz.) and Paul Gosar (R-Ariz.):

> "During our tour of the damaged areas caused by the Wallow Fire on Saturday,
we were briefed by senior Forest Service officials, one of whom informed us
that some wildfires in Arizona (across our southern border) are regrettably
caused by drug smugglers and illegal immigrants. This statement is consistent
with what we've been hearing for years, as well as testimony by the Forest
Service and media reports dating back as far as 2006.

>

> "While Arizonans continue to face the enormous challenges related to these
wildfires, it's unfortunate that some are inserting their political agenda
into this tragedy."

McCain's office also pointed to the following information:

> "[T]he great majority, if not all the fires, on the Coronado National Forest
(this year) have been human-caused. Causes of fires include ricocheting
bullets, campfires, welding equipment and possibly ignition by smugglers or
illegal immigrants." – Jim Upchurch, Forest Supervisor, Coronado National
Forest, _Arizona Daily Star_ , June 7, 2011

>

> "Lightning cannot be blamed for the fires this year, [Coronado National
Forest acting fire management officer Kristy] Lund said. Fires can be caused
by careless campers and hikers, by ricocheting bullets, trailer chains that
drag on the ground and send up sparks or driving on a flat tire and the rim
lights sparks as it hits the road. And some can be caused by illegal border
crossers." – _Sierra Vista_ (Ariz.) _Herald_ , June 7, 2011

>

> "Large numbers of warming and cooking fires built and abandoned by cross-
border violators have caused wildfires that have destroyed valuable natural
and cultural resources. The wildfires also pose a threat to visitors,
residents and firefighters as well as to the cross-border violators in the
area. Agencies have documented that some cross-border violators also will
intentionally set diversion or rescue fires, using uncontrolled wildfires to
divert law enforcement from their illegal activities. Armed smugglers have
walked through the middle of active firefighting operations. The Coronado
National Forest must now send armed officers to clear wildland fire areas or
provide security for firefighters. Ensuring wildland fire areas are cleared of
people is challenging as cross-border violators often hide from firefighters.
Agents of the Border Patrol have been used to help in these efforts. However,
the potential for causing the death of cross-border violators during
prescribed fires or fire suppression operations remains a serious liability
and concern for us." – U.S. Forest Service Testimony to Congress, June 15,
2006

>

> "A fire that blackened nearly 900 acres in San Diego County was caused by
illegal immigrants who were apparently lost and set off a signal fire." – _Los
Angeles Times_ , September 4, 2010

The new GAO report confirms, once again, that illegal aliens are partially to
blame for forest fires along the Arizona border region, causing nearly 40
percent of the fires that were investigated. Among the findings:

    
        * From 2006 through 2010, at least 2,467 wildland fires occurred in the Arizona border region, about 86 percent of which were caused by human activity.
    
    
    
    * About 63 percent or 1,553 of the 2,467 fires were ignited on federally managed land or tribal land.
    
    
    
    * Human-caused fires that burned 10 or more acres had a number of economic and environmental impacts on the Arizona border region, including (1) over $35 million in fire suppression costs by federal and state agencies, (2) destruction of property, (3) impacts on ranching operations, and (4) impacts on tourism. Similarly, these fires had several environmental impacts, such as the expansion of nonnative plant species, degraded endangered species habitat, and soil erosion. However, the full economic and environmental impacts cannot be determined because complete information about these impacts is not available.
    
    
    
    * Of the 422 human-caused wildland fires that occurred on Forest Service, Interior, or tribal lands and burned at least 1 acre from 2006 through 2010, only 77 were investigated. Of the investigations conducted, 30 identified illegal border crossers as a suspected source of ignition.
    
    
    
    * The presence of illegal border crossers has complicated fire suppression activities in the Arizona border region. According to agency officials, the presence of illegal border crossers has increased concerns about firefighter safety and, in some instances, has required firefighters to change or limit the tactics they use in suppressing fires. For example, the presence of illegal border crossers has limited firefighting activities at night and complicated the use of aerial firefighting methods. The agencies have taken some steps to mitigate the risks to firefighters by, for example, using law enforcement to provide security.
    

The fires are not all accidental, and the GAO points to a report from 2010.
That report found that illegal aliens often set fires as a means to divert
U.S. law enforcement away from certain smuggling routes. Specifically, that
report pointed out the following:

> Refuge Manager of Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge testified that
illegal border crossers had disturbed wildlife and created more than 1,300
miles of illegal trails, causing the loss of vegetation and severe erosion. He
also estimated that each year illegal border crossers leave more than 500 tons
of trash and more than 100 abandoned vehicles on the refuge. Further,
officials at several units we visited reported that illegal border crossers
have started wildland fires, either by accident (e.g., from a cooking fire
that escaped) or on purpose (e.g., to divert law enforcement resources away
from certain areas).

As a side note, it should be remembered that the _Arizona Republic_ reported
in 2003 that an al Qaeda detainee claimed that forest fires were going to be
used as a means of terrorism.

So it's settled: Illegal aliens are to blame for some forest fires. Some also
kill Americans, most engage in ID theft, some are spreading gang activity,
while others risk lives while driving drunk.

All of this could be avoided through a serious commitment to immigration law
enforcement.

Topics: UnidosUS, Arizona

## Media Interviews

![Jessica Vaughan Discusses Border

Crisis](/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_image/public/2019-06/jessica-

dobbs-060819-small.png?itok=7U0OVqOa)

Jessica Vaughan Discusses Border Crisis

![Andrew Arthur Discusses MS-13 Murder in

Maryland](/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_image/public/2019-05/art-

tucker-052319-small.png?itok=R1DrcngJ)

Andrew Arthur Discusses MS-13 Murder in Maryland

![Mark Krikorian Discusses Legislation and

Policy](/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_image/public/2019-02/krikorian-

wj-021219-small.png?itok=GYWgO8OW)

Mark Krikorian Discusses Legislation and Policy

## Popular Today

    
        * Maps: Sanctuary Cities, Counties, and States 
    * Notes on The Mexican Military's Mission to the Guatemala-Mexico Border
    * Somalia-Born Candidate for Congress Accused of Immigration/Marriage Fraud
    

## Related Articles

    
        * What's in a Name? The Meaning of "La Raza"
    * Janet Murguia of La Raza Takes the High Road on Immigration Debate
    * White House Immigration Chief Tried to Undermine Enforcement in '86 Amnesty
    

## More from the Author

    
        * Media Mislead on Pew Poll about Border Wall
    * Does Hillary Support a Border Wall? Someone Should Ask
    * More Pinocchios for the Post's Immigration Editorial
    

The Center for Immigration Studies is an independent, non-partisan, non-profit
research organization founded in 1985. It is the nation's only think tank
devoted exclusively to research and policy analysis of the economic, social,
demographic, fiscal, and other impacts of immigration on the United States.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

