

Sections

SEARCH

Skip to contentSkip to site index

U.S.

SubscribeLog In

Log In

Today’s Paper

U.S.|The Number of Undocumented Immigrants in the U.S. Has Dropped, a Study
Says. Here Are 5 Takeaways.

    
        *     *     *     *     * Advertisement
    

Supported by

# The Number of Undocumented Immigrants in the U.S. Has Dropped, a Study Says.

Here Are 5 Takeaways.

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2018/11/28/us/28migrants-

print/28migrants-articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

Immigrants were apprehended by law enforcement agents in Laredo, Tex., in
August. The number of unauthorized migrants living in the United States has
steadily declined.CreditCreditTodd Heisler/The New York Times

By Jose A. Del Real

    
        * Nov. 27, 2018
    *       *       *       *       *       * Shortly after then-candidate Donald Trump announced his presidential campaign, he suggested that the number of undocumented immigrants living in the United States could exceed 30 million. But a new study puts the number far lower and shows a significant decline over more than a decade.
    

The study, published by the Pew Research Center on Tuesday, put the number of
undocumented immigrants in the United States at 10.7 million in 2016, down
from a peak of 12.2 million in 2007.

As Pew analyzed new data from recent years, its researchers found that “it
wasn’t just that the numbers declined, but also who these unauthorized
immigrants are had changed since 2007,” said D’Vera Cohn, a senior writer at
Pew Research.

The estimates are derived from figures published by sources like the Census
Bureau, which accounts for foreign-born people living in the United States,
along with other demographic data including death rates and legal border
admissions.

The report showed that the immigration landscape was different from that
portrayed by many politicians:

**In 2016, as President Barack Obama left office, the number of undocumented
immigrants living in the United States was at its lowest level in a decade.**

As of 2016, the most recent data available, the number of people living in the
United States without documents decreased to 10.7 million from a peak of 12.2
million in 2007. The sharp decline came largely during the Obama
administration and in the wake of the Great Recession. Deportations also
sharply rose during that time.

“The recession and the housing bust were certainly important events driving
down these numbers, but it’s also possible that several other things were
important as well,” Ms. Cohn said. “We know that border enforcement was
stepped up during this period too, and smuggling fees increased. And we also
know there has been a rise in deportations.”

**Amid global economic and political shifts, there are fewer undocumented
Mexican migrants today and more Central Americans.**

In 2016 there were 1.5 million fewer unauthorized Mexicans living in the
United States than in 2007. While they still make up a majority of illegal
immigrants living in the United States today, migration out of Mexico has
slowed. Pew notes that, according to survey data by the Mexican government,
“the majority cited family reunification as the main reason” for returning to
Mexico.

And there has also been a sharp decrease in the number of “recent arrivals” —
immigrants who entered the country within the last five years. “There was an
average of 386,000 annual unauthorized arrivals for the 2011-16 period,
compared with 715,000 for the 2002-07 period. That amounts to a 46 percent
decline,” according to the report. During that time, entering the country grew
more difficult and, throughout the recession, jobs in construction and other
fields grew more scarce.

But in contrast, the number of migrants from Central America living in the
United States illegally rose somewhat between 2007 and 2016, amid increased
violence and economic uncertainty in the Northern Triangle region.

**The overwhelming majority of undocumented immigrants have lived in the
country for a decade or longer.**

The typical undocumented migrant living in the United States in 2016 had been
here for about 15 years, up from a median of about nine years in 2007. Two-
thirds of all undocumented immigrants, the researchers found, had lived in the
United States for more than 10 years.

“This is a much more rooted, established population than it was in 2007,” Ms.
Cohn said. “There are markedly fewer short-term residents and more long term
residents.”

**One million immigrants without papers are protected from deportation by the
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program and other mechanisms.**

Pew estimates that about 700,000 people in the United States who were brought
to the country without documents as children have received protection from
deportation through DACA. An additional 300,000 have Temporary Protected
Status, which is applied to migrants from countries like El Salvador and Haiti
that have experienced natural disasters.

**Visa overstays have become an increasingly significant share of unauthorized
migration.**

Because of limited statistical data, it is hard to account for how many
undocumented immigrants in the United States are here as a result of
overstaying a visa. But those migrants increasingly appear to make up a
significant share of overall illegal immigration.

“We don’t have exact numbers,” Ms. Cohn said, “but, from what we know, it
appears that a majority of recent arrivals in 2016 are not unauthorized
immigrants who crossed without documents, but people who arrived on legal
visas and overstayed their deadlines to leave.”

Such immigrants, who typically have the means to enter the country legally but
have not been granted permission to stay beyond a certain period, “probably
constituted most of the recent unauthorized immigrant arrivals in 2016,”
according to the report.

A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A12 of the New York
edition with the headline: Study Finds the Inflow Of Illegal Immigrants Has
Steadily Declined. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

    
        *     *     *     * Advertisement
    

## Site Index

Go to Home Page »

news

    
        * home page
    * world
    * U.S.
    * politics
    * New York
    * business
    * tech
    * science
    * climate
    * sports
    * obituaries
    * the upshot
    * today's paper
    * corrections
    

opinion

    
        * today's opinion
    * op-ed columnists
    * editorials
    * op-ed Contributors
    * letters
    * sunday review
    * video: opinion
    

arts

    
        * today's arts
    * art & design
    * books
    * dance
    * movies
    * music
    * Pop Culture
    * television
    * theater
    * watching
    * video: arts
    

living

    
        * automobiles
    * Cooking
    * crossword
    * education
    * food
    * health
    * jobs
    * magazine
    * parenting
    * real estate
    * style
    * t magazine
    * travel
    * weddings
    

listings & more

    
        * Reader Center
    * Wirecutter
    * Live Events
    * The Learning Network
    * tools & services
    * N.Y.C. events guide
    * multimedia
    * photography
    * video
    * Newsletters
    * NYT store
    * times journeys
    * manage my account
    

### news

    
        * home page
    * world
    * U.S.
    * politics
    * New York
    * business
    * tech
    * science
    * climate
    * sports
    * obituaries
    * the upshot
    * today's paper
    * corrections
    

### opinion

    
        * today's opinion
    * op-ed columnists
    * editorials
    * op-ed Contributors
    * letters
    * sunday review
    * video: opinion
    

### arts

    
        * today's arts
    * art & design
    * books
    * dance
    * movies
    * music
    * Pop Culture
    * television
    * theater
    * watching
    * video: arts
    

### living

    
        * automobiles
    * Cooking
    * crossword
    * education
    * food
    * health
    * jobs
    * magazine
    * parenting
    * real estate
    * style
    * t magazine
    * travel
    * weddings
    

### more

    
        * Reader Center
    * Wirecutter
    * Live Events
    * The Learning Network
    * tools & services
    * N.Y.C. events guide
    * multimedia
    * photography
    * video
    * Newsletters
    * NYT store
    * times journeys
    * manage my account
    

### Subscribe

    
        * home delivery
    * digital subscriptions
    * Crossword
    * Cooking
    * email newsletters
    * corporate subscriptions
    * education rate
    * mobile applications
    * replica edition
    

## Site Information Navigation

    
        * © 2019 The New York Times Company
    * Contact Us
    * Work with us
    * Advertise
    * Your Ad Choices
    * Privacy
    * Terms of Service
    * Terms of Sale
    * Site Map
    * Help
    * Help
    * Subscriptions
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

