

Skip to main content

Google Tag Manager

×

## Search form

Search

IRC

    
        * Crisis Watch: Ebola in Democratic Republic of Congo
    * Search
    * Log in
    * Careers
    * Volunteer
    *     * Donate☰
    
    * ×
    
    * Who We AreWho We Are
      * ##### About Us
    
        * At a Glance
        * Annual Report
        * Financials & Ratings
        * Our Strategy
      * ##### Our People
    
        * President David Miliband
        * Staff Leaders
        * Board & Overseers
        * Voices
    * Where We WorkWhere We Work
      * ##### Location
    
        * AfricaAfrica
    
          * Cameroon
          * Central African Republic
          * Chad
          * Democratic Republic of Congo
          * Ethiopia
          * Ivory Coast
          * Kenya
          * Liberia
          * Libya
    
          * Mali
          * Niger
          * Nigeria
          * Sierra Leone
          * Somalia
          * South Sudan
          * Tanzania
          * Uganda
          * Zimbabwe
    
        * AsiaAsia
    
          * Afghanistan
          * Bangladesh
          * Malaysia
    
          * Myanmar
          * Pakistan
          * Thailand
    
        * Central & South AmericaCentral & South America
    
          * Colombia
          * Venezuela
    
          * El Salvador
    
        * EuropeEurope
    
          * Germany
          * Greece
    
          * Italy
          * Serbia
    
        * Middle EastMiddle East
    
          * Iraq
          * Jordan
          * Lebanon
    
          * Syria
          * Yemen
    
        * United StatesUnited States
    
          * Abilene, TX
          * Atlanta, GA
          * Baltimore, MD
          * Boise, ID
          * Charlottesville, VA
          * Dallas, TX
          * Denver, CO
          * Elizabeth, NJ
          * Los Angeles, CA
          * Miami, FL
          * Missoula, MT
          * New York, NY
          * Oakland, CA
    
          * Phoenix, AZ
          * Richmond, VA
          * Sacramento, CA
          * Salt Lake City, UT
          * San Diego, CA
          * San Jose, CA
          * Seattle, WA
          * Silver Spring, MD
          * Tallahassee, FL
          * Tucson, AZ
          * Turlock, CA
          * Wichita, KS
    
    * What We DoWhat We Do
      * ##### Where We Focus
    
        * Economic Wellbeing
        * Education
        * Health
        * Empowerment
        * Safety
      * ##### Our Approach
    
        * Better Aid
        * Centered on Women & Girls
        * How We Use Evidence
        * Airbel Center R&D
        * Reports & Resources
    * How To HelpHow To Help
      * ##### Give
    
        * Donate Monthly
        * Rescue Gifts for Father's Day
        * Make a Tribute Gift
        * Start a Fundraising Campaign
        * Donor Advised Funds (DAF)
        * Make a Planned Gift
      * ##### Join Us
    
        * Take Action
        * Become a Corporate Partner
        * Join GenR
        * Attend an Event
        * Volunteer
        * Careers
    * LatestLatest
      * ##### News
    
        * News & Features
        * Media Center
        * Podcast: Displaced 
      * ##### Crises & Issues
    
        * Border asylum seekers
        * Venezuela crisis
        * Starvation in Yemen
        * Refugees in America
    * Crisis Watch
    * Search
    * Log in
    * Careers
    * Volunteer
    *     *     * Donate
    

###### Refugees in America

# How immigrants and refugees become U.S. citizens

July 3, 2018

Each year, more than 700,000 people become American citizens.

Many arrive in the United States after escaping war and persecution. Some are
resettled in the U.S. as refugees and others request asylum after reaching a
U.S. border. (Meet some of our newest American citizens below.)

The American immigration system can be extremely difficult to navigate and the
application process to become a citizen alone can take a year or longer.
Generally speaking, foreigners applying for citizenship must successfully pass
six stages or steps—here's how it works.

### **Step 1: Determine eligibility**

To become U.S. citizens, foreigners must first become permanent
residents—green card holders. The International Rescue Committee helps
refugees and immigrants obtain green cards, a costly and lengthy process in
itself.

After living in the U.S. for five consecutive years as lawful permanent
residents (or three years if married to a U.S. citizen), green card holders
can then apply for citizenship (there are exceptions for military veterans as
well). Applicants must:

    
        * be at least 18 years old;
    * be of good moral character;
    * able to read, write and speak basic English.
    * demonstrate an understanding of the principles and ideals of the U.S. Constitution;
    * have a basic understanding of U.S. history and government;
    * take an oath of allegiance to the United States.
    

### **Step 2: Apply for naturalization**

Naturalization is the process by which U.S. citizenship is granted to a
foreign citizen or national. Once individuals have met the legal requirements
for becoming citizens, they must submit an application form, with supporting
documents and a $725 fee, to the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
(USCIS).

The IRC helps immigrants and refugees prepare their applications and
documentation and guides them through the process, which can take six to 14
months. Over the past six years, the IRC has helped nearly 30,000 refugees and
immigrants become U.S. citizens.

### **Step 3: Take the biometric test**

Applicants for citizenship will receive an appointment letter from the USCIS
to be fingerprinted and photographed for the purpose of conducting multiple
background checks and cross-checks by the Department of Justice, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, and the Department of Homeland Security. All
applicants must be cleared before the USCIS schedules an in-person interview.

### **Step 4: Complete the interview**

Applicants are interviewed by USCIS officers who ask questions about their
applications, backgrounds, character, understanding of the U.S. Constitution,
and willingness to take an oath of allegiance.

### Step 5: Take the civics and English tests

During the interview, a USCIS officer will test an applicant’s ability to
read, write and speak basic English as well as his or her knowledge and
understanding of U.S. history and government. **Here's a sample civics
question:**

What is one thing Benjamin Franklin is famous for?

    
        * He was the leader of the Constitutional Convention. 
    * He helped write The Federalist Papers.
    * He was the first Postmaster General of the U.S. 
    * He discovered electricity.
    

In 1775, the Second Continental Congress appointed Benjamin Franklin the first
postmaster general. He was also a U.S. diplomat, the oldest member of the
Constitutional Convention, the writer of “Poor Richard’s Almanac” and started
the first free libraries. While he did not discover electricity, Franklin was
a pioneer in the study of electricity and made many important contributions to
the science.

Certain applicants, because of age, disability or length of permanent
residency, are exempt from the English requirement and may take the civics
test in the language of their choice.

A USCIS officer typically asks applicants up to 10 questions (from a list of
100) covering principles of American democracy, system of government,
geography, rights and responsibilities, and history. Applicants must answer
six of the 10 questions correctly to pass the civics test.

The English test has three components: reading, writing and speaking. The
USCIS officer dictates several sentences in English and applicants must read,
write and speak them.

The IRC conducts English and civic classes, one-on-one tutoring, mock
interviews, and general information sessions to help applicants prepare for
the tests **.**

![Mulu Bahre at John Hopkins Hospital in

Baltimore](https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/styles/partial_width_landscape_breakpoints_theme_rescue_large_1x/public/image/4351/e-image/20161216_baltimore_klane_093.jpg?itok=oGv4p6xd&timestamp=1530584259)

Mulu Bahre, born in Eritrea, became an American citizen in January 2016, six
years after the IRC resettled his family in Baltimore.

###### Photo: Keith Lane/IRC

### **Step 6: Take the oath**

Finally, successful applicants must take an oath of allegiance to the United
States at a public ceremony before receiving their certificates of
naturalization. They are now U.S. citizens. These public ceremonies are often
celebrations, a time when new citizens recognize the large commitment and
effort they have made to achieve their goal.

Mulu Bahre, born in Eritrea, became an American citizen in January 2016, six
years after the IRC resettled his family in Baltimore.

“It was a big change for me, it was also a big commitment,” he said. “The day
I went to be sworn in, that was full of joy for me. I was really excited and
knew that there were more opportunities ahead. It made me feel like I belong
here.”

### Stand with refugees and asylum seekers

Demand that your Members of Congress protect vulnerable families fleeing from
violence and persecution.

Take action

##### Explore related topics

    
        * Citizenship
    * Immigrants
    * #RefugeesWelcome
    

## Related news & features

    
        * ![](https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/styles/window_width_breakpoints_theme_rescue_large_1x/public/article/468/teaser/hero_1_1.jpg?itok=1ZaLN3n7&timestamp=1504630711)
    

Immigration

Pathways to citizenship

January 9, 2014

    
        * ![Syrian sisters resettled in Baltimore](https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/styles/window_width_breakpoints_theme_rescue_large_1x/public/article/329/teaser/2.jpg?itok=LDIwBlh_&timestamp=1490794176)
    

# RefugeesWelcome

How the U.S. refugee vetting and resettlement process really works

March 24, 2017

    
        * ![Airman 1st Class Nelson Versailles Rieu](https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/styles/window_width_breakpoints_theme_rescue_large_1x/public/article/1011/teaser/20150903_bharkin_nelsonversaillesrieu_003.jpg?itok=381-DTd7&timestamp=1482170052)
    

New Americans

Living the dream while serving his country

September 20, 2016

    
        * ![Portraits of refugees stranded in Greece.](https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/styles/window_width_breakpoints_theme_rescue_large_1x/public/article/1333/teaser/irc_refugee_portraits_6x3_nolines_bw.jpg?itok=ExhncZsc&timestamp=1504630323)
    

Take action

Tell your elected officials, “I stand with refugees”

February 2, 2017

###### Crisis Watch

    
        * Who We Are
    * Where We Work
    * What We Do
    * How To Help
    * Latest
    * Careers
    * Contact Us
    * Donor Help
    * Code of Conduct
    * Ethics Hotline
    

###### Our efficiency

    
        * 87% Program services
    * 8% Management & general
    * 5% Fundraising
    

Donate

###### Join our mailing list

###### Follow us

    
        * Global Affiliates: IRC UK Stichting Vluchteling
    * Respecting Your Privacy
    * Terms and Conditions
    

International Rescue Committee is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization.
Copyright (C) International Rescue Committee, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

