
    
        * Shows
    
    * This Day In History
    
    * Schedule
    
    * Topics
    
    * Stories
    
    *  _Ad Choices_
    *  _Advertise_
    *  _Closed Captioning_
    *  _Copyright Policy_
    *  _Corporate Information_
    *  _Employment Opportunities_
    *  _FAQ/Contact Us_
    *  _Privacy Notice_
    *  _Terms of Use_
    *  _TV Parental Guidelines_
    *  _RSS Feeds_
    *  _Privacy Settings_
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    

Publish date:

    
        Nov 9, 2009
    

Updated on

    
        Jun 7, 2019
    

# Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo

Author:

    
        History.com Editors
    
    *     *     *     * ## Contents
    
    1. Mexican-American War: 1846-48 
    2. Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo: February 2, 1848 
    3. Mexican-American War: Aftermath
    

The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, signed on February 2, 1848, ended the
Mexican-American War in favor of the United States. The war had begun almost
two years earlier, in May 1846, over a territorial dispute involving Texas.
The treaty added an additional 525,000 square miles to United States
territory, including the including the land that makes up all or parts of
present-day Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah and
Wyoming. Mexico also gave up all claims to Texas and recognized the Rio Grande
as America's southern boundary.

## Mexican-American War: 1846-48

On May 13, 1846, the U.S. Congress voted in favor of President James Polk's
request to declare war on Mexico ina dispute over Texas. Under the threat of
war, theUnited Stateshad refrained from annexing Texas afterthe latterwon
independence from Mexico in 1836. But in 1844, President John Tyler
(1790-1862) restarted negotiations with the Republic of Texas, culminating
with a treaty of annexation.

Did you know? During his presidency, James Polk managed another important land
acquisition, this time without a war, when his administration diplomatically
settled a border dispute with the British and gained control of the present-
day states of Washington, Oregon and Idaho, plus parts of Montana and Wyoming.

The treaty was defeated by a wide margin in the U.S. Senate because it would
upset the slave state-free state balance between North and South and risked
war with Mexico, which had broken off relations with the United States. But
shortly before leaving office and with the support of President-elect Polk
(1795-1849), Tyler managed to get a congressional resolution passed and then,
on March 1, 1845, signed into law. Texas was admitted to the union on December
29 of that year.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

While Mexico didn't follow through with its threat to declare war, relations
between the two nations remained tense over border disputes, and in July 1845,
President Polk ordered troops into disputed lands that lay between the Nueces
and Rio Grande rivers. In November, Polk sent the diplomat John Slidell
(1793-1871) to Mexico to seek boundary adjustments in return for the U.S.
government's settlement of the claims of American citizens against Mexico and
also to make an offer to purchase California and New Mexico. After the mission
failed, the U.S. Army under General Zachary Taylor (1784-1850) advanced to the
mouth of the Rio Grande, the river that the state of Texas claimed as its
southern boundary.

Mexico, claiming that the boundary was the Nueces Riverto the northeast of the
Rio Grande, considered the advance of Taylor's army an act of aggression and
in April 1846 sent troops across the Rio Grande. Polk, in turn, declared the
Mexican advance to be an invasion of U.S. soil, and on May 11, 1846, asked
Congress to declare war on Mexico, which it did two days later.

## Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo: February 2, 1848

Following the defeat of the Mexican army and the fall of Mexico City, in
September 1847, the Mexican government surrendered and peace negotiations
began. The war officially ended with the February 2, 1848, signing in Mexico
of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The treaty added an additional 525,000
square miles to United States territory, including the land that makes up all
or parts of present-day Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico,
Utah and Wyoming. Mexico also gave up all claims to Texas and recognized the
Rio Grande as America's southern boundary. In return, the United States paid
Mexico $15 million and agreed to settle all claims of U.S. citizens against
Mexico.

## Mexican-American War: Aftermath

Although Polk's war was successful, he lost public support after nearly two
bloody and costly years of fighting. Additionally, the controversial war
reignited the slavery extension debate that would ultimately result in the
American Civil War in the 1860s.

Polk did not seek re-election after his first term, and died at age 53 in June
1849, three months after leaving office. Zachary Taylor, who became a national
hero during the Mexican-American War, ran for president in the 1848 election
and won. However, 16 months after his inauguration, Taylor became ill and
died.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo

### Author

History.com Editors

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/topics/mexican-american-war/treaty-of-guadalupe-
hidalgo

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

June 7, 2019

### Original Published Date

November 9, 2009

By

History.com Editors

    
        *     *     *     * #
    

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

#

VIDEOS

![German resentment over harsh peace terms leads to a rise in nationalist

sentiment and the eventual rise to power of Adolf

Hitler.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU4ODg5OTU0NjMz/treaty-

of-versailles.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Treaty of Versailles

![Secretary of State Dean Rusk discusses the significance of the Nuclear Non-

Proliferation Treaty, which was signed in Geneva on July 1,

1968.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU4MzYwODgyNTA1/us-

signs-nuclear-non-proliferation-treaty.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## U.S. Signs Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

![On September 7, 1977, President Jimmy Carter and Panamanian leader Omar

Torrijos signed the Panama Canal Treaty, which ceded U.S. control of the canal

beginning in 2000 and guaranteed the neutrality of the waterway thereafter.

President Carter delivers a speech on the occasion of the treaty

signing.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU4NjIxMjU3MDMz/carter-

signs-the-panama-canal-treaty.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Carter Signs the Panama Canal Treaty

![On April 4, 1949, the North Atlantic Treaty was signed by 12 Western

democracies, creating the North Atlantic Treaty Organization \(NATO\).

President Harry Truman speaks at the signing ceremony on the significance of

the new military alliance   the first ever made during

peacetime.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU2MjA1OTkzNjk1/truman-

signs-the-north-atlantic-treaty.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Truman Signs the North Atlantic Treaty

# ![SIGN UP FOR MORE

HISTORY!](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU3OTM4MTkyNjk0MTI2NTQy/section_header_art_small_signup.svg)

Subscribe for fascinating stories connecting the past to the present.

SIGN UP

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTY1NzE4MzM0MjE5OTg5/section_header_art_medium_street.jpg)

#

RELATED CONTENT

![The Treaty of Paris is seen on display during a media preview August 21,
2008 at the National Archives in Washington, DC. The treaty formally ended the
American Revolution and established the US as an independent nation. AFP
PHOTO/Mandel NGAN (Photo credit should read MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images)

](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg0ODE4NzY5MjI1/the-
treaty-of-paris-is-seen-on-display-d.jpg)

## Treaty of Paris

The Treaty of Paris of 1783 formally ended the American Revolutionary War.
American statesmen Benjamin Franklin, John Adams and John Jay negotiated the
peace treaty with Great Britain. In the Treaty of Paris, the British Crown
formally recognized American independence and ceded _...read more_

![signing-of-the-treaty-of-

ghent-1812](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTA0MDQxNjk1/signing-

of-the-treaty-of-ghent-1812.jpg)

## Treaty of Ghent

On December 24, 1814, The Treaty of Ghent was signed by British and American
representatives at Ghent, Belgium, ending the War of 1812. By terms of the
treaty, all conquered territory was to be returned, and commissions were
planned to settle the boundary of the United States _...read more_

![treaty-of-

versailles-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgyOTQ0MTc3ODg3/treaty-

of-versailles-2.jpg)

## Treaty of Versailles

World War I officially ended with the signing of the Treaty of Versailles on
June 28, 1919. Negotiated among the Allied powers with little participation by
Germany, its 15 parts and 440 articles reassigned German boundaries and
assigned liability for reparations. After strict _...read more_

![8th May 1846: General Zachary Taylor (1784 – 1850) leading the American
troops into battle at Palo Alto during the Mexican-American War. Original
Artist: By Nathaniel Currier. (Photo by MPI/Getty Images)

](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTA2OTkwODE1/at-
palo-alto.jpg)

## Mexican-American War

The Mexican-American War (1846-1848) marked the first U.S. armed conflict
chiefly fought on foreign soil. It pitted a politically divided and militarily
unprepared Mexico against the expansionist-minded administration of U.S.
President James K. Polk, who believed the United _...read more_

![treaty-of-brest-

litovsk](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgyNjcxNTQ3NzIx/treaty-

of-brest-litovsk.jpg)

## Treaties of Brest-Litovsk

On March 3, 1918, in the city of Brest-Litovsk, located in modern-day Belarus
near the Polish border, Russia signed a treaty with the Central Powers
(Germany, Austria-Hungary, Ottoman Empire, Bulgaria) ending its participation
in World War I (1914-18). With the November 11, _...read more_

![battle-of-palo-

alto](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgyMTQwOTAzMTM1/battle-

of-palo-alto.jpg)

## Battle of Palo Alto

On May 8, 1846, shortly before the United States formally declared war on
Mexico, General Zachary Taylor (1784-1850) defeated a superior Mexican force
in the Battle of Palo Alto. The battle took place north of the Rio Grande
River near present-day Brownsville, Texas. Taylor’s _...read more_

![wilmot-proviso-

hero](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTY2MTIyMjA3/wilmot-

proviso-hero.jpg)

## Wilmot Proviso

The Wilmot Proviso was designed to eliminate slavery within the land acquired
as a result of the Mexican War (1846-48). Soon after the war began, President
James K. Polk sought the appropriation of $2 million as part of a bill to
negotiate the terms of a treaty. Fearing the _...read more_

![07 Oct 1963 — President Kennedy signs the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in the
White House Treaty Room with Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and House and
Senate members looking on. October 7, 1963. — Image by © CORBIS

](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgyNDAzODk5MTAz/president-
kennedy-signs-the-nuclear-test-ban-treaty-in-the-white-house-treaty-room-with-
vice-president-lyndon-b-johnson-and-house-and-senate-members-looking-on-
october-7-1963.jpg)

## Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty

On August 5, 1963, representatives of the United States, Soviet Union and
Great Britain signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, which prohibited the
testing of nuclear weapons in outer space, underwater or in the atmosphere.
The treaty, which President John F. Kennedy signed _...read more_

![john-c-fremont-hoists-flag-in-bear-flag-

revolt](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgzMjA4MzUzMDk3/john-

c-fremont-hoists-flag-in-bear-flag-revolt.jpg)

## Bear Flag Revolt

During the Bear Flag Revolt, from June to July 1846, a small group of American
settlers in California rebelled against the Mexican government and proclaimed
California an independent republic. The republic was short-lived because soon
after the Bear Flag was raised, the U.S. _...read more_

Loading…

See More

    
        * Ad Choices
    * Advertise
    * Closed Captioning
    * Copyright Policy
    * Corporate Information
    * Employment Opportunities
    * FAQ/Contact Us
    * Privacy Notice
    * Terms of Use
    * TV Parental Guidelines
    * RSS Feeds
    

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

