
    
        * Shows
    
    * This Day In History
    
    * Schedule
    
    * Topics
    
    * Stories
    
    *  _Ad Choices_
    *  _Advertise_
    *  _Closed Captioning_
    *  _Copyright Policy_
    *  _Corporate Information_
    *  _Employment Opportunities_
    *  _FAQ/Contact Us_
    *  _Privacy Notice_
    *  _Terms of Use_
    *  _TV Parental Guidelines_
    *  _RSS Feeds_
    *  _Privacy Settings_
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    

Publish date:

    
        Dec 15, 2009
    

Updated on

    
        Jun 6, 2019
    

# Berlin Wall

Author:

    
        History.com Editors
    
    *     *     *     * ## Contents
    
    1. The Berlin Wall: The Partitioning of Berlin 
    2. The Berlin Wall: Blockade and Crisis 
    3. The Berlin Wall: Building the Wall 
    4. The Berlin Wall: 1961-1989 
    5. The Berlin Wall: The Fall of the Wall
    

On August 13, 1961, the Communist government of the German Democratic Republic
(GDR, or East Germany) began to build a barbed wire and concrete
"Antifascistischer Schutzwall," or "antifascist bulwark," between East and
West Berlin. The official purpose of this Berlin Wall was to keep Western
"fascists" from entering East Germany and undermining the socialist state, but
it primarily served the objective of stemming mass defections from East to
West. The Berlin Wall stood until November 9, 1989, when the head of the East
German Communist Party announced that citizens of the GDR could cross the
border whenever they pleased. That night, ecstatic crowds swarmed the wall.
Some crossed freely into West Berlin, while others brought hammers and picks
and began to chip away at the wall itself. To this day, the Berlin Wall
remains one of the most powerful and enduring symbols of the Cold War.

## The Berlin Wall: The Partitioning of Berlin

As World War II came to an end in 1945, a pair of Allied peace conferences at
Yalta and Potsdam determined the fate of Germany's territories. They split the
defeated nation into four "allied occupation zones": The eastern part of the
country went to the Soviet Union, while the western part went to the United
States, Great Britain and (eventually) France.

_Did you know?_ On October 22, 1961, a quarrel between an East German border
guard and an American official on his way to the opera in East Berlin very
nearly led to what one observer called "a nuclear-age equivalent of the Wild
West Showdown at the O.K. Corral." That day, American and Soviet tanks faced
off at Checkpoint Charlie for 16 hours. Photographs of the confrontation are
some of the most familiar and memorable images of the Cold War.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

Even though Berlin was located entirely within the Soviet part of the country
(it sat about 100 miles from the border between the eastern and western
occupation zones), the Yalta and Potsdam agreements split the city into
similar sectors. The Soviets took the eastern half, while the other Allies
took the western. This four-way occupation of Berlin began in June 1945.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

## The Berlin Wall: Blockade and Crisis

The existence of West Berlin, a conspicuously capitalist city deep within
communist East Germany, "stuck like a bone in the Soviet throat," as Soviet
leader Nikita Khrushchev put it. The Russians began maneuvering to drive the
United States, Britain and France out of the city for good. In 1948, a Soviet
blockade of West Berlin aimed to starve the western Allies out of the city.
Instead of retreating, however, the United States and its allies supplied
their sectors of the city from the air. This effort, known as the Berlin
Airlift, lasted for more than a year and delivered more than 2.3 million tons
of food, fuel and other goods to West Berlin. The Soviets called off the
blockade in 1949.

After a decade of relative calm, tensions flared again in 1958. For the next
three years, the Soviets-emboldened by the successful launch of the Sputnik
satellite the year before and embarrassed by the seemingly endless flow of
refugees from east to west (nearly 3 million since the end of the blockade,
many of them young skilled workers such as doctors, teachers and
engineers)-blustered and made threats, while the Allies resisted. Summits,
conferences and other negotiations came and went without resolution.
Meanwhile, the flood of refugees continued. In June 1961, some 19,000 people
left the GDR through Berlin. The following month, 30,000 fled. In the first 11
days of August, 16,000 East Germans crossed the border into West Berlin, and
on August 12 some 2,400 followed--the largest number of defectors ever to
leave East Germany in a single day.

## The Berlin Wall: Building the Wall

That night, Premier Khrushchev gave the East German government permission to
stop the flow of emigrants by closing its border for good. In just two weeks,
the East German army, police force and volunteer construction workers had
completed a makeshift barbed wire and concrete block wall-the Berlin Wall-that
divided one side of the city from the other.

Before the wall was built, Berliners on both sides of the city could move
around fairly freely: They crossed the East-West border to work, to shop, to
go to the theater and the movies. Trains and subway lines carried passengers
back and forth. After the wall was built, it became impossible to get from
East to West Berlin except through one of three checkpoints: at Helmstedt
("Checkpoint Alpha" in American military parlance), at Dreilinden ("Checkpoint
Bravo") and in the center of Berlin at Friedrichstrasse ("Checkpoint
Charlie"). (Eventually, the GDR built 12 checkpoints along the wall.) At each
of the checkpoints, East German soldiers screened diplomats and other
officials before they were allowed to enter or leave. Except under special
circumstances, travelers from East and West Berlin were rarely allowed across
the border.

## The Berlin Wall: 1961-1989

The construction of the Berlin Wall did stop the flood of refugees from East
to West, and it did defuse the crisis over Berlin. (Though he was not happy
about it, President Kennedy conceded that "a wall is a hell of a lot better
than a war.") Over time, East German officials replaced the makeshift wall
with one that was sturdier and more difficult to scale. A 12-foot-tall,
4-foot-wide mass of reinforced concrete was topped with an enormous pipe that
made climbing over nearly impossible. Behind the wall on the East German side
was a so-called "Death Strip": a gauntlet of soft sand (to show footprints),
floodlights, vicious dogs, trip-wire machine guns and patrolling soldiers with
orders to shoot escapees on sight.

In all, at least 171 people were killed trying to get over, under or around
the Berlin Wall. Escape from East Germany was not impossible, however: From
1961 until the wall came down in 1989, more than 5,000 East Germans (including
some 600 border guards) managed to cross the border by jumping out of windows
adjacent to the wall, climbing over the barbed wire, flying in hot air
balloons, crawling through the sewers and driving through unfortified parts of
the wall at high speeds.

## The Berlin Wall: The Fall of the Wall

On November 9, 1989, as the Cold War began to thaw across Eastern Europe, the
spokesman for East Berlin's Communist Party announced a change in his city's
relations with the West. Starting at midnight that day, he said, citizens of
the GDR were free to cross the country's borders. East and West Berliners
flocked to the wall, drinking beer and champagne and chanting "Tor auf!"
("Open the gate!"). At midnight, they flooded through the checkpoints.

More than 2 million people from East Berlin visited West Berlin that weekend
to participate in a celebration that was, one journalist wrote, "the greatest
street party in the history of the world." People used hammers and picks to
knock away chunks of the wall-they became known as "mauerspechte," or "wall
woodpeckers"--while cranes and bulldozers pulled down section after section.
Soon the wall was gone and Berlin was united for the first time since 1945.
"Only today," one Berliner spray-painted on a piece of the wall, "is the war
really over."

The reunification of East and West Germany was made official on October 3,
1990, almost one year after the fall of the Berlin Wall.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

Berlin Wall

### Author

History.com Editors

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/topics/cold-war/berlin-wall

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

June 6, 2019

### Original Published Date

December 15, 2009

Tags

terms:

    
        Cold War
    

By

History.com Editors

    
        *     *     *     * #
    

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

#

VIDEOS

![On the evening of November 9, 1989, East Germany announced an easing of

travel restrictions to the west, and thousands demanded passage through the

Berlin Wall. Faced with a growing demonstration, East German border guards

allowed citizens to cross. CBS News is on the scene as scores of East Germans

climb on top of the once-imprisoning

wall.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU2MjE3NzI0NjM5/fall-

of-the-berlin-wall.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Fall of the Berlin Wall

![On June 12, 1987, in a speech delivered from the Brandenburg Gate in West

Germany, President Ronald Reagan makes one of his most famous statements when

he calls on Mikhail Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin

Wall.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU4ODkxMTM0Mjgx/reagan-

demands-fall-of-berlin-wall.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Reagan Demands Fall of Berlin Wall

![In June of 1987, President Ronald Reagan stopped in West Berlin on the 750th

anniversary of the city and delivered one of his most famous lines when he

demanded that Mikhail Gorbachev tear down the Berlin Wall. In an address to

the nation following his return from that trip, President Reagan recalls

standing next to the imposing

structure.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU5MTYyMzIyNjU1/reagan-

on-historic-visit-to-berlin-wall.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Reagan on Historic Visit to Berlin Wall

![The day after the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 20, 1989, President

George H. W. Bush met with West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher

to discuss plans for the reunification of Germany. As a token of his gratitude

to the United States, Genscher brought President Bush a piece of the Berlin

Wall. In a press conference, Bush thanks the foreign minister for the

gift.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU4ODkyNTEwNTM3/bush-

on-the-fall-of-the-berlin-wall.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Bush on the Fall of the Berlin Wall

# ![SIGN UP FOR MORE

HISTORY!](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU3OTM4MTkyNjk0MTI2NTQy/section_header_art_small_signup.svg)

Subscribe for fascinating stories connecting the past to the present.

SIGN UP

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTY1NzE4MzM0MjE5OTg5/section_header_art_medium_street.jpg)

#

RELATED CONTENT

![During the Berlin Airlift the victorius powers, the United States of
America, Britain and France transported millions of tons of food and other
required supplies, primarily from Frankfurt and Wiesbaden to the three western
zones of the blockaded city of Berlin after World War II.

The Berlin Blockade (June 24, 1948  May 11, 1949) was one of the first major
international crises of the Cold War. During the multinational occupation of
post-World War II Germany, the Soviet Union blocked the three Western powers’
railroad and street access to the western sectors of Berlin that they had been
controlling

](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg1NjMxMDg3OTQ1/celebrating-
the-60th-anniversary-of-the-berlin-airlift.jpg)

## Berlin Blockade

The Berlin Blockade was an attempt in 1948 by the Soviet Union to limit the
ability of France, Great Britain and the United States to travel to their
sectors of Berlin, which lay within Russian-occupied East Germany. Eventually,
the western powers instituted an airlift that _...read more_

![raisinbomber-flights-to-end-in-

october](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTA3NTgwMjMz/raisinbomber-

flights-to-end-in-october.jpg)

## Berlin Airlift

After World War II, the Allies partitioned the defeated Germany into a Soviet-
occupied zone, an American-occupied zone, a British-occupied zone and a
French-occupied zone. Berlin, the German capital city, was located deep in the
Soviet zone, but it was also divided into four _...read more_

![ask-how-long-berlin-

wall-120775557-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NTk4OTUxNTExNzc1/ask-

how-long-berlin-wall-120775557-2.jpg)

## How long was the Berlin Wall?

Few symbols better captured the Cold War divide between western Europe and the
Soviet bloc than the Berlin Wall, a concrete and barbed wire barrier that
divided Germany’s largest city for nearly 30 years. As World War II wound to a
close, Germany and Berlin were divided into four _...read more_

![ask-how-long-berlin-

wall-120775557-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NTk4OTUxNTExNzc1/ask-

how-long-berlin-wall-120775557-2.jpg)

## Reflecting on the Berlin Wall, 50 Years After Its Construction

What were the events that set the stage for the Berlin Wall’s construction?
When Germany was defeated at the end of World War II in May 1945, the Four
Powers (the United States, the USSR, the United Kingdom and France) divided
the country and the capital city of Berlin into four _...read more_

![gettyimages-548182237](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NjAyOTgwMDA5Njk1/gettyimages-548182237.jpg)

## The Surprising Human Factors Behind the Fall of the Berlin Wall

Great events do not always have great causes. One of history’s biggest
surprises is how sometimes a series of small, seemingly insignificant events
can suddenly add up to momentous change. That’s how it happened with the fall
of the Berlin Wall, the point-of-no-return moment in _...read more_

![hith-10-things-berlin-wall-df-

st-91-01408-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NTk5MjE5MTYwMzkz/hith-10-things-

berlin-wall-df-st-91-01408-2.jpg)

## 10 Things You May Not Know About the Berlin Wall

    1. The fall of the Berlin Wall happened by mistake. At a press conference on the evening of November 9, 1989, East German politburo member Günter Schabowski prematurely announced that restrictions on travel visas would be lifted. When asked when the new policy would begin, he _...read more_

![walltown-crags-hadrians-wall-c2nd-

century-c1960s](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3NTA4NDMyMjAx/walltown-

crags-hadrians-wall-c2nd-century-c1960s.jpg)

## Hadrian’s Wall

Hadrian’s Wall is the remains of stone fortifications built by the Roman
Empire following its conquest of Britain in the second century A.D. The
original structure stretched more than 70 miles across the northern English
countryside from the River Tyne near the city of Newcastle _...read more_

![great-wall-of-china-

hero](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg1ODk2MjQ2NjAx/great-

wall-of-china-hero.jpg)

## Great Wall of China

The Great Wall of China is an ancient series of walls and fortifications,
totaling more than 13,000 miles in length, located in northern China. Perhaps
the most recognizable symbol of China and its long and vivid history, the
Great Wall was originally conceived by Emperor Qin _...read more_

![airlift-

gettyimages-514880324](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NjAwNTY4NTQ3MDM5/airlift-

gettyimages-514880324.jpg)

## Why the Berlin Airlift Was the First Major Battle of the Cold War

Almost as soon as World War II ended, the question of what to do with a
defeated, destroyed Germany threatened to drive a wedge between the Soviet
Union and the Western Allies. At Potsdam in 1945, the Big Three (the United
States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union) agreed to _...read more_

Loading…

See More

    
        * Ad Choices
    * Advertise
    * Closed Captioning
    * Copyright Policy
    * Corporate Information
    * Employment Opportunities
    * FAQ/Contact Us
    * Privacy Notice
    * Terms of Use
    * TV Parental Guidelines
    * RSS Feeds
    

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

