

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods Blog About Follow DONATE

Numbers, Facts and Trends Shaping Your World

About

Follow

My Account __

Log in View Account Log out

Donate

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-standard.svg)

__

__

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-white-alt.svg)

__

HomeU.S. PoliticsMedia & NewsSocial TrendsReligionInternet &
TechScienceHispanicsGlobalMethods

    
        * Publications
    * Topics
    * Datasets
    * Interactives
    * Fact Tank
    * Experts
    

__

    * Main

More __

FactTank-logos

### NEWS IN THE NUMBERS

June 3, 2019

__

* * *

# Key findings about U.S. immigrants

By Jynnah Radford

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/FT_17.04.10_immigrant_featured.jpg)Immigrants listen
to a speech as they wait to become U.S. citizens at a naturalization ceremony
in Los Angeles. (Mark Ralson/AFP/Getty Images)

The United States has more immigrants than any other country in the world.
Today, more than 40 million people living in the U.S. were born in another
country, accounting for about one-fifth of the world’s migrants in 2017. The
population of immigrants is also very diverse, with just about every country
in the world represented among U.S. immigrants.

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Artboard-6@2x.png)

#### View interactive charts and detailed tables on U.S. immigrants.

Pew Research Center regularly publishes statistical portraits of the nation’s
foreign-born population, which include historical trends since 1960. Based on
these portraits, here are answers to some key questions about the U.S.
immigrant population.

#### How many people in the U.S. are immigrants?

The U.S. foreign-born population reached a record 44.4 million in 2017. Since
1965, when U.S. immigration laws replaced a national quota system, the number
of immigrants living in the U.S. has more than quadrupled. Immigrants today
account for 13.6% of the U.S. population, nearly triple the share (4.7%) in
1970. However, today’s immigrant share remains below the record 14.8% share in
1890, when 9.2 million immigrants lived in the U.S.

#### ![Immigrant share of U.S. population nears historic

high](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_immigrant-share-us-
population.png)

#### What is the legal status of immigrants in the U.S.?

![Unauthorized immigrants are a quarter of the U.S. foreign-born

population](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_unauthorized-

immigrants-quarter-us-foreign-born.png)Most immigrants (76%) are in the
country legally, while a quarter are unauthorized, according to new Pew
Research Center estimates based on census data adjusted for undercount. In
2016, 45% were naturalized U.S. citizens.

Some 27% of immigrants were permanent residents and 5% were temporary
residents in 2016. Another 24% of all immigrants were unauthorized immigrants.
From 1990 to 2007, the unauthorized immigrant population tripled in size –
from 3.5 million to a record high of 12.2 million. During the Great Recession,
the number declined by 1 million and since then has leveled off. In 2016,
there were 10.7 million unauthorized immigrants in the U.S., accounting for
3.3% of the nation’s population.

The decline in the unauthorized immigrant population is due largely to a fall
in the number from Mexico – the single largest group of unauthorized
immigrants in the U.S. Between 2007 and 2016, this group decreased by more
than 1 million. Meanwhile, there was a rise in the number from Central
America.

#### Do all lawful immigrants choose to become U.S. citizens?

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/GMD_immigrationCourse_260x173.png)

#### Try our email course on immigration

Learn about U.S. immigration through five short lessons delivered to your
inbox every other day.  
Sign up now!

Not all lawful permanent residents choose to pursue U.S. citizenship. Those
who wish to do so may apply after meeting certain requirements, including
having lived in the U.S. for five years. In fiscal year 2018, about 800,000
immigrants applied for naturalization. The number of naturalization
applications has climbed in recent years, though the annual totals remain
below the 1.4 million applications filed in 2007.

Generally, most immigrants eligible for naturalization apply to become
citizens. However, Mexican lawful immigrants have the lowest naturalization
rate overall. Language and personal barriers, lack of interest and financial
barriers are among the top reasons for choosing not to naturalize cited by
Mexican-born green card holders, according to a 2015 Pew Research Center
survey.

#### Where do immigrants come from?

![Mexico, China and India are top birthplaces for immigrants in the

U.S.](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_mexico-china-

india.png)Mexico is the top origin country of the U.S. immigrant population.
In 2017, 11.2 million immigrants living in the U.S. were from there,
accounting for 25% of all U.S. immigrants. The next largest origin groups were
those from China (6%), India (6%), the Philippines (5%) and El Salvador (3%).

By region of birth, immigrants from South and East Asia combined accounted for
27% of all immigrants, close to the share of immigrants from Mexico (25%).
Other regions make up smaller shares: Europe/Canada (13%), the Caribbean
(10%), Central America (8%), South America (7%), the Middle East (4%) and sub-
Saharan Africa (4%).

#### Who is arriving today?

![Among new immigrant arrivals, Asians outnumber

Hispanics](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_among-new-arrivals-

asians.png)More than 1 million immigrants arrive in the U.S. each year. In
2017, the top country of origin for new immigrants coming into the U.S. was
India, with 126,000 people, followed by Mexico (124,000), China (121,000) and
Cuba (41,000).

By race and ethnicity, more Asian immigrants than Hispanic immigrants have
arrived in the U.S. in most years since 2010. Immigration from Latin America
slowed following the Great Recession, particularly from Mexico, which has seen
net decreases in U.S. immigration over the past few years.

Asians are projected to become the largest immigrant group in the U.S. by
2055, surpassing Hispanics. Pew Research Center estimates indicate that in
2065, Asians will make up some 38% of all immigrants; Hispanics, 31%; whites,
20%; and blacks, 9%.

#### Is the immigrant population growing?

![U.S. foreign-born population reached 45 million in 2015, projected to reach

78 million by 2065](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_us-foreign-born-

population.png)New immigrant arrivals have fallen, mainly due to a decrease in
the number of unauthorized immigrants coming to the U.S. The fall in the
growth of the unauthorized immigrant population can partly be attributed to
more Mexican immigrants leaving the U.S. than coming in.

Looking forward, immigrants and their descendants are projected to account for
88% of U.S. population growth through 2065, assuming current immigration
trends continue. In addition to new arrivals, U.S. births to immigrant parents
will be important to future growth in the country’s population. In 2017, the
percentage of women giving birth in the past year was higher among immigrants
(7.5%) than among the U.S. born (5.8%). While U.S.-born women gave birth to
more than 3 million children that year, immigrant women gave birth to about
780,000.

#### How many immigrants have come to the U.S. as refugees?

![More than half of U.S. refugees in 2018 were from D.R. Congo and

Burma](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_more-than-half-us-

refugees.png)Since the creation of the federal Refugee Resettlement Program in
1980, about 3 million refugees have been resettled in the U.S – more than any
other country.

In fiscal 2018, a total of 22,491 refugees were resettled in the U.S. The
largest origin group of refugees was the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
followed by Burma (Myanmar), Ukraine, Bhutan and Eritrea. Among all refugees
admitted in that fiscal year, 3,495 are Muslims (16%) and 16,018 are
Christians (71%). Texas, Washington, Ohio, and California resettled more than
a quarter of all refugees admitted in fiscal 2018.

#### Where do most U.S. immigrants live?

Roughly half (45%) of the nation’s 44.4 million immigrants live in just three
states: California (24%), Texas (11%) and New York (10%). California had the
largest immigrant population of any state in 2017, at 10.6 million. Texas and
New York had more than 4.5 million immigrants each.

In terms of regions, about two-thirds of immigrants lived in the West (34%)
and South (33%). Roughly one-fifth lived in the Northeast (21%) and 11% were
in the Midwest.

In 2017, most immigrants lived in just 20 major metropolitan areas, with the
largest populations in New York, Los Angeles and Miami. These top 20 metro
areas were home to 28.7 million immigrants, or 64.7% of the nation’s total.
Most of the nation’s unauthorized immigrant population lived in these top
metro areas as well.

#### ![20 metropolitan areas with the largest number of immigrants in

2017](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFindingsImmigrants_20metropolitanareas.png)How
do immigrants compare with the U.S. population overall in education?

Immigrants in the U.S. as a whole have lower levels of education than the
U.S.-born population. In 2017, immigrants were three times as likely as the
U.S. born to have not completed high school (27% vs. 9%). However, immigrants
were just as likely as the U.S. born to have a bachelor’s degree or more (31%
and 32%, respectively).

![Educational attainment among U.S. immigrants,

2017](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_educational-

attainment-2017.png)Educational attainment varies among the nation’s immigrant
groups, particularly across immigrants from different regions of the world.
Immigrants from Mexico and Central America are less likely to be high school
graduates than the U.S. born (54% and 46%, respectively, do not have a high
school diploma, vs. 9% of U.S. born). On the other hand, immigrants from South
and East Asia, Europe/Canada, the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa were more
likely than U.S.-born residents to have a bachelor’s or advanced degree.

Among all immigrants, those from South and East Asia (53%) and the Middle East
(48%) were the most likely to have a bachelor’s degree or more. Immigrants
from Mexico (7%) and Central America (11%) were the least likely to have a
bachelor’s or higher.

#### How many immigrants are working in the U.S.?

![Total U.S. labor force grows since 2007, but number of unauthorized

immigrant workers declines](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_total-us-labor-

force.png)In 2016, about 28 million immigrants were working or looking for
work in the U.S., making up some 17% of the total civilian labor force. Lawful
immigrants made up the majority of the immigrant workforce, at 20.6 million.
An additional 7.8 million immigrant workers are unauthorized immigrants, the
first time since 2006 that the number was significantly below 8 million. They
alone account for 4.8% of the civilian labor force, a dip from their peak of
5.4% in 2007. During the same period, the overall U.S. workforce grew, as did
the number of U.S.-born workers and lawful immigrant workers.

Immigrants, regardless of legal status, work in a variety of jobs and do not
make up the majority of workers in any U.S. industry. Lawful immigrants are
most likely work in professional, management, or business and finance jobs
(38%) or service jobs (21%). Unauthorized immigrants, by contrast, are most
likely to be working in service (31%) or construction jobs (17%).

Immigrants are also projected to drive future growth in the U.S. working-age
population through at least 2035. As the Baby Boom generation heads into
retirement, immigrants and their children are expected to offset a decline in
the working-age population by adding about 18 million people of working age
between 2015 and 2035.

#### How well do immigrants speak English?

![Half of immigrants in U.S. are English proficient as of

2017](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFindingsImmigrants_HalfofimmigrantsinUSareEnglishproficient_2.png)Among
immigrants ages 5 and older, half (52%) are proficient English speakers –
either speaking English very well (36%) or only speaking English at home
(16%).

Immigrants from Mexico have the lowest rates of English proficiency (33%),
followed by Central Americans (34%), South Americans (54%) and immigrants from
South and East Asia (56%). Those from Europe or Canada (77%), sub-Saharan
Africa (73%) and the Middle East (61%) have the highest rates of English
proficiency.

The longer immigrants have lived in the U.S., the greater the likelihood they
are English proficient. Some 45% of immigrants living in the U.S. five years
or less are proficient. By contrast, more than half (56%) of immigrants who
have lived in the U.S. for 20 years or more are proficient English speakers.

Among immigrants ages 5 and older, Spanish is the most commonly spoken
language. Some 43% of immigrants in the U.S. speak Spanish at home. The top
five languages spoken at home among immigrants outside of Spanish are English
only (17%), followed by Chinese (6%), Hindi (5%), Filipino/Tagalog (4%) and
French (3%).

#### How many immigrants have been deported recently?

Around 295,000 immigrants were deported from the U.S. in fiscal 2017, down
since 2016. Overall, the Obama administration deported about 3 million
immigrants between 2009 and 2016, a significantly higher number than the 2
million immigrants deported by the Bush administration between 2001 and 2008.
In 2017, the Trump administration deported 295, 000 immigrants, the lowest
total since 2006.

![U.S. deportations of immigrants slightly down in

2017](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFindingsImmigrants_USdeportationsofimmigrantsdown.png)Immigrants
convicted of a crime made up the minority of deportations in 2017, the most
recent year for which statistics by criminal status are available. Of the
295,000 immigrants deported in 2017, some 41% had criminal convictions and 59%
were not convicted of a crime. From 2001 to 2017, a majority (60%) of
immigrants deported have not been convicted of a crime.

#### How many immigrant apprehensions take place at the U.S.-Mexico border?

The number of apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico border has sharply decreased
over the past decade or so, from more than 1 million in fiscal 2006 to 396,579
in fiscal 2018. Today, there are more apprehensions of non-Mexicans than
Mexicans at the border. In fiscal 2018, apprehensions of Central Americans at
the border exceeded those of Mexicans for the third consecutive year (the
fourth time this has occurred since 2000, the earliest for which the country
data is available).

#### How do Americans view immigrants and immigration?

![U.S. immigrants are seen more as a strength than a burden to the

country](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/FT_19.06.03_KeyFactsImmigrants_us-immigrants-strength-

burden.png)While immigration has been at the forefront of a national political
debate, the U.S. public holds a range of views about immigrants living in the
country. Overall, a majority of Americans have positive views about
immigrants. Six-in-ten Americans (62%) say immigrants strengthen the country
“because of their hard work and talents,” while about a quarter (28%) say
immigrants burden the country by taking jobs, housing and health care.

Yet these views vary starkly by political affiliation. Among Democrats and
Democratic-leaning independents, 83% think immigrants strengthen the country
with their hard work and talents, and just 11% say they are a burden. Among
Republicans and Republican-leaning independents, 38% say immigrants strengthen
the country, while nearly half (49%) say they burden it.

Americans were divided on future levels of immigration. A quarter said
immigration to the U.S. should be decreased (24%), while one-third (38%) said
immigration should be kept at its present level and almost another third (32%)
said immigration should be increased.

_Correction: The text in this post has been corrected to reflect the number of
times that border apprehensions of Central Americans at the U.S.-Mexico border
exceeded those of Mexicans in a fiscal year since 2000._

_Note: This is an update of a post originally published May 3, 2017, and
written by Gustavo López, a former research analyst focusing on Hispanics,
immigration and demographics; and Kristen Bialik, a former research
assistant._

Topics:

Immigration TrendsPopulation GeographyGlobal Migration and
DemographyPopulation TrendsMigrationImmigration

Share this link:

__

* * *

![](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/Radford_Jynnah_web.jpg?w=160)

Jynnah Radford _is a research assistant focusing on global migration at Pew
Research Center._

POSTS BIO EMAIL

donate-icon

### MAKE A FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO SUPPORT OUR WORK

DONATE

##### Related

HispanicMay 18, 2016

5 facts about the U.S. rank in worldwide migration

HispanicDecember 15, 2016

International migration: Key findings from the U.S., Europe and the world

GlobalJanuary 30, 2019

Immigrant share in U.S. nears record high but remains below that of many other
countries

GlobalOctober 25, 2013

5 challenges to estimating global migration

Social TrendsJanuary 24, 2018

Key facts about black immigrants in the U.S.

##### Popular on Fact Tank

Fact TankJanuary 17, 2019

Defining generations: Where Millennials end and Generation Z begins

Fact TankSeptember 6, 2018

Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator

Fact TankNovember 28, 2018

5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S.

Fact TankNovember 30, 2018

Key findings about U.S. immigrants

Fact TankApril 5, 2017

Christians remain world’s largest religious group, but they are declining in
Europe

![Pew Research Center](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-

content/themes/prc_parent/assets/images/logos/logo-alt.svg)  
1615 L St. NW, Suite 800  
Washington, DC 20036  
USA  
(+1) 202-419-4300 | Main  
(+1) 202-857-8562 | Fax  
(+1) 202-419-4372 | Media Inquiries

##### Research Areas

U.S. Politics & Policy Journalism & Media Internet & Technology Science &
Society Religion & Public Life Hispanic Trends Global Attitudes & Trends
Social & Demographic Trends Methods

##### Follow Us

__Email Newsletters __Facebook __Twitter __Tumblr __YouTube __RSS

**About Pew Research Center** Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank
that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the
world. It conducts public opinion polling, demographic research, media content
analysis and other empirical social science research. Pew Research Center does
not take policy positions. It is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts.

Copyright 2019 Pew Research Center About Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy
Reprints, Permissions & Use Policy Feedback Careers

We need to confirm your email address

To complete the subscription process, please click the link in the email we
just sent you.

Cancel

OK

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

