

# Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![1857 engraving of a sick Native American being cared for by an indigenous

healer](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e3/Ancient_sick_native_american.jpg/220px-

Ancient_sick_native_american.jpg)

Contemporary illustration of the 1868 Washita Massacre by the 7th Cavalry
against Black Kettle's band of Cheyennes, during the American Indian Wars.
Violence and conflict with colonists were also important causes of the decline
of certain indigenous American populations since the 16th century.

The population figure of indigenous peoples of the Americas before the 1492
voyage of Christopher Columbus has proven difficult to establish. Scholars
rely on archaeological data and written records from European settlers. Most
scholars writing at the end of the 19th century estimated that the pre-
Columbian population was as low as 10 million; by the end of the 20th century
most scholars gravitated to a middle estimate of around 50 million, with some
historians arguing for an estimate of 100 million or more.[1] Contact with the
Europeans led to the European colonization of the Americas, in which millions
of immigrants from Europe eventually settled in the Americas.

The population of African and Eurasian peoples in the Americas grew steadily,
while the indigenous population plummeted. Eurasian diseases such as
influenza, pneumonic plagues, and smallpox devastated the Native Americans,
who did not have immunity to them. Conflict and outright warfare with Western
European newcomers and other American tribes further reduced populations and
disrupted traditional societies. The extent and causes of the decline have
long been a subject of academic debate, along with its characterization as a
genocide.[2]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Population overview
    * 2 Pre-Columbian Americas
    * 3 Depopulation from disease
      * 3.1 Virulence and mortality
      * 3.2 Biological warfare
      * 3.3 Vaccination
    * 4 Depopulation from European Conquest
      * 4.1 War and violence
      * 4.2 Exploitation
      * 4.3 Massacres
      * 4.4 Displacement and disruption
      * 4.5 Formal apology from the United States government
    * 5 See also
    * 6 References
      * 6.1 Notes
      * 6.2 Bibliography
    * 7 Further reading
    * 8 External links
    

## Population overview[edit]

Given the fragmentary nature of the evidence, even semi-accurate pre-Columbian
population figures are impossible to obtain. Scholars have varied widely on
the estimated size of the indigenous populations prior to colonization and on
the effects of European contact.[3] Estimates are made by extrapolations from
small bits of data. In 1976, geographer William Denevan used the existing
estimates to derive a "consensus count" of about 54 million people.
Nonetheless, more recent estimates still range widely.[4]

Using an estimate of approximately 37 million people in Mexico, Central and
South America in 1492 (including 6 million in the Aztec Empire, 5-10 million
in the Mayan States, 11 million in what is now Brazil, and 12 million in the
Inca Empire), the lowest estimates give a death toll due from disease of 80%
by the end of the 17th century (nine million people in 1650).[5] Latin America
would match its 15th-century population early in the 19th century; it numbered
17 million in 1800, 30 million in 1850, 61 million in 1900, 105 million in
1930, 218 million in 1960, 361 million in 1980, and 563 million in 2005.[5] In
the last three decades of the 16th century, the population of present-day
Mexico dropped to about one million people.[5] The Maya population is today
estimated at six million, which is about the same as at the end of the 15th
century, according to some estimates.[5] In what is now Brazil, the indigenous
population declined from a pre-Columbian high of an estimated four million to
some 300,000.

While it is difficult to determine exactly how many Natives lived in North
America before Columbus,[6] estimates range from a low of 2.1 million[7] to 7
million[8] people to a high of 18 million.[9]

The aboriginal population of Canada during the late 15th century is estimated
to have been between 200,000[10] and two million,[11] with a figure of 500,000
currently accepted by Canada's Royal Commission on Aboriginal Health.[12]
Repeated outbreaks of Old World infectious diseases such as influenza, measles
and smallpox (to which they had no natural immunity), were the main cause of
depopulation. This combined with other factors such as dispossession from
European/Canadian settlements and numerous violent conflicts resulted in a
forty- to eighty-percent aboriginal population decrease after contact.[10] For
example, during the late 1630s, smallpox killed over half of the Wyandot
(Huron), who controlled most of the early North American fur trade in what
became Canada. They were reduced to fewer than 10,000 people.[13]

Historian David Henige has argued that many population figures are the result
of arbitrary formulas selectively applied to numbers from unreliable
historical sources. He believes this is a weakness unrecognized by several
contributors to the field, and insists there is not sufficient evidence to
produce population numbers that have any real meaning. He characterizes the
modern trend of high estimates as "pseudo-scientific number-crunching." Henige
does not advocate a low population estimate, but argues that the scanty and
unreliable nature of the evidence renders broad estimates inevitably suspect,
saying "high counters" (as he calls them) have been particularly flagrant in
their misuse of sources.[14] Many population studies acknowledge the inherent
difficulties in producing reliable statistics, given the scarcity of hard
data.[ _citation needed_ ]

The population debate has often had ideological underpinnings.[15] Low
estimates were sometimes reflective of European notions of cultural and racial
superiority. Historian Francis Jennings argued, "Scholarly wisdom long held
that Indians were so inferior in mind and works that they could not possibly
have created or sustained large populations."[16]

The indigenous population of the Americas in 1492 was not necessarily at a
high point and may actually have been in decline in some areas. Indigenous
populations in most areas of the Americas reached a low point by the early
20th century. In most cases, populations have since begun to climb.[17]

## Pre-Columbian Americas[edit]

Main article: Genetic history of indigenous peoples of the Americas

See also: Y-DNA haplogroups in indigenous peoples of the Americas

Genetic diversity and population structure in the American land mass using DNA
micro-satellite markers (genotype) sampled from North, Central, and South
America have been analyzed against similar data available from other
indigenous populations worldwide.[18][19] The Amerindian populations show a
lower genetic diversity than populations from other continental regions.[19]
Observed is both a decreasing genetic diversity as geographic distance from
the Bering Strait occurs and a decreasing genetic similarity to Siberian
populations from Alaska (genetic entry point).[18][19] Also observed is
evidence of a higher level of diversity and lower level of population
structure in western South America compared to eastern South America.[18][19]
A relative lack of differentiation between Mesoamerican and Andean populations
is a scenario that implies coastal routes were easier than inland routes for
migrating peoples (Paleo-Indians) to traverse.[18] The overall pattern that is
emerging suggests that the Americas were recently colonized by a small number
of individuals (effective size of about 70-250), and then they grew by a
factor of 10 over 800 – 1000 years.[20][21] The data also show that there have
been genetic exchanges between Asia, the Arctic and Greenland since the
initial peopling of the Americas.[21][22] A new study in early 2018 suggests
that the effective population size of the original founding population of
Native Americans was about 250 people.[23][24]

## Depopulation from disease[edit]

See also: Influx of disease in the Caribbean, Native American disease and
epidemics, and History of smallpox § Epidemics in the Americas

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/39/Aztec_smallpox_victims.jpg/300px-

Aztec_smallpox_victims.jpg)

Sixteenth-century Aztec drawings of victims of smallpox (above) and measles
(below)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b1/Measles_Aztec_drawing.jpg/300px-

Measles_Aztec_drawing.jpg)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/56/Acuna-

Soto_EID-v8n4p360_Fig1.png/220px-Acuna-Soto_EID-v8n4p360_Fig1.png)

Graph demonstrating the population collapse in Central Mexico brought on by
successive epidemics in the early colonial period.

According to Noble David Cook, a community of scholars have recently, albeit
slowly, "been quietly accumulating piece by piece data on early epidemics in
the Americas and their relation to subjugation of native peoples." They now
believe that widespread epidemic disease, to which the natives had no prior
exposure or resistance, was the primary cause of the massive population
decline of the Native Americans.[25] Earlier explanations for the population
decline of the American natives include the European immigrants' accounts of
the brutal practices of the Spanish conquistadores, as recorded by the
Spaniards themselves. This was applied through the encomienda, which was a
system ostensibly set up to protect people from warring tribes as well as to
teach them the Spanish language and the Catholic religion, but in practice was
tantamount to serfdom and slavery.[26] The most notable account was that of
the Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas, whose writings vividly depict
Spanish atrocities committed in particular against the Taínos. It took five
years for the Taíno rebellion to be quelled by both the _Real Audiencia_
—through diplomatic sabotage, and through the Indian auxiliaries fighting with
the Spanish.[27] After Emperor Charles V personally eradicated the notion of
the encomienda system as a use for slave labour, there were not enough Spanish
to have caused such a large population decline.[28] [ _not in citation given_
][29] The second European explanation was a perceived divine approval, in
which God removed the natives as part of His "divine plan" to make way for a
new Christian civilization. Many Native Americans viewed their troubles in
terms of religious or supernatural causes within their own belief systems.[30]

Soon after Europeans and enslaved Africans arrived in the New World, bringing
with them the infectious diseases of Europe and Africa, observers noted
immense numbers of indigenous Americans began to die from these diseases. One
reason this death toll was overlooked is that once introduced, the diseases
raced ahead of European immigration in many areas. Disease killed a sizable
portion of the populations before European written records were made. After
the epidemics had already killed massive numbers of natives, many newer
European immigrants assumed that there had always been relatively few
indigenous peoples. The scope of the epidemics over the years was tremendous,
killing millions of people—possibly in excess of 90% of the population in the
hardest hit areas—and creating one of "the greatest human catastrophe in
history, far exceeding even the disaster of the Black Death of medieval
Europe",[25] which had killed up to one-third of the people in Europe and Asia
between 1347 and 1351.

One of the most devastating diseases was smallpox, but other deadly diseases
included typhus, measles, influenza, bubonic plague, cholera, malaria,
tuberculosis, mumps, yellow fever and pertussis, which were chronic in
Eurasia.[31]

This transfer of disease between the Old and New Worlds was later studied as
part of what has been labeled the "Columbian Exchange".

The epidemics had very different effects in different regions of the Americas.
The most vulnerable groups were those with a relatively small population and
few built-up immunities. Many island-based groups were annihilated. The Caribs
and Arawaks of the Caribbean nearly ceased to exist, as did the Beothuks of
Newfoundland. While disease raged swiftly through the densely populated
empires of Mesoamerica, the more scattered populations of North America saw a
slower spread.[ _citation needed_ ]

The colonization of the Americas killed so many people it resulted in climate
change and temporary global cooling, according to scientists from University
College London.[32][33] According to one of the researchers, UCL Geography
Professor Mark Maslin, the large death toll also boosted the economies of
Europe: "the depopulation of the Americas may have inadvertently allowed the
Europeans to dominate the world. It also allowed for the Industrial Revolution
and for Europeans to continue that domination."[34]

### Virulence and mortality[edit]

Viral and bacterial diseases that kill victims before the illnesses spread to
others tend to flare up and then die out. A more resilient disease would
establish an equilibrium; if its victims lived beyond infection, the disease
would spread further. The evolutionary process selects against quick
lethality, with the most immediately fatal diseases being the most short-
lived.[ _citation needed_ ] A similar evolutionary pressure acts upon victim
populations, as those lacking genetic resistance to common diseases die and do
not leave descendants, whereas those who are resistant procreate and pass
resistant genes to their offspring. For example, in the first fifty years of
the sixteenth century, an unusually strong strain[ _clarification needed_ ] of
syphilis killed a high proportion of infected Europeans within a few months;
over time, however, the disease has become much less virulent.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Thus both infectious diseases and populations tend to evolve towards an
equilibrium in which the common diseases are non-symptomatic, mild or
manageably chronic.[ _citation needed_ ] When a population that has been
relatively isolated is exposed to new diseases, it has no resistance to the
new diseases (the population is "biologically naive"). These people die at a
much higher rate, resulting in what is known as a "virgin soil" epidemic.
Before the European arrival, the Americas had been isolated from the Eurasian-
African landmass. The peoples of the Old World had had thousands of years for
their populations to accommodate to their common diseases.

The fact that all members of an immunologically naive population are exposed
to a new disease simultaneously increases the fatalities.[ _citation needed_ ]
In populations where the disease is endemic, generations of individuals
acquired immunity; most adults had exposure to the disease at a young age.
Because they were resistant to reinfection, they are able to care for
individuals who caught the disease for the first time, including the next
generation of children. With proper care, many of these "childhood diseases"
are often survivable. In a naive population, all age groups are affected at
once, leaving few or no healthy caregivers to nurse the sick. With no
resistant individuals healthy enough to tend to the ill, a disease may have
higher fatalities.

The natives of the Americas were faced with several new diseases at once
creating a situation where some who successfully resisted one disease might
die from another. Multiple simultaneous infections (e.g., smallpox and typhus
at the same time) or in close succession (e.g., smallpox in an individual who
was still weak from a recent bout of typhus) are more deadly than just the sum
of the individual diseases. In this scenario, death rates can also be elevated
by combinations of new and familiar diseases: smallpox in combination with
American strains of yaws, for example.

Other contributing factors:

    
        * Native American medical treatments such as sweat baths and cold water immersion (practiced in some areas) weakened some patients and probably increased mortality rates.[35]
    * Europeans brought many diseases with them because they had many more domesticated animals than the Native Americans. Domestication usually means close and frequent contact between animals and people, which allows diseases of domestic animals to migrate into the human population when the necessary mutations occur.[36]
    * The Eurasian landmass extends many thousands of miles along an east–west axis. Climate zones also extend for thousands of miles, which facilitated the spread of agriculture, domestication of animals, and the diseases associated with domestication. The Americas extend mainly north and south, which, according to the environmental determinist theory popularized by Jared Diamond in _Guns, Germs, and Steel_ , meant that it was much harder for cultivated plant species, domesticated animals, and diseases to migrate.
    

### Biological warfare[edit]

When Old World diseases were first carried to the Americas at the end of the
fifteenth century, they spread throughout the southern and northern
hemispheres, leaving the indigenous populations in near ruins.[31][37] No
evidence has been discovered that the earliest Spanish colonists and
missionaries deliberately attempted to infect the American natives, and some
effort was actually made to limit the devastating effects of disease before it
killed off what remained of their forced slave labor under their encomienda
system.[31][37] The cattle introduced by the Spanish contaminated various
water reserves which Native Americans dug in the fields to accumulate rain
water. In response, the Franciscans and Dominicans created public fountains
and aqueducts to guarantee access to drinking water.[5] But when the
Franciscans lost their privileges in 1572, many of these fountains were no
longer guarded and so deliberate well poisoning may have happened.[5] Although
no proof of such poisoning has been found, some historians believe the
decrease of the population correlates with the end of religious orders'
control of the water.[5]

In the centuries that followed, accusations and discussions of biological
warfare were common. Well-documented accounts of incidents involving both
threats and acts of deliberate infection are very rare, but may have occurred
more frequently than scholars have previously acknowledged.[38][39] Many of
the instances likely went unreported, and it is possible that documents
relating to such acts were deliberately destroyed,[39] or sanitized.[40][41]
By the middle of the 18th century, colonists had the knowledge and technology
to attempt biological warfare with the smallpox virus. They well understood
the concept of quarantine, and that contact with the sick could infect the
healthy with smallpox, and those who survived the illness would not be
infected again. Whether the threats were carried out, or how effective
individual attempts were, is uncertain.[31][39][40]

One such threat was delivered by fur trader James McDougall, who is quoted as
saying to a gathering of local chiefs, "You know the smallpox. Listen: I am
the smallpox chief. In this bottle I have it confined. All I have to do is to
pull the cork, send it forth among you, and you are dead men. But this is for
my enemies and not my friends."[42] Likewise, another fur trader threatened
Pawnee Indians that if they didn't agree to certain conditions, "he would let
the smallpox out of a bottle and destroy them." The Reverend Isaac McCoy was
quoted in his _History of Baptist Indian Missions_ as saying that the white
men had deliberately spread smallpox among the Indians of the southwest,
including the Pawnee tribe, and the havoc it made was reported to General
Clark and the Secretary of War.[42][43] Artist and writer George Catlin
observed that Native Americans were also suspicious of vaccination, "They see
white men urging the operation so earnestly they decide that it must be some
new mode or trick of the pale face by which they hope to gain some new
advantage over them."[44] So great was the distrust of the settlers that the
Mandan chief Four Bears denounced the white man, whom he had previously
treated as brothers, for deliberately bringing the disease to his
people.[45][46][47]

During the Seven Years' War, British militia took blankets from their smallpox
hospital and gave them as gifts to two neutral Lenape Indian dignitaries
during a peace settlement negotiation, according to the entry in the Captain's
ledger, "To convey the Smallpox to the Indians".[40][48][49] In the following
weeks, the high commander of the British forces in North America conspired
with his Colonel to "Extirpate this Execreble Race" of Native Americans,
writing, "Could it not be contrived to send the small pox among the
disaffected tribes of Indians? We must on this occasion use every stratagem in
our power to reduce them." His Colonel agreed to try.[39][48] Most scholars
have asserted that the 1837 Great Plains smallpox epidemic was "started among
the tribes of the upper Missouri River by failure to quarantine steam boats on
the river",[42] and Captain Pratt of the _St. Peter_ "was guilty of
contributing to the deaths of thousands of innocent people. The law calls his
offense criminal negligence. Yet in light of all the deaths, the almost
complete annihilation of the Mandans, and the terrible suffering the region
endured, the label criminal negligence is benign, hardly befitting an action
that had such horrendous consequences."[46] However, some sources attribute
the 1836–40 epidemic to the deliberate communication of smallpox to Native
Americans, with historian Ann F. Ramenofsky writing, " _Variola Major_ can be
transmitted through contaminated articles such as clothing or blankets. In the
nineteenth century, the U. S. Army sent contaminated blankets to Native
Americans, especially Plains groups, to control the Indian problem."[50] Well
into the 20th century, deliberate infection attacks continued as Brazilian
settlers and miners transported infections intentionally to the native groups
whose lands they coveted."[37]

### Vaccination[edit]

After Edward Jenner's 1796 demonstration that the smallpox vaccination worked,
the technique became better known and smallpox became less deadly in the
United States and elsewhere. Many colonists and natives were vaccinated,
although, in some cases, officials tried to vaccinate natives only to discover
that the disease was too widespread to stop. At other times, trade demands led
to broken quarantines. In other cases, natives refused vaccination because of
suspicion of whites. The first international healthcare expedition in history
was the Balmis expedition which had the aim of vaccinating indigenous peoples
against smallpox all along the Spanish Empire in 1803. In 1831, government
officials vaccinated the Yankton Sioux at Sioux Agency. The Santee Sioux
refused vaccination and many died.[15]

## Depopulation from European Conquest[edit]

### War and violence[edit]

Main articles: Spanish colonization of the Americas, American Indian Wars,
Arauco War, Chichimeca War, and Conquest of the Desert

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8d/Leutze%2C_Emanuel_%E2%80%94_Storming_of_the_Teocalli_by_Cortez_and_His_Troops_%E2%80%94_1848.jpg/220px-

Leutze%2C_Emanuel_%E2%80%94_Storming_of_the_Teocalli_by_Cortez_and_His_Troops_%E2%80%94_1848.jpg)

Storming of the Teocalli by Cortez and His Troops by Emanuel Leutze

While epidemic disease was a leading factor of the population decline of the
American indigenous peoples after 1492, there were other contributing factors,
all of them related to European contact and colonization. One of these factors
was warfare. According to demographer Russell Thornton, although many lives
were lost in wars over the centuries, and war sometimes contributed to the
near extinction of certain tribes, warfare and death by other violent means
was a comparatively minor cause of overall native population decline.[51]

From the U.S. Bureau of the Census in 1894: "The Indian wars under the
government of the United States have been more than 40 in number [Over the
previous 100 years]. They have cost the lives of about 19,000 white men, women
and children, including those killed in individual combats, and the lives of
about 30,000 Indians. The actual number of killed and wounded Indians must be
very much higher than the given... Fifty percent additional would be a safe
estimate..."[52]

There is some disagreement among scholars about how widespread warfare was in
pre-Columbian America,[53] but there is general agreement that war became
deadlier after the arrival of the Europeans and their firearms. The South or
Central American infrastructure allowed for thousands of European
conquistadors and tens of thousands of their Indian auxiliaries to attack the
dominant indigenous civilization. Empires such as the Incas depended on a
highly centralized administration for the distribution of resources.
Disruption caused by the war and the colonization hampered the traditional
economy, and possibly led to shortages of food and materials.[54] The Arauco
War, Chichimeca War, Red Cloud's War, Seminole Wars, War of 1812, Pontiac's
Rebellion, Beaver Wars, French-Indian War, American Civil War, American
Revolution, Modoc War, Oka Crisis, Battle of Cut Knife, all represented either
pyrrhic victories by colonial forces, outright defeat, military stalemates, or
further alliance-politics.[55] Across the western hemisphere, war with various
Native American civilizations constituted alliances based out of both
necessity or economic prosperity and, resulted in mass-scale intertribal
warfare.[56] European colonization in the North American continent also
contributed to a number of wars between Native Americans, who fought over
which of them should have first access to new technology and weaponry—like in
the Beaver Wars.[57]

### Exploitation[edit]

Main article: European enslavement of indigenous peoples of the Americas

Some Spaniards objected to the encomienda system, notably Bartolomé de las
Casas, who insisted that the Indians were humans with souls and rights. Due to
many revolts and military encounters, Emperor Charles V helped relieve the
strain on both the Indian laborers and the Spanish vanguards probing the
Caribana for military and diplomatic purposes.[58] Later on New Laws were
promulgated in Spain in 1542 to protect isolated natives, but the abuses in
the Americas were never entirely or permanently abolished. The Spanish also
employed the pre-Columbian draft system called the _mita_ ,[59] and treated
their subjects as something between slaves and serfs. Serfs stayed to work the
land; slaves were exported to the mines, where large numbers of them died. In
other areas the Spaniards replaced the ruling Aztecs and Incas and divided the
conquered lands among themselves ruling as the new feudal lords with often,
but unsuccessful lobbying to the viceroys of the Spanish crown to pay
Tlaxcalan war demnities. The infamous Bandeirantes from São Paulo, adventurers
mostly of mixed Portuguese and native ancestry, penetrated steadily westward
in their search for Indian slaves. Serfdom existed as such in parts of Latin
America well into the 19th century, past independence.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Massacres[edit]

![Question book-

new.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **relies too much onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. _( July 2014)_ _(Learn
how and when to remove this template message)_

---|--- 

Main article: List of Indian massacres

See also: California Genocide and Round Valley Settler Massacres of 1856-1859

Friar Bartolomé de las Casas and Antonius Flávio Chesta (Tony Chesta) and
other dissenting Spaniards from the colonial period described the manner in
which the natives were treated by colonials. This has helped to create an
image of the Spanish conquistadores as cruel in the extreme.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Great revenues were drawn from Hispaniola so the advent of losing manpower[
_clarification needed_ ] didn't benefit the Spanish crown. At best, the
reinforcement of vanguards sent by the Council of the Indies to explore the
Caribana country and gather information on alliances or hostilities was the
main goal of the local viceroys and their adelantados.[60] Although mass
killings and atrocities were not a significant factor in native depopulation,
no mainstream scholar dismisses the sometimes humiliating circumstances now
believed to be precipitated by civil disorder as well as Spanish
cruelty.[61][62]

    
        * The Pequot War in early New England.
    * In mid-19th century Argentina, post-independence leaders Juan Manuel de Rosas and Julio Argentino Roca engaged in what they presented as a "Conquest of the Desert" against the natives of the Argentinian interior, leaving over 1,300 indigenous dead.[63][64]
    * While some California tribes were settled on reservations, others were hunted down and massacred by 19th century American settlers. It is estimated that at least some 4,500 people of the Population of Native California suffered violent deaths between 1849 and 1870.[65][66]
    

### Displacement and disruption[edit]

Main articles: Indian removal and Trail of Tears

The populations of many Native American peoples were reduced by the common
practice of intermarrying with Europeans.[67] Although many Indian cultures
that once thrived are extinct today, their descendants exist today in some of
the bloodlines of the current inhabitants of the Americas.

### Formal apology from the United States government[edit]

See also: Bureau of Indian Affairs

On 8 September 2000, the head of the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA) formally apologized for the agency's participation in the "ethnic
cleansing" of Western tribes.[68][69][70]

## See also[edit]

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/29/MAYA-g-log-cal-D10-Ok.svg/30px-MAYA-g-log-cal-D10-Ok.svg.png)Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal
    * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cc/Aboriginal_War_Veterans_monument_%28close%29.JPG/21px-Aboriginal_War_Veterans_monument_%28close%29.JPG)Aboriginal peoples in Canada portal
    
    * List of Indian massacres
    * List of Indian reserves in Canada by population
    * Amazonas before the Inca Empire
    * Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas
    * Conquest of the Desert
    * First Nations
    * Genocides in the Americas
    * Guatemalan genocide
    * _Handbook of South American Indians_
    * Population of Canada
    * Population of Native California
    * Selknam genocide
    * Smallpox epidemics in the Americas
    * Trail of Tears
    * Uncontacted peoples
    

## References[edit]

### Notes[edit]

    
        1. **^** Taylor, Alan (2002). _American colonies; Volume 1 of The Penguin history of the United States, History of the United States Series_. Penguin. p. 40. ISBN 9780142002100. Retrieved 7 October 2013.
    2. **^** David E. Stannard (18 November 1993). _American Holocaust: The Conquest of the New World_. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-19-508557-0.
    3. **^** Michael R. Haines; Richard H. Steckel (2000). _A Population History of North America_. Cambridge University Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-521-49666-7.
    4. **^** 20th century estimates in Thornton, p. 22; Denevan's consensus count; recent lower estimates. Archived 28 October 2004 at the Wayback Machine
    5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ "La catastrophe démographique" (The Demographic Catastrophe"), _L'Histoire_ n°322, July–August 2007, p. 17.
    6. **^** "Microchronology and Demographic Evidence Relating to the Size of Pre-Columbian North American Indian Populations". _Science_ 16 June 1995: Vol. 268. no. 5217, pp. 1601–04 doi:10.1126/science.268.5217.1601.
    7. **^** Ubelaker, Douglas H. (1 November 1976). "Prehistoric New World population size: Historical review and current appraisal of North American estimates". _American Journal of Physical Anthropology_. **45** (3): 661–65. doi:10.1002/ajpa.1330450332. ISSN 1096-8644.
    8. **^** Thornton, Russell (1990). _American Indian holocaust and survival: a population history since 1492_. University of Oklahoma Press. pp. 26–32. ISBN 978-0-8061-2220-5.
    9. **^** Dobyns, Henry (1983). _Their Number Become Thinned: Native American Dynamics in Eastern North America_. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
    10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Northcott, Herbert C; Wilson, Donna M (2008). _Dying and Death in Canada_. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 25–27. ISBN 978-1-55111-873-4. Retrieved 20 June 2010.
    11. **^** Thornton, Russell (2000). "Population history of Native North Americans". In Michael R. Haines, Richard Hall Steckel (ed.). _A population history of North America_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-521-49666-7. Retrieved 20 June 2010.
    12. **^** Bailey, Garrick Alan (2008). _Handbook of North American Indians: Indians in contemporary society_. Government Printing Office. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-16-080388-8. Retrieved 14 January 2011.
    13. **^** Robertson, Ronald G (2001). _Rotting face : smallpox and the American Indian_. Caldwell, Idaho: Caxton Press. pp. 107–08. ISBN 978-0-87004-419-9.
    14. **^** Henige, p. 182.
    15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Krech III, Shepard (1999). _The ecological Indian: myth and history_ (1 ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. pp. 81–84. ISBN 978-0-393-04755-4.
    16. **^** Jennings 1993, p. 83
    17. **^** Thornton, pp. xvii, 36.
    18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Wang S; Lewis CM; Jakobsson M; Ramachandran S; Ray N; Bedoya G; Rojas W; Parra MV; Molina JA; Gallo C; Mazzotti G; Poletti G; Hill K; Hurtado AM; Labuda D; Klitz W; Barrantes R; Bortolini MC; Salzano FM; Petzl-Erler ML; Tsuneto LT; Llop E; Rothhammer F; Excoffier L; Feldman MW; Rosenberg NA; Ruiz-Linares A. (2007). "Genetic Variation and Population Structure in Native Americans". _PLoS Genet_. **3** (11): e185. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0030185. PMC 2082466. PMID 18039031.
    19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Joint match probabilities for Y chromosomal and autosomal markers" (PDF). Forensic Science International. 2008. pp. 174, 234–238. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2010. Retrieved 3 February 2010.
    20. **^** Wells, Spencer; Read, Mark (2002). _The Journey of Man - A Genetic Odyssey_ (Digitised online by Google books). Random House. pp. 138–140. ISBN 978-0-8129-7146-0. Retrieved 21 November 2009.
    21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hey J (2005). "On the number of New World founders: a population genetic portrait of the peopling of the Americas". _PLoS Biol_. **3** (6): e193. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030193. PMC 1131883. PMID 15898833.
    22. **^** Wade, Nicholas (2010). "Ancient Man In Greenland Has Genome Decoded". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  10 January 2010.
    23. **^** The University of Kansas, DNA sequences suggest 250 people made up original Native American founding population (2018/05/01)
    24. **^** Nelson J.R. Fagundes, et al., "How strong was the bottleneck associated to the peopling of the Americas? New insights from multilocus sequence data", 41(1) Genetics and Molecular Biology (2018). http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S1415-47572018000200206&lng=en&tlng=en
    25. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cook, Noble David. _Born To Die_ ; Cambridge University Press ;1998; pp. 1–14.
    26. **^** Junius P. Rodriguez (2007). _Encyclopedia of slave resistance and rebellion_. **1**. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-313-33272-2. Retrieved 10 July 2010.
    27. **^** Anghiera Pietro Martire D' (July 2009). _De Orbe Novo, the Eight Decades of Peter Martyr D'Anghera_. BiblioLife. p. 199. ISBN 978-1-113-14760-8. Retrieved 10 July 2010.
    28. **^** David M. Traboulay (1994). _Columbus and Las Casas: the conquest and Christianization of America, 1492–1566_. University Press of America. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-8191-9642-2. Retrieved 10 July 2010.
    29. **^** Anghiera Pietro Martire D' (July 2009). _De Orbe Novo, the Eight Decades of Peter Martyr D'Anghera_. BiblioLife. p. 192. ISBN 978-1-113-14760-8. Retrieved 10 July 2010.
    30. **^** Guilmet, George M; Boyd, Robert T; Whited, David L; Thompson, Nile (1991). "The Legacy of Introduced Disease: The Southern Coast Salish". _American Indian Culture and Research Journal_. **15** (4): 1–32. doi:10.17953/aicr.15.4.133g8x7135072136.
    31. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _The First Horseman: Disease in Human History_ ; John Aberth; Pearson-Prentice Hall (2007); pp. 47–75(51)
    32. **^** Amos, Jonathan (31 January 2019). "America colonisation 'cooled Earth's climate'". _BBC_. Retrieved  31 January 2019.
    33. **^** Koch, Alexander; Brierley, Chris; Maslin, Mark M.; Lewis, Simon L. (2019). "Earth system impacts of the European arrival and Great Dying in the Americas after 1492". _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **207** : 13–36. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2018.12.004.
    34. **^** Kent, Lauren (1 February 2019). "European colonizers killed so many Native Americans that it changed the global climate, researchers say". _CNN_. Retrieved  1 February 2019.
    35. **^** Cook, p. 208; Thornton, p. 47.
    36. **^** Jared Diamond (1997). _Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies_. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 357. ISBN 978-0-393-03891-0.
    37. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Cook; pp. 205–16
    38. **^** _Empire of Fortune_ ; Francis Jennings; W. W. Norton & Company; 1988; pp. 200, 447–48
    39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Fenn, Elizabeth A. Biological Warfare in Eighteenth-Century North America: Beyond Jeffery Amherst Archived 3 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine; The Journal of American History, Vol. 86, No. 4, March, 2000
    40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _The Tainted Gift_ ; Barbara Alice Mann; ABC-CLIO; 2009; pp. 1–18
    41. **^** _Cherokee Medicine, Colonial Germs: An Indigenous Nation's Fight Against Smallpox, 1518–1824_ ; Paul Kelton; University of Oklahoma Press; 2015; pp. 102–05
    42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _The Effect of Smallpox on the Destiny of the Amerindian_ ; Esther Wagner Stearn, Allen Edwin Stearn; University of Minnesota; 1945; pp. 13–20, 73–94, 97
    43. **^** _Chardon's Journal at Fort Clark, 1834–1839_ ; Annie Heloise Abel; Books for Libraries Press; 1932; pp. 319, 394
    44. **^** _Princes and Peasants: Smallpox in History_ ; Donald R. Hopkins; University of Chicago Press; 1983; pp. 270–71
    45. **^** Robert Blaisdell ed., _Great Speeches by Native Americans_ , p. 116.
    46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Rotting Face: Smallpox and the American Indian_ ; R. G. Robertson; Caxton Press; 2001 pp. 80–83; 298–312
    47. **^** _Encyclopedia of Plague and Pestilence: From Ancient Times to the Present_ ; George C. Kohn; pp. 252–53
    48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Pontiac and the Indian Uprising_ ; Peckham, Howard H.; University of Chicago Press; 1947; pp. 170, 226–27
    49. **^** _Crucible of War: The Seven Years' War and the Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754–1766_ ; Anderson, Fred; New York: Knopf; 2000; pp. 541–42, 809 n11; ISBN 0-375-40642-5
    50. **^** _Vectors of Death: The Archaeology of European Contact_ ; University of New Mexico Press; 1987; pp. 147–48
    51. **^** War not a major cause : Thornton, pp. 47–49.
    52. **^** _Report on Indians taxed and Indians not taxed in the United States (except Alaska)_. U.S. Government Printing Office. 1994 [1894]. p. 637. ISBN 9780883544624.
    53. **^** W. D. Rubinstein (2004). _Genocide: A History_. Pearson Education. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-582-50601-5.
    54. **^** Cartwright, Mark (October 2015). "Inca Government". _Ancient History Encyclopedia_. Knights of Vatican. Retrieved  19 July 2017. "Eventually 40,000 Incas would govern some 10 million subjects speaking over 30 different languages. Consequently, the centralised Inca government, employing a vast network of administrators, governed over a patchwork empire which, in practice, touched local populations to varying degrees."
    55. **^** Woo, Grace Li Xiu (February 2005). "Canada's Forgotten Founders: The Modern Signifance of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Application for Membership in the League of Nations". _The University of Warwick_. The University of Warwick: Electronic Law Journal. Retrieved  17 July 2017. "Following Article 1 of the Montevideo Convention on the Rights and Duties of States, it is now considered that a 'state' must have a permanent population, a defined territory, a government and the capacity to enter into relations with other states. As a division of the British Empire, Canada's international relations were handled by Britain when the League of Nations was founded and it did not meet these criteria. The Haudenosaunee Confederacy did."
    56. **^** W. D. Rubinstein (2012). _Indian Conquistadors: Indigenous Allies in the Conquest of Mesoamerica_. University of Oklahoma Press; Reprint edition. p. 1. ISBN 978-0806143255.
    57. **^** Increased deadliness of warfare, see for example Hanson, ch. 6. See also flower war.
    58. **^** David M. Traboulay (1994). _Columbus and Las Casas: the conquest and Christianization of America, 1492–1566_. University Press of America. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-8191-9642-2. Retrieved 11 July 2010.
    59. **^** Bolivia – Ethnic Groups.
    60. **^** Anghiera Pietro Martire D' (July 2009). _De Orbe Novo, the Eight Decades of Peter Martyr D'Anghera_. BiblioLife. p. 395. ISBN 978-1-113-14760-8. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
    61. **^** Anghiera Pietro Martire D' (July 2009). _De Orbe Novo, the Eight Decades of Peter Martyr D'Anghera_. BiblioLife. p. 198. ISBN 978-1-113-14760-8. Retrieved 10 July 2010.
    62. **^** Jay O. Sanders. "The Great Inca Rebellion". Retrieved 30 June 2010.
    63. **^** Cook, p. 212.
    64. **^** Carlos A. Floria and César A. García Belsunce, 1971. _Historia de los Argentinos_ I and II; ISBN 84-599-5081-6.
    65. **^** Minorities During the Gold Rush. Archived 4 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine
    66. **^** For example, _The Oxford Companion to American Military History_ (Oxford University Press, 1999) states that "if Euro-Americans committed genocide anywhere on the continent against Native Americans, it was in California."
    67. **^** Indian Mixed-Blood.
    68. **^** "An apology from the BIA". tahtonka (Global Culture, Exploring the Humanities of Humans). 2000. Retrieved  21 February 2010.
    69. **^** Kevin Gover (2006) [Sep 8, 2000]. _Video of Kevin Gover’s speech, "Never Again" (Sept. 8, 2000), a formal apology to Native Americans, on behalf of the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs_ (video). U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs, analog to digital conversion by Harkirat Chawia, Michigan State University, presented by Christopher Buck, Michigan State University.
    70. **^** Buck, Christopher (2006). ""Never Again"; Kevin Gover's Apology for the Bureau of Indian Affairs" (PDF). _Wicazo SA Review_. **21** (1 (Spring)): 97–126. JSTOR 4140301. Retrieved  12 October 2015.
    

### Bibliography[edit]

Books

    
        * Cappel, Constance (2007). _The smallpox genocide of the Odawa tribe at L'Arbre Croche, 1763: the history of a Native American people_. Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 978-0-7734-5220-6.
    * Cook, Noble David (1998). _Born to Die: Disease and New World Conquest, 1492–1650_. ISBN 978-0-521-62208-0.
    * Hanson, Victor Davis (27 August 2002). _Carnage and culture: landmark battles in the rise of Western power_. Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-50052-4.
    * Henige, David P. (1998). _Numbers from Nowhere: The American Indian Contact Population Debate_. Norman : University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-3044-6.
    * Jennings, Francis (1993). _The Founders of America: How Indians discovered the land, pioneered in it, and created great classical civilizations, how they were plunged into a Dark Age by invasion and conquest, and how they are reviving_. New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-03373-1.
    * Mann, Charles C. (9 August 2005). _1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus_. Knopf. ISBN 9781400040063.
    * Ramenofsky, Ann (1988). _Vectors of Death: The Archaeology of European Contact_. Albuquerque, New Mexico: University of New Mexico Press. ISBN 978-0-8263-0997-6.
    * Royal, Robert. _1492 and All That: Political Manipulations of History_. Washington, D.C.: Ethics and Public Policy Center, 1992.
    * Shoemaker, Nancy (1999). _American Indian population recovery in the twentieth century_. University of New Mexico Press. ISBN 978-0-8263-1919-7.
    * Stannard, David E. (18 November 1993). _American Holocaust:The Conquest of the New World_. Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-508557-0.
    * Stearn, E. Wagner and Allen E. Stearn. _The Effect of Smallpox on the Destiny of the Amerindian_. Boston: Humphries, 1945.
    * Thornton, Russel (1987). _American Indian Holocaust and Survival: ˜a Œpopulation History Since 1492_. Norman : University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-2074-4.
    

Online sources

    
        * Lewy, Guenter. "Were American Indians the Victims of Genocide?", History News Network, originally published in _Commentary_.
    * Lord, Lewis. How many people were here before Columbus? at the Wayback Machine (archived 22 September 2006), 10 August 1997.
    * Rummel, R.J. _Death by Government_ , Chapter 3: Pre-Twentieth Century Democide
    * Stutz, Bruce. Megadeath in Mexico Discover, 21 February 2006.
    * White, Matthew. "The Annihilation of the Native Americans". Amateur website, but reports data from scholarly sources.
    * Jeffrey Amherst and Smallpox Blankets "Lord Jeffrey Amherst's letters discussing germ warfare against American Indians" Retrieved February 2007
    

## Further reading[edit]

    
        * Alchon, Suzanne Austin (2003). _A Pest in the Land_. University of New Mexico Press.
    * Cameron, Catherine M., Paul Kelton, and Alan C. Swedlund (eds.) (2015). _Beyond Germs: Native Depopulation in North America._ Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press.
    * Cappel, Constance (2007). _The smallpox genocide of the Odawa tribe at L'Arbre Croche, 1763: the history of a Native American people_. Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 978-0-7734-5220-6.
    * Fagan, Brian M. (20 May 2005). _Ancient North America: The Archaeology of a Continent_. ISBN 978-0-500-28532-9.
    * Mann, Charles C. (9 August 2005). _1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus_. Knopf. ISBN 9781400040063.
    * McNeill, William Hardy (1998). _Plagues and peoples_. Anchor. ISBN 978-0-385-12122-4.
    * Sletcher, Michael 'North American Indians', in Will Kaufman and Heidi Macpherson, eds., _Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History_ , (2 vols., Oxford, 2005).
    

## External links[edit]

    
        * Aboriginal peoples populations - Statistics Canada
    * Article by Russell Thornton on American Indian population history in North America Template:DEAD
    * Article by Alan Rinding on Brazil's Indians
    * Colonial Brazil: Portuguese, Tupi, etc
    * Indigenous Genocide in the Brazilian Amazon
    * The theft of Native Americans' land, in one animated map
    * Indian land cession by years
    * Pope Francis apologises for Catholic crimes against indigenous peoples during the colonisation of the Americas (2015)
    * When Native Americans Were Slaughtered in the Name of ‘Civilization’. History. March 2, 2018.
    

Links to related articles

* * *

|

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Indigenous peoples of the Americas

* * *

Pre-history|

    
        * Paleo-Indians
    * Pre-Columbian era
    * Classification
    * Archaeology
    * Genetics
    

|

![Americas \(orthographic

projection\).svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ca/Americas_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg/120px-

Americas_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg.png)

Mythology/Religion|

    
        * Mythologies of the indigenous peoples of the Americas‎ 
      * List of deities
      * Native American religion
    * Mesoamerican mythology
      * Mesoamerican religion
    

European  
colonization|

    
        * European colonization
    * Population history
    * Columbian exchange
    

Modern groups  
by country|

| North America|

    
        * Canada
    * Costa Rica
    * Dominica
    * El Salvador
    * Greenland
    * Jamaica
    * Mexico
    * Panama
    * Trinidad and Tobago
    * United States
    

---|---  
South America|

    
        * Argentina
    * Bolivia
    * Brazil
    * Chile
    * Colombia
    * Ecuador
    * Guyana
    * Paraguay
    * Peru
    * Suriname
    * Uruguay
    * Venezuela
    

Related topics|

    
        * Indigenous American studies
    * Indigenous languages
    * Indigenous movements
    * Indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest
    * Indigenous art
    * Artists
    * Writers
    
    * **Category**
    * **Portal**
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Cultural areas of indigenous North Americans

* * *
    
        * Arctic
    * California
    * Eastern Woodlands
      * Northeastern Woodlands
      * Southeastern Woodlands
    * Great Basin
    * Mexico
      * Aridoamerica
      * Mesoamerica
    * Caribbean
    * Northwest Coast
    * Interior Plains
    * Plateau
    * Southwest
    * Subarctic
      * Alaska
      * Canada
    

|

![Nordamerikanische Kulturareale

en.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Nordamerikanische_Kulturareale_en.png/70px-

Nordamerikanische_Kulturareale_en.png)

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Pre-Columbian civilizations and cultures

* * *

Americas|

    
        * Paleo-Indians
    * Genetic history
    * Archaeology of the Americas
    * Indigenous peoples of the Americas
    

North America|

    
        * North American pre-Columbian cultures
    * Caddoan Mississippian
    * Chichimeca
    * Hopewell tradition
    * Coles Creek
    * Fremont
    * Marksville
    * Mississippian
    * Mogollon
    * Plaquemine
    * Plum Bayou
    * Poverty Point
    * Troyville
    * Weeden Island
    

Mesoamerica|

    
        * Mesoamerican pre-Columbian chronology
    * Capacha
    * Chalcatzingo
    * Cholula
    * Coclé
    * Epi-Olmec
    * Huastec
    * Izapa
    * Mezcala
    * Mixtec
    * Olmec
    * Pipil
    * Quelepa
    * Shaft tomb tradition
    * Teuchitlan
    * Purépecha
    * Teotihuacan
    * Tlatilco
    * Tlaxcaltec
    * Toltec
    * Totonac
    * Veracruz
    * Xochipala
    * Zapotec
    

South America|

    
        * Andean civilizations
    * South American Indigenous people
    * El Abra
    * Cañaris
    * Chachapoya
    * Chancay
    * Chavín
    * Chimú
    * Chinchorro
    * Cultural periods of Peru
    * Hydraulic culture of mounds (Bolivia)
    * Las Vegas
    * Lima
    * La Tolita (Tumaco)
    * Manteño-Guancavilca
    * Mapuche
    * Moche
    * Mollo
    * Nariño
    * Nazca
    * Norte Chico
    * Quimbaya
    * San Agustín
    * Shuar
    * Sican
    * Taíno
    * Tairona
    * Tiwanaku
    * Tierradentro
    * Valdivia
    * Wankarani
    * Wari
    * Zenú
    

| | Aztec| Maya| Muisca| Inca  
---|---|---|---|---  
Language| Nahuatl| Mayan languages| Muysccubun| Quechua  
Writing| Script| Script| Numerals| Quipu  
Religion| Religion| Religion| Religion| Religion  
Mythology| Mythology| Mythology| Mythology| Mythology  
Calendar| Calendar| Calendar| Calendar|  
Society| Society| Society| Economy (Women)| Society  
Infrastructure| Chinampas| Architecture| Architecture  
Agriculture| Architecture (road system)  
Agriculture  
History| History| History| History| Inca history  
Neo-Inca State  
People| Moctezuma I  
Moctezuma II  
Cuitláhuac  
Cuauhtémoc  
| K'inich Janaab' Pakal  
Uaxaclajuun Ub'aah K'awiil  
Jasaw Chan K'awiil I| Nemequene  
Quemuenchatocha  
Tisquesusa  
Tundama  
Zoratama| Manco Cápac  
Pachacuti  
Atahualpa  
Manco Inca Yupanqui  
Túpac Amaru

Conquest| Spanish conquest  
(Hernán Cortés)| Spanish conquest  
Spanish conquest of Yucatán  
(Francisco de Montejo)  
Spanish conquest of Guatemala  
(Pedro de Alvarado)| Spanish conquest  
(Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada)  
(Hernán Pérez de Quesada)  
(List of conquistadors)| Spanish conquest  
(Francisco Pizarro)

**See also**

* * *
    
        * Aztecs
    * Portal:Indigenous peoples of the Americas
    * Portal:Mesoamerica
    * Columbian exchange
    * Mesoamerican writing systems
    * Native American cuisine
    * Native American pottery
    * Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas
    * Pre‑Columbian art
    * Painting in the Americas before European colonization
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

![Motif S.E.C.C. crossincircle HRoe

2008.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/67/Motif_S.E.C.C._crossincircle_HRoe_2008.jpg/20px-

Motif_S.E.C.C._crossincircle_HRoe_2008.jpg) Pre-Columbian North America

* * *

_Periods_

    
        Lithic
    Archaic
    Formative
    Classic
    Post-Classic
    

Archaeological  
cultures|

    
        * Adena
    * Alachua
    * Ancient Beringian
    * Ancestral Pueblo (Anasazi)
    * Baytown
    * Belle Glade
    * Buttermilk Creek Complex
    * Caborn-Welborn
    * Calf Creek
    * Caloosahatchee
    * Clovis
    * Coles Creek
    * Comondú
    * Deptford
    * Folsom
    * Fort Ancient
    * Fort Walton
    * Fremont
    * Glacial Kame
    * Glades
    * Hohokam
    * Hopewell
      * List of Hopewell sites
    * La Jolla
    * Las Palmas
    * Leon-Jefferson
    * Mississippian
      * List of Mississippian sites
    * Mogollon
    * Monongahela
    * Old Cordilleran
    * Oneota
    * Paleo-Arctic
    * Paleo-Indians
    * Patayan
    * Plano
    * Plaquemine
    * Poverty Point
    * Red Ocher
    * Santa Rosa-Swift Creek
    * St. Johns
    * Steed-Kisker
    * Tchefuncte
    * Tocobaga
    * Troyville
    

Archaeological  
sites|

![S.E.C.C. hero twins 3 HRoe

2007-transparent.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/S.E.C.C._hero_twins_3_HRoe_2007-transparent.png/110px-S.E.C.C._hero_twins_3_HRoe_2007-transparent.png)

    
        * Angel Mounds
    * Anzick Clovis burial
    * Bandelier National Monument
    * Blue Spring Shelter
    * The Bluff Point Stoneworks
    * Brewster
    * Cahokia
    * Candelaria Cave
    * Casa Grande
    * Chaco Canyon
    * Coso Rock Art District
    * Crystal River Archaeological State Park
    * Cuarenta Casas
    * Cueva de la Olla
    * Eaker
    * El Fin del Mundo
    * El Vallecito
    * Effigy Mounds National Monument
    * Etowah Indian Mounds
    * Eva
    * Folsom Site
    * Fort Ancient
    * Fort Center
    * Fort Juelson
    * Four Mounds
    * Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument
    * Glenwood
    * Grimes Point
    * Holly Bluff Site
    * Hopewell Culture National Historical Park
    * Horr's Island archaeological site
    * Huápoca
    * Key Marco
    * Kimball Village
    * Kincaid Mounds
    * Kolomoki Mounds
    * Lake Jackson Mounds
    * L'Anse aux Meadows
    * Marksville
    * Marmes Rockshelter
    * Meadowcroft Rockshelter
    * Mesa Verde
    * Moaning Cavern
    * Moorehead Circle
    * Morrison Mounds
    * Moundville
    * Mummy Cave
    * Nodena Site
    * Ocmulgee National Monument
    * Old Stone Fort
    * Orwell Site
    * Paquime
    * Parkin Park
    * Pinson Mounds
    * Portsmouth Earthworks
    * Poverty Point
    * Pueblo Bonito
    * Recapture Canyon
    * Rock Eagle
    * Rock Hawk
    * Rosenstock Village Site
    * Russell Cave National Monument
    * Salmon Ruins
    * Serpent Mound
    * Sierra de San Francisco
    * Spiro Mounds
    * SunWatch
    * Taos Pueblo
    * Toltec Mounds
    * Town Creek Indian Mound
    * Turkey River Mounds
    * Upward Sun River site
    * Velda Mound
    * West Oak Forest Earthlodge
    * Winterville
    * Wupatki National Monument
    

Human  
remains|

    * Anzick-1
    * Arlington Springs Man
    * Buhl Woman
    * Kennewick Man
    * La Brea Woman
    * Leanderthal Lady
    * Minnesota Woman
    * Spirit Cave mummy 

Miscellaneous|

    
        * Aridoamerica
    * Black drink
    * Ceremonial pipe
    * Chunkey
    * Clovis point
    * Container Revolution
    * Eastern Agricultural Complex
    * Eden point
    * Effigy mound
    * Falcon dancer
    * Folsom point
    * Green Corn Ceremony
    * Horned Serpent
    * Kiva
    * Medicine wheel
    * Metallurgy
    * Mi'kmaq hieroglyphic writing
    * Mound Builders
    * N.A.G.P.R.A.
    * Norse colonization of North America
    * Oasisamerica
    * Piasa
    * Southeastern Ceremonial Complex
    * Stickball
    * Three Sisters agriculture
    * Thunderbird
    * Underwater panther
    * Water glyphs
    

Related

    
        Genetic history
    Portal of Indigenous peoples of North America
    Pre-Columbian era
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

![Americas \(orthographic

projection\).svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ca/Americas_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg/20px-

Americas_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg.png) History of the Americas

* * *

History|

    
        * North America
    * Mesoamerica
    * Central America
    * Caribbean
    * Latin America
    * South America
    * Andean South America
    * Genetics
    

|

![LocationAmericas.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/LocationAmericas.png/200px-

LocationAmericas.png)

Settlement|

    
        * Indigenous peoples
    * Indigenous population
    * Pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact theories
    * Discovery
    * Exploration
    * European colonization
    * Spanish colonization
    * French colonization
    * Portuguese colonization
    * British colonization
    * Columbian Exchange
    * Decolonization
    

Societies|

    
        * Paleo-Indians
    * Pre-Columbian era
    * Aztec
    * Maya
    * Muisca
    * Inca
    

Related|

    
        * Maps
    * Culture
    * Geography
    * Indigenous languages
    * Epidemics
    * Slavery
    

Lists|

    
        * Pre-Columbian cultures
    * Indigenous peoples
    * Oldest churches
    * Population
    * Conflicts 
      * North America
      * South America
    

Chronology|

    
        * Archaeology of the Americas
    * North America by period
    * North American timelines
    * Mesoamerica by period
    * Mesoamerica timeline
    
    * Era: By period
    * By region
    * Three-age system
    * Ancient history
    * Pre-Columbian era
    * Classical Antiquity
    * Middle Ages
    * Modern history
    * Future
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Genocide topics

* * *

Genocides  
(list by death toll)|

    
        * Dzungar Mongols (1750s)
    * Circassian genocide (1860s)
    * Selk'nam genocide (1890s–1900s)
    * Herero and Namaqua (1904–1907)
    * Greek (1914–1923)
    * Assyrian (1914–1925)
    * Armenian (1915–1923)
    * Holodomor (1932–1933)
    * The Holocaust (1941–1945)
    * Porajmos (1941–1944)
    * Bangladesh (1971)
    * East Timor (1974–1999)
    * Cambodian (1975–1979)
    * Guatemalan Maya (1981–1983)
    * Anfal genocide (1986–1989)
    * Burundian genocides (1972 & 1993)
    * Rwandan genocide (1994)
    * Bosnian genocide (1992–1995)
    * Rohingya (2017–)
    

Terms|

    
        * Democide
      * Autogenocide
    * Politicide
      * Classicide
      * Eliticide
    * Ethnocide
    * Cultural genocide
    * Eugenics
    * Gendercide
    * Genocidal massacre
    * Genocide of indigenous peoples
    * Policide
    * Utilitarian genocide
    

Methods|

    
        * Genocidal rape
    * Extermination camp
    * Killing Fields
    * Death marches
    * Death squads
    

Genocide denial|

    
        * The Holocaust
      * trivialization
    * Armenian
    * Bosnian
    * Rwandan
    * Holodomor
    * Cambodian
    

Issues|

    
        * Definitions
    * Genocide law
    * Prevention
    * Effects on young survivors
    

Legal proceedings|

    
        * International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
      * Trial of Radovan Karadžić
      * Trial of Ratko Mladić
      * Trial of Slobodan Milošević
    * International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
    * Khmer Rouge Tribunal
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Population_history_of_indigenous_peoples_of_the_Americas&oldid=896996854"

Categories:

    
        * History of indigenous peoples of the Americas
    * Native American history
    * Colonization history of the United States
    * Native American genocide
    * Racism
    * Controversies
    * Human rights abuses in the United States
    * Discrimination
    * Persecution
    * Ethnic cleansing in the Americas
    * Demographic history by country or region
    * Christianity and violence
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Webarchive template wayback links
    * Use dmy dates from October 2013
    * All articles with unsourced statements
    * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015
    * All articles with failed verification
    * Articles with failed verification from March 2016
    * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015
    * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2015
    * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009
    * Articles lacking reliable references from July 2014
    * All articles lacking reliable references
    * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014
    * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2013
    * Portal templates with redlinked portals
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * Azərbaycanca
    * Беларуская
    * Čeština
    * Español
    * Français
    * Հայերեն
    * Italiano
    * Português
    * Русский
    * Türkçe
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 14 May 2019, at 03:37 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

