

Migrants Breach the U.S. Border Fence in a Bid for Asylum

    
        * Subscribe
    
    * Home
    * Subscribe
    

![Subscribe](http://subscription-

assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

Close

    
        * 40 Under 40 
    * 100 Best Companies to Work For 
    * Fortune 500 
    * Global 500 
    * Most Powerful Women 
    * World's 50 Greatest Leaders 
    * World's Most Admired Companies 
    * All Rankings 
    * Automotive 
    * Careers 
    * Commentary 
    * Design 
    * Energy 
    * Entertainment 
    * Finance 
    * Health 
    * Humor 
    * International 
    * Leadership 
    * Luxury 
    * Most Powerful Women 
    * Real Estate 
    * Retail 
    * Sports 
    * Technology 
    * The Ledger 
    * Travel 
    * Venture 
    * FORTUNE Communications 
    * Fortune Knowledge Group 
    * FORTUNE Membership 
    * Conferences 
    * Data Store 
    * Infographics 
    * Magazine 
    * Newsletters 
    * Photography 
    * Radio 
    * The 21st Century Corporation 
    * Brainstorm Reinvent 
    * Digital Health 
    * Discovering Luxury 
    * Innovation By Design 
    * Looking Forward 
    * Mastering the Market 
    * MPW Mentorship 
    * MPW Next Gen 
    * State of the Market 
    * About Us 
    * Subscribe 
    * Give a Gift 
    * Customer Service 
    * EU Customer Service 
    * Work at Fortune
    

Stay Connected

    
        1. Briefing
    2. Immigration
    

# Migrants Breach the U.S. Border Fence in a Bid for Asylum

By Erik Sherman

December 4, 2018

Dozens of Central American migrants, frustrated by weeks of waiting in squalid
camps, went over the 10-foot border fence at Tijuana last night, according to
Reuters.

Choosing a spot at dusk where the fence was lower, just over a quarter mile
from the Pacific, eventually roughly two dozen people had gone over. Another
three managed to squeeze themselves through a narrow space in the fence.

Some migrants helped each other over, using blankets as ropes. At least one
mother with three children were among those who crossed over.

A second taller fence past a hill kept them from reaching California, creating
an area heavily guarded by border patrols. Although a few tried to escape,
most walked over to the officials to turn themselves in.

Thousands of migrants have been waiting for a chance to apply for asylum. The
U.S. says it can process up to 100 people a day at the Tijuana crossing, UPI
reports. Reuters said that the number can be as low as 40.

Some of the people seek economic opportunity but many tell of death threats.
Even having entered illegally, chances are that those who did will receive
asylum hearings more quickly.

In October there was an attempted fence breach at the Mexico-Guatemala border,
as thousands of migrants tried to head north, reported the Associated Press.

The desperation of many drives them to take a perilous journey. An AP count
puts the number of migrants who have died or gone missing during the last four
years at almost 4,000, and that count may be low. It is 1,573 higher than a
United Nations estimate.

AP, using a variety of sources, also estimated the number of migrants dead or
missing worldwide at 56,800.

### SPONSORED FINANCIAL CONTENT

![](http://assets.time.com/images/dianomi-logo.png)

### You May Like

### Read More

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much more.

SUBSCRIBE

EDIT POST

![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top2_205_thumb.jpg)

![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

### Subscribe & Save

Subscribe today and save 79% off the cover price.

SUBSCRIBE NOW

![](https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/fortune-newsletter-tout-

footer.png)

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much more.

SUBSCRIBE

    
        * 40 Under 40
    * 100 Best Companies to Work For
    * Fortune 500
    * Global 500
    * Most Powerful Women in Business
    * World's 50 Greatest Leaders
    * World's Most Admired Companies
    * Brainstorm Reinvent
    * All Rankings
    * Home
    * Automotive
    * Careers
    * Design
    * Energy & Environment
    * Executive Travel
    * Finance
    * Commentary
    * Health
    * International
    * Leadership
    * Luxury
    * Markets
    * Most Powerful Women
    * Retail
    * Sports
    * Technology
    * The Ledger
    * Venture
    * Photography
    * Podcasts
    * Videos
    * Newsletters
    * Magazine
    * Fortune Knowledge Group
    * Fortune Data Store
    * Fortune Conferences
    * Customer Service
    * EU Customer Service
    * Site Map
    * Privacy Policy
    * Advertising
    * About Us
    * Subscribe
    * Give a Gift
    * Ad Choices
    * Terms of Use
    * Your California Privacy Rights
    

(C) 2018 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site
constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy (Your California
Privacy Rights).  
Fortune may receive compensation for some links to products and services on
this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.  
Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Interactive Data.
ETF and Mutual Fund data provided by Morningstar, Inc. Dow Jones Terms &
Conditions: http://www.djindexes.com/mdsidx/html/tandc/indexestandcs.html.  
S&P; Index data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its
licensors. All rights reserved. Terms & Conditions. Powered and implemented by
Interactive Data Managed Solutions. | EU Data Subject Requests

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

