

Fox News

    
        * U.S.
    * World
    * Opinion
    * Politics
    * Entertainment
    * Business
    * Lifestyle
    * TV
    * Fox Nation
    * Listen
    * More
    

Expand / Collapse search

Login

Watch TV

☰

Hot Topics

###### U.S.

    
        * Crime
    * Military
    * Education
    * Terror
    * Immigration
    * Economy
    * Personal Freedoms
    * Fox News Investigates
    

###### World

    
        * U.N.
    * Conflicts
    * Terrorism
    * Disasters
    * Global Economy
    * Environment
    * Religion
    * Scandals
    

###### Opinion

###### Politics

    
        * Executive
    * Senate
    * House
    * Judiciary
    * Foreign policy
    * Polls
    * Elections
    

###### Entertainment

    
        * Celebrity News
    * Movies
    * TV News
    * Music News
    * Style News
    * Entertainment Video
    

###### Business

    
        * Markets
    * Politics
    * Technology
    * Features
    * Business Leaders
    

###### Lifestyle

    
        * Food + Drink
    * Cars + Trucks
    * Travel + Outdoors
    * House + Home
    * Fitness + Well-being
    * Style + Beauty
    * Family
    

###### Science

    
        * Archaeology
    * Air & Space
    * Planet Earth
    * Wild Nature
    * Natural Science
    * Dinosaurs
    

###### Tech

    
        * Security
    * Innovation
    * Drones
    * Computers
    * Video Games
    * Military Tech
    

###### Health

    
        * Healthy Living
    * Medical Research
    * Mental Health
    * Cancer
    * Heart Health
    * Children's Health
    

###### TV

    
        * Shows
    * Personalities
    * Watch Live
    * Full Episodes
    * Show Clips
    * News Clips
    

###### About

    
        * Careers
    * College Students
    * Fox Around the World
    * Advertise With Us
    * Ad Choices
    * Media Relations
    * Compliance
    

###### Other

    
        * Fox Nation
    * Fox News Shop
    * Fox News Go
    * Fox News Radio
    * Fox News Insider
    * Newsletters
    * Alerts
    * Podcasts
    * Apps & Products
    

Fox News

    
        * Terms of Use
    * Updated Privacy Policy(What's Changed)
    * Closed Captioning Policy
    * Help
    * Contact Us
    

This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
©2019 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20
minutes.

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Google+
    * Instagram
    * RSS
    * Email
    

ADVERTISEMENT

OPINION

**Published** January 5

# Americans want border security, and the numbers show it

![Brett

Velicovich](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2018/09/340/340/Brett20Velicovich.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)

By Brett Velicovich | Fox News

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Flipboard
    * Comments
    * Print
    * Email
    

close

![Are Democrats really for border security? A look at all the ways they have

blocked efforts to reform

immigration](https://a57.foxnews.com/media2.foxnews.com/BrightCove/694940094001/2018/12/30/931/524/694940094001_5984584713001_5984579843001-vs.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)Video

#### Are Democrats really for border security? A look at all the ways they

have blocked efforts to reform immigration

Are Democrats really for border security? A look at all the ways they have
blocked efforts to reform immigration

President Trump is far from alone in his determination to secure our borders
-- according to a recent Gallup poll, Americans view immigration as the
second-biggest problem facing the country today.

That's bad news for the Democrat Party, which is hellbent on opposing the
president's efforts to fix our broken immigration system, especially the
border wall he needs in order to get illegal immigration under control.

The Democrats have a very simple, two-part strategy on immigration: first and
foremost, they want to keep President Trump from fulfilling his promises to
the American people; second, they want to make it even easier for foreigners
to enter this country illegally.

**CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BRETT VELICOVICH**

With Democrats now in control of the House of Representatives, it's no
surprise that Americans are deeply troubled by the immigration crisis.

Over the past several decades, millions of illegal immigrants have
successfully evaded our efforts to enforce immigration laws, putting local
economies and welfare programs under tremendous pressure to cope with the
massive influx of undocumented workers and their families, most of whom
receive at least one form of government welfare.

**CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP**

In fact, illegal immigration costs taxpayers a staggering $134.9 billion a
year while contributing only $19 billion in state, federal, and local taxes.
At the federal level, medical costs make up the lion's share of government
expenditures on illegal immigrants, while education is the largest single
expense that illegal immigration imposes on state and local governments.

Sadly, an overloaded welfare state is not the only negative side-effect of our
broken immigration system. Communities across America are also being
devastated by the violent crime and drug trafficking that result from our
failure to control the border -- an issue Donald Trump has addressed
repeatedly and emphatically ever since he first announced his candidacy for
president.

Rather than letting obstructionist Democrats in Congress prevent him from
addressing the immigration problem, the president has exercised his executive
power to make progress on the issue wherever possible.

Thanks to the president's diplomatic approach, for instance, the U.S. and
Mexico have virtually achieved synergy on immigration, developing a joint
strategy to tackle the root causes of mass migration. In response to urging
from the Trump administration, Mexico is also offering incentives to deter
migrants from illegally crossing the U.S. border, as well as agreeing to house
asylum-seekers on its territory while their claims are processed by U.S.
authorities.

President Trump has done everything in his power to strengthen immigration
enforcement on our side of the border as well, even sending the military to
reinforce our brave border patrol agents when a caravan of thousands of
migrants threatened to overwhelm their resources.

By taking a firm stand on border security, the president is doing exactly what
the people elected him to do, as Gallup's polling confirms.

Politicians in Washington simply can't continue to ignore the significant
problems with our immigration system, and the voters know it. The Democrats
now have a clear choice -- they can either listen to the American people who
overwhelmingly oppose illegal immigration and work with President Trump to
secure the border, or they can continue to play political games in the midst
of a national crisis. May they choose wisely.

_Editor 's note: An earlier version of this article referred to immigration
figures that have been disputed in a report by the Washington Post._

Brett Velicovich is a U.S. Army veteran, a strategic advisor at WhiteFox
Defense, and author of “Drone Warrior: An Elite Soldier's Inside Account of
the Hunt for America's Most Dangerous Enemies.” You can follow him on twitter
@TheDroneWarrior.

#### Latest in Opinion

    
        * ![Gutfeld on Oberlin College losing $11 million to a bakery](https://a57.foxnews.com/media2.foxnews.com/BrightCove/694940094001/2019/06/11/270/152/694940094001_6047122228001_6047116574001-vs.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
    

##### Gutfeld on Oberlin College losing $11 million to a bakery

    
        * ![Colin Reed: Pennsylvania could be a key battleground in 2020 presidential race](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2019/06/270/152/BidenAP060719.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
    

##### Colin Reed: Pennsylvania could be a key battleground in 2020

presidential race

    
        * ![Liz Peek: Iowa Democrats are making smart choices \(even conservatives should approve\)](https://a57.foxnews.com/media2.foxnews.com/BrightCove/694940094001/2019/06/11/270/152/694940094001_6046729043001_6046733066001-vs.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
    

##### Liz Peek: Iowa Democrats are making smart choices (even conservatives

should approve)

    
        * ![Judah and Chelsea Smith: After graduation, have faith in your ‘adulting’](https://a57.foxnews.com/static.foxnews.com/foxnews.com/content/uploads/2019/06/270/152/iStock-Graduation-Cake.jpg?ve=1&tl=1)
    

##### Judah and Chelsea Smith: After graduation, have faith in your ‘adulting’

ADVERTISEMENT

###### U.S.

    
        * Crime
    * Military
    * Education
    * Terror
    * Immigration
    * Economy
    * Personal Freedoms
    * Fox News Investigates
    

###### World

    
        * U.N.
    * Conflicts
    * Terrorism
    * Disasters
    * Global Economy
    * Environment
    * Religion
    * Scandals
    

###### Opinion

###### Politics

    
        * Executive
    * Senate
    * House
    * Judiciary
    * Foreign policy
    * Polls
    * Elections
    

###### Entertainment

    
        * Celebrity News
    * Movies
    * TV News
    * Music News
    * Style News
    * Entertainment Video
    

###### Business

    
        * Markets
    * Politics
    * Technology
    * Features
    * Business Leaders
    

###### Lifestyle

    
        * Food + Drink
    * Cars + Trucks
    * Travel + Outdoors
    * House + Home
    * Fitness + Well-being
    * Style + Beauty
    * Family
    

###### Science

    
        * Archaeology
    * Air & Space
    * Planet Earth
    * Wild Nature
    * Natural Science
    * Dinosaurs
    

###### Tech

    
        * Security
    * Innovation
    * Drones
    * Computers
    * Video Games
    * Military Tech
    

###### Health

    
        * Healthy Living
    * Medical Research
    * Mental Health
    * Cancer
    * Heart Health
    * Children's Health
    

###### TV

    
        * Shows
    * Personalities
    * Watch Live
    * Full Episodes
    * Show Clips
    * News Clips
    

###### About

    
        * Careers
    * College Students
    * Fox Around the World
    * Advertise With Us
    * Ad Choices
    * Media Relations
    * Compliance
    

###### Other

    
        * Fox Nation
    * Fox News Shop
    * Fox News Go
    * Fox News Radio
    * Fox News Insider
    * Newsletters
    * Alerts
    * Podcasts
    * Apps & Products
    
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Flipboard
    * Google+
    * Instagram
    * RSS
    * Email
    

Fox News

    
        * Terms of Use
    * Updated Privacy Policy(What's Changed)
    * Closed Captioning Policy
    * Help
    * Contact Us
    

This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
©2019 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20
minutes.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

