
    
        * News
      * News
      * Crime + Public Safety
      * Investigative Reporting
      * Politics
      * Health
      * Environment
    * Local News
      * Local News
      * Pasadena
      * San Marino
      * Altadena
      * San Gabriel
      * Alhambra
      * Monrovia
      * Arcadia
      * Temple City
      * Monterey Park
      * South Pasadena
      * Duarte
      * Rosemead
      * Sierra Madre
      * El Monte
      * South El Monte
      * Los Angeles
      * Los Angeles County
    * Sports
      * Sports
      * LA Varsity
      * Chargers
      * Rams
      * Lakers
      * Clippers
      * Dodgers
      * Angels
      * USC
      * UCLA
      * College Sports
      * Kings
      * Ducks
      * MMA/Boxing
      * Soccer
    * Things to do
      * Things to do
      * Restaurant Reviews + Food
      * Amusement Parks
      * Movies + TV
      * Music + Concerts
      * Theater
      * Home + Garden
      * Travel
      * Comics
      * Puzzles
    * Business
      * Business
      * Housing
      * Jobs
    * Obituaries
      * Obituaries
      * Place an Obituary
    * Opinion
      * Opinion
    * SUBSCRIBE NOW
    

GET BREAKING NEWS IN YOUR BROWSER. CLICK HERE TO TURN ON NOTIFICATIONS.

X

![Pasadena Star News](https://www.pasadenastarnews.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/pasadena-star-news-logo.svg)

    
        * Sign Up For Newsletters
    * E-Edition
    * Subscribe + Subscriber Services
    * SUBSCRIBE NOW
    
    * News
      * News
      * Crime + Public Safety
      * Investigative Reporting
      * Politics
      * Health
      * Environment
    * Local News
      * Local News
      * Pasadena
      * San Marino
      * Altadena
      * San Gabriel
      * Alhambra
      * Monrovia
      * Arcadia
      * Temple City
      * Monterey Park
      * South Pasadena
      * Duarte
      * Rosemead
      * Sierra Madre
      * El Monte
      * South El Monte
      * Los Angeles
      * Los Angeles County
    * Sports
      * Sports
      * LA Varsity
      * Chargers
      * Rams
      * Lakers
      * Clippers
      * Dodgers
      * Angels
      * USC
      * UCLA
      * College Sports
      * Kings
      * Ducks
      * MMA/Boxing
      * Soccer
    * Things to do
      * Things to do
      * Restaurant Reviews + Food
      * Amusement Parks
      * Movies + TV
      * Music + Concerts
      * Theater
      * Home + Garden
      * Travel
      * Comics
      * Puzzles
    * Business
      * Business
      * Housing
      * Jobs
    * Obituaries
      * Obituaries
      * Place an Obituary
    * Opinion
      * Opinion
    * SUBSCRIBE NOW
    

#### Statistics can be manipulated to prove anything

### Share this:

    
        * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
    * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
    * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
    * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
    * Click to print (Opens in new window)
    * Trending:
    
    * Monrovia High graduation 
    * Arcadia sales tax boost 
    * All-Area Softball Team 
    * All-Area Baseball Team 
    * Pasadena-area valedictorians
    

###### News

# Statistics can be manipulated to prove anything

### Share this:

    
        * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
    * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
    * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
    * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
    * Click to print (Opens in new window)
    *  __
    

ByRobert Rector | RRector@SCNG.com |

PUBLISHED: May 24, 2014 at 11:04 pm | UPDATED: August 29, 2017 at 9:25 am

There are several undeniable truths about statistics: First and foremost, they
can be manipulated, massaged and misstated. In the immortal words of Homer
Simpson, "Aw, you can come up with statistics to prove anything … Forty
percent of all people know that."

Second, if bogus statistical information is repeated often enough, it
eventually is considered to be true.

As to Point One, consider a presidential debate. In 2012, when Barak Obama and
Mitt Romney squared off, the president was heard to declare that "Over the
last 30 months, we've seen 5 million jobs in the private sector created." But
30 months only dates back to January 2010. And the president took office in
January 2009.

It turns out that in his first year in office, the country lost some 5 million
jobs. While things got better, the cumulative job creation in the private
sector during Obama's first term is in fact a more humble 125,000.

Romney, for his part, said that "If I'm president I will create -- help create
12 million new jobs in this country with rising incomes." While that may have
seemed impressive, it's the exact same figure that had been used by economic
forecasters for how many jobs they already expected the economy would add over
the next four years given a stable economy. And it had nothing to do with who
was in the White House.

As to Point Two, consider these Things We Believe But Shouldn't:

The teen pregnancy rate is on the rise. No, it isn't. According to a report in
the Washington Post, the teen pregnancy rate in 2009, of about 38 per thousand
girls, was 39 percent lower than the 1991 peak of 62. Just four years later,
in 2012, it reached a record low of about 29.

People only use 10 per cent of their brains: Nobody knows for sure where this
nugget came from, but as psychologist Scott Lilienfeld explains: "The last
century has witnessed the advent of increasingly sophisticated technologies
for snooping in the brain's traffic… Despite this detailed mapping, no quiet
areas awaiting new assignments have emerged. In fact, even simple tasks
generally require contributions of processing areas spread throughout
virtually the whole brain." Which means you're using all of your brain, even
if you don't feel like it on occasion.

Men think about sex every seven seconds: Calculated over 16 waking hours that
adds up to 8,000 salacious thoughts in a day. While we've known a few guys who
met or maybe even exceeded that mark, a 2011 Ohio State study found that young
men think about sex 19 times a day, compared with 10 for young women.

We're discussing all of this because of the emergence of one Tyler Vigen, a
law school student at Harvard, who has once and for all exposed just how
absurd statistical data can be in the wrong hands.

He has created a website called Spurious Correlations (found at
tylervigen.com) which, he says, isn't meant to create a distrust for research
or even correlative data but instead foster interest in statistics and
numerical research. Perhaps. We prefer to think he has a wicked sense of
humor.

Using data from the Center for Disease Control and the U.S. Census, he
intertwines the numbers to reach statistical conclusions which are based on
real data but which have to actual correlation whatsoever.

In his first example, he has illustrated in graph form that the number of
people who trip and fall over their own feet is in direct correlation with the
number of lawyers in Nevada. There is, of course, no plausible connection
unless most the members of the Nevada bar handle slip and fall cases.

Next up is a chart that show the number of people murdered by being pushed
from high places corresponds with the precipitation in Tuscola County,
Mississippi.

Vigen has showed that the age of our Miss Americas declines in concert with
the number of murders by steam, hot vapors and hot objects.

Then we see that the number of sociology doctorates awarded is in direct
proportion to the number of deaths caused by anticoagulants.

By the same measurement, we find that the per capita consumption of mozzarella
cheese is in statistical lockstep with civil engineering doctorates awarded.

More intriguing is the chart that illustrates that the number of people who
drowned by falling into a swimming pool correlates with the number of films in
which Nicolas Cage has appeared.

Get the latest news delivered daily!

Subscribe

Follow Us

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * RSS
    

## Most Popular

    
        1. Photos: 2019 Monrovia High School Graduation 
    2. Monterey Park residents serve recall notices to two city councilmen 
    3. Cal State LA is trying to use a bioscience hub to bring new jobs, opportunity to struggling region 
    4. Pasadena’s Robinson Park Recreation Center is open again after $12.2 million improvement 
    5. Photos: Pasadena-area valedictorians for the Class of 2019 
    6. Fox’s in Altadena will start serving dinner, and here's what's on the menu 
    7. Jacaranda trees: Invasion of the purple flowers bring peace, beauty (and some mess) to SoCal 
    8. Star-News All-Area Baseball Team 2019: Maranatha’s Dawson Netz earns top honors 
    9. Car damaged in Pasadena shooting, no victim found 
    10. National Doughnut Day 2019: Where to find free treats and deals 
    11. Arcadia election results: Voters push local sales tax to the maximum 
    12. Governor Newsom, help the most vulnerable Californians
    

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/ce370a7e644a7f66748bee909dcf50c4?s=85&d=mm&r=g)

### Robert Rector

blog comments powered by Disqus

## More in News

    
        * #####  Sergio Gonzalez served stars and everyone else like they were one, at Hollywood's famous Musso & Frank Grill
    
    * #####  Undocumented seniors have tenuous chance at needed health care as coverage debate reaches a head
    
    * #####  Leo Carrillo's camp concession is story of survival, nostalgia as store reopens following Woolsey fire
    
    * #####  Leaders of white supremacist California prison gang charged in killings
    
    * Live Traffic Map
    * Weather
    * Corrections
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * RSS
    
    * About Us
      * About Us
      * Contact Us
      * About SCNG
      * MediaNews Group
      * Work With Us
      * Company Store
      * Newspapers in Education
    * Advertising Sections
      * Autos
      * Classified
      * Jobs
      * Local Ads
      * Real Estate Ads
      * Weekly Ads
      * Special Sections
      * Readers Choice
    * How To Advertise
      * MediaNews Group Advertising
      * Place a Classified Ad
      * Media Kit
      * Advertising Inquiry
    * How to Find Us on Other Platforms
      * Mobile Apps
      * Newsletter Signup
      * e-Edition
      * Breaking News Alerts
      * Site Map
      * RSS
    * Customer Service
      * Subscriber Services
      * Subscribe
      * Reader Rewards
      * Share Your News
    * Partners
      * SoCal Prep Legends
      * San Gabriel Valley Tribune
      * Whittier Daily News
      * L.A. Daily News
      * The Cannifornian
      * Monster
    
    * Copyright © 2019 MediaNews Group, Inc.
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    * Cookie Policy
    * Arbitration
    * Powered by WordPress.com VIP
    * Southern California News Group
    * MediaNews Group
    

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://www.pasadenastarnews.com/wp-content/mu-

plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

