

null: nullpx

    
        * Portada
    * TV Shows
    * Famosos
    * Horóscopos
    * Noticias
    * Inmigración
    * Deportes
    * Liga MX
    * TV
    * Más
    

Secciones

    
        *       * Portada
    *       * TV Shows
        * Al Punto
        * Amar a muerte
        * Aquí y Ahora
        * Atrapada
        * Contacto Deportivo
        * Crónicas
        * Despierta América
        * Doña Flor y sus dos maridos
        * El Gordo y La Flaca
        * En Tierras Salvajes
        * Futbol Club
        * Fútbol Central
        * Hoy
        * Inseparables
        * Jesús
        * La Reina Soy Yo
        * La Rosa De Guadalupe
        * Like la leyenda
        * Locura Deportiva
        * Línea de 4
        * Me Caigo de Risa
        * Mi marido tiene más familia
        * Mi Lista de Exes
        * Misión Europa
        * Noticiero Edicion Digital
        * Noticiero Univision
        * Pequeños Gigantes
        * Por Amar Sin Ley
        * Primer Impacto
        * República Deportiva
        * Sábado Futbolero
        * Simón Dice
        * Sin tu mirada
        * Teletón USA
        * Tenías que ser tú
      * Famosos
      * Horóscopos
    *       * Noticias
        * América Latina
        * Ataques
        * Ciencia
        * Comunidad
        * Criminalidad 
        * Dinero
        * Educación
        * Especiales
        * Estados Unidos
        * Fenomenos Naturales
        * Hispanos
        * Inmigración
        * Justicia
        * Meteorologia
        * Mundo
        * Narcotrafico
        * News in english
        * Opinión
        * Pandillas
        * Planeta
        * Politica
        * Racismo
        * Religion
        * Reto-28
        * Salud
        * Sucesos
        * Tecnología
        * Tiroteos
        * Trending
      * Inmigración
    *       * Deportes
        * Fútbol
        * Boxeo
        * Formula 1
        * MLB
        * NBA
        * NFL
        * Sensación Deporte
        * Tenis
        * UFC
        * Combate Americas
        * Mas Deportes
        * Premios Univision Deportes
        * Liga MX
        * Posiciones
        * Radio
        * UEFA Champions League
        * Otras Ligas
        * Selección MX
        * Selección USA
        * MLS
        * Opinión
        * Entrevistas
        * COPA MX
        * UEFA Europa League
        * UEFA Nations League
        * Deportes Extremos
        * Fanshop
      * Liga MX
    *       * TV En Vivo
      * Guia TV
      * Delicioso
      * Radio
      * A Bordo
      * Tu Ciudad
        * Atlanta, GA
        * Austin, TX
        * Chicago, IL
        * Dallas, TX
        * Fresno, CA
        * Houston, TX
        * Los Angeles, CA
        * Miami, FL
        * Nueva York, NY
        * Philadelphia, PA
        * Phoenix/Tucson, AZ
        * Puerto Rico
        * Raleigh, NC
        * San Antonio, TX
        * San Francisco, CA
        * Sacramento, CA
      * Galavisión
      * Unimás
    

![](https://www.univision.com/assets/styles/fonts/logo-univision-news-

mobile.5b1d3e444bd3fc71ff7e2737d4faf814.svg)![](https://www.univision.com/assets/styles/fonts/logo-

univision-news-desktop.ae62e87c3419ab458931268e4fba1c96.svg)

HomeEdición en EspañolImmigrationHealthEducationLatin AmericaUnited
StatesPolitics

Más

    
        * Environment
    * Opinion
    * Money
    * World
    

Immigration

# A day in the life of a coyote: smuggling migrants from Mexico to the United

States

Ramón wanted the American dream, but now sells it. He smuggles dozens of
migrants across the Rio Grande every week. He is one of the contacts in a
network that stretches from Central America to Texas. And he pays a cut to the
Mexican cartels.

![Univision News

Logo](https://st1.uvnimg.com/e6/4e/fb46a1c94bd7baad3486e75160ae/UNIVISION-

NEWS_600x124.png)

Damià S. Bonmatí,

21 Dic 2016 – 6:02 PM EST

![](https://st1.uvnimg.com/dims4/default/b441f03/2147483647/strip/true/resize/30x17/quality/75/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fst1.uvnimg.com%2F02%2Fb7%2F4791996643de9c7a84c99effbaed%2F9b4a391b2b8543149b672826e2853e3a)

![](https://st1.uvnimg.com/dims4/default/ff5bc51/2147483647/thumbnail/480x270/quality/75/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fuvn-

brightspot.s3.amazonaws.com%2F02%2Fb7%2F4791996643de9c7a84c99effbaed%2Fresizes%2F500%2F9b4a391b2b8543149b672826e2853e3a)

**REYNOSA, Mexico** – Ramón came to the border looking for the American dream,
but now makes a living by selling it – smuggling migrants from the Mexican
side of the Rio Grande to the U.S. side.

“People from practically all of the world. Not just Latin Americans. People
from Asia, Africa, all that. And you ask yourself how they manage to get
here," said the 31-year old. They all come because of the so-called American
Dream, which is a big lie."

He usually crosses a number of times each week. "Two, three, even four times
per week," he said.

Over the six years he's been working as a coyote, he's been in the United
States "hundreds of times."

Though he's never been arrested, he's come close.

Ramón, who would not give his last name, said he usually smuggles five to 20
migrants at a time. With less than five, there's no profit. Smuggling, after
all, is business.

Audio extendido de la entrevista al coyote

### “There's a lot of risk, but the pay is good”

Ramón says he started out helping other coyotes. After six years he now has
his own business, which focuses on one of the last stages of the journey --
when migrants cross the border.

“It's money. It pays well. You don't work hard. There's a lot of risk, but the
pay is good,” he said.

His is a business of contacts. Ramón says it's important to have contacts
along Mexico's southern borders with Guatemala and Belize, because that's
where the market starts. He also has to be good to his clients, who may need
him in the future to smuggle their relatives or friends.

His main work tool is his cell phone, which he uses to talk to people in
Central America, in southern and central Mexico and in Texas to coordinate the
work. They are cogs in a smuggling network that uses trucks and hideouts, as
well as bribes to authorities and payoffs to drug cartels.

### “If we don't pay, the cartel will kill us”

Drug cartels that operate along the Mexico-U.S. border are another tentacle in
the migrant smuggling business.

“They are our ticket into the United States, because they are the ones who
control the border,” the coyote said. In Reynosa and the surrounding state of
Tamalulipas, the Gulf Cartel controls the border. Los Zetas control regions to
the west.

Ramón said he pays the cartel for each client; more for adults, less for
minors. The cartel's men sometimes show up before the groups cross, to count
the migrants and make sure the coyotes pay the right amount.

“If you fail to pay for just one person, you are breaking your word. And your
word is the only thing that counts here,” he said.

If he doesn't pay?

“They will kill us,” he added. “And I'm not just saying that.”

### “They pay $7,000 to $10,000 for the whole trip”

Because migrants pay along the way, Ramón said he can only estimate the total
cost of the journey. There's one price for being smuggled from El Salvador to
Mexico's southern border. There's another from Chiapas to Tamaulipas, about
$3,000. It all adds up.

The people paying those thousands of dollars are usually relatives already
living in the United States. “It's all fixed from up there,” he said.

Ramón added that the most dangerous coyotes __ are the ones who want the
entire amount paid in Honduras, El Salvador or Guatemala. “They are con
artists … extortionists who in the end don't take you where you want to go.”

Some migrants have complained that their coyotes abandoned them or that they
were kidnapped during their trip through Mexico. Smugglers then telephone
their relatives and demand even more money to continue their trip.

Ramón said he even guarantees his work. “If you don't make it on the first
try, we try again, no extra charge,” he said. And if U.S. authorities deport
his clients, he gives them three more chances.

### “I prepare them psychologically before crossing”

Around 3 p.m. on crossing day, Ramón goes to the Mexican houses where migrants
are hiding to announce they've been granted permission to cross.

The migrants spend hours and days in the safe houses, four to a room. From
there, they can telephone relatives in the United States to ask for the money
they need for the final stretch of the trip, about $4,000. They get food,
though it's usually not good.

Some migrants have complained that once in the safe house, the coyotes doubled
the prices they had quoted. So close to the Rio Grande, migrants usually find
a way to pay.

“I prepare them psychologically, telling them that they can't make any noise,
that they have to eat a lot and be well hydrated because you never know what
can happen,” he said. “You can spend hours crouching under a tree.”

He also tells his clients that they can never identify him to U.S.
authorities. “If they detain you … you must not identify the coyote,” he said.

### “ **There are spots in the river where the water is not even knee-high”**

Ramón works at night, from 7 p.m. to about 10 p.m., them from 11 p.m. on. “You
can't move from 10 to 11 p.m., because that's when the border patrols are most
frequent,” he said.

The Rio Grande, which marks part of the U.S.-Mexico border, is more dangerous
than its size would suggest. The soil along its shores is sandy and unstable
and the vegetation is thick. It's difficult to move quickly without a guide.

His groups often cross the Rio Grande on an inflatable raft or a tire tube.
Sometimes they just walk. “We already have places where there's no need to get
on a raft because the water isn't even knee-high,” he said. If there are too
many patrols in those areas, he changes routes and uses the rafts.

Many families want to be detained by U.S. authorities after they cross the
border, because they want to apply for asylum. Others want to avoid detection
so they can continue their trip and find a job somewhere.

But always there's the need for silence. Cell phones are thrown into the water
to avoid ringtones. They quietly stumble and fall. A 2-year-old girl drops her
favorite doll into the river.

“After crossing the river, we have to walk silently,” Ramón added. The groups
usually head for a road where a truck picks them up.

The migrants are then taken to new safe houses. Some ranchers in Texas along
the border allow migrants to cross on foot and rest for a few hours.

### “ **We have smuggled migrants through border controls”**

Corruption does not stop in Mexico.

The coyote also talked about other pieces of the illegal network.

He said he has smuggled some migrants through official U.S. border crossings.
“You find documents for people who more or less look the same,” he said. They
are passports that already have U.S. visas, and are sold by their owners to
criminal networks.

Some U.S. Border Patrol agents also accept bribes for allowing migrants to
pass, he added. “When it gets really hard here, we send the people over there
and they let them in,” he said. “They say that there's no corruption on the
other side, but there is.”

### “ **Come before Trump”**

Ramón said his part of the smuggling business is seeing the same trend as the
rest of the border: an increase in the arrival of migrants over the last few
weeks.

He recommends that migrants get to the border soon, before Donald Trump is
sworn in a president of the United States. But his reasoning is odd. “There
will be more jobs, because companies are going to fire people,” he argued.

His logic goes something like this: Trump will deport or jail millions of
undocumented migrants, which will create millions of job vacancies and drive
up salaries.

“The United States will not be able to live without us,” Ramón said. “We are
the ones who make the United States strong, we the undocumented people.”

Ramón added that the majority of migrants arrive at the border “so their
families can survive in those countries where they have practically nothing.”

“Others come to escape wars, conflicts,” he said. “Some come alone, because
their families were wiped out.”

RELACIONADOS:Immigration•United States•Selección México•

Publicidad

Javascript is required.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

