

Skip to content

![Logo: The Washington Times](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/images/TWTlogo3.5238e37e24b5.png)![Logo: The Washington

Times](//twt-assets.washtimes.com/img/WLogoNoBack.b80e1949f96a.png)  
_Reliable Reporting. The Right Opinion._

**Subscribe**

**Welcome**

**Sign In**

Sign In Today's E-Edition Subscribe

Sign Out Today's E-Edition My Account Subscribe

    
        * News
      * Politics
      * National
      * World
      * Security
      * Business & Economy
      * D.C. Local
      * Faith & Family
      * Inside Politics
      * Inside the Beltway
      * Inside the Ring
      * Culture
      * Entertainment
      * Technology
      * Obituaries
      * Just the Headlines
      * Trump Central
      * Photo Galleries
      * Video
    * Policy
      * Energy & Environment
      * Banking & Finance
      * Health Care Reform
      * Second Amendment
      * Immigration Reform
      * Homeland & Cybersecurity
      * Aerospace & Defense
      * Taxes & Budget
      * Law Enforcement & Intelligence
      * Transportation & Infrastructure
    * Investigations
      * Waste, Fraud & Abuse
      * Media Spotlight
      * Dive Deeper
    * Opinion
      * Opinion Main
      * Commentary
      * Editorials
      * Letters
      * Pruden on Politics
      * Charles Hurt
      * David Keene
      * Tammy Bruce
      * Ralph Z. Hallow
      * Stephen Moore
      * Cal Thomas
      * Clifford D. May
      * Cheryl K. Chumley
      * Joseph Curl
      * Everett Piper
      * Matt Mackowiak
      * Robert Knight
      * Rapid Reactions
      * Tim Constantine
      * Books
      * Cartoons
      * Threat Assessment
      * U.S.-Russia Crosstalk
    * Sports
      * Sports Main
      * Redskins
      * Football
      * Baseball
      * Basketball
      * NCAA
      * Thom Loverro
      * Deron Snyder
      * Tennis
      * Golf
      * Hockey
      * Soccer
      * Horse Racing
      * NASCAR & Racing
    * Special Reports
      * Special Reports Main
      * America's Opioid Addiction
      * Good Intentions Gone Wrong
      * Agricultural Mixed-Use
      * SonoSpineÂ®
      * Commerce Alliance Against China
      * #GreaterKarachi
      * New Africa
      * Rolling Thunder XXXII
      * Qatar
    * Games
      * Games Main
      * Play Sudoku
      * Crossword Puzzle
      * Word Search
      * Quizzes
    * Subscribe
    * Sign In
    

**TRENDING:**

Donald Trump

China

Nba

Mexico

Senate

White House

NFL

Russia

Boston

Robert Mueller

    
        * Home
    * News
    * National
    

# Less than half of immigrants speak English well: Census Bureau

Follow Us ![](//twt-assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-facebook.jpg) ![](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-twitter.jpg) ![](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-instagram.jpg) ![](//twt-

assets.washtimes.com/img/icon-rss.jpg)

Search Search Keyword:

## Recommended

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2018/11/15/8thGradeQuiz-900_c188-0-712-524_s85x85.jpg?b0254c8db5ed38f9c35532203153253ce3304a2e)

### Quiz: Are you smarter than an 8th grader?

![President Donald Trump speaks on the South Lawn at the White House, Monday,

June 10, 2019, in Washington as he honors Team Penske for the 2019

Indianapolis 500 win. \(AP Photo/Patrick Semansky\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Trump_35352.jpg-312fc_c243-0-2356-2113_s85x85.jpg?30538a3a55cf430586487040e0194f903f373a2e)

### 'Tariff man' Trump, Mexico snipe over supposed side deal

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/04/25/FB-1980MovieQuotes-900_c188-0-712-524_s85x85.jpg?b0254c8db5ed38f9c35532203153253ce3304a2e)

### Quiz: Can you guess the 1980s movie from its famous quote?

![Democratic Gov. John Bel Edwards smiles as he describes the end of a

legislative session that saw his teacher pay raise and education spending

plans win final passage, on Thursday, June 6, 2019, in Baton Rouge, La. \(AP

Photo/Melinda Deslatte\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/06/louisiana_session_ends_92011_c456-0-3192-2736_s85x85.jpg?f7d75d8f68f524503fcba1a18d2603bb28ae1c6e)

### Democratic Louisiana governor positioned to fend off GOP challenge:

'We're all a little bit nervous'

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2015/04/21/pistol_c180-0-843-663_s85x85.jpg?75ff37c0864ffe6f9bf163f0d7252dc3cac9e8dc)

### Quiz: How well do you know your guns?

SPONSORED CONTENT

![How To: Fix Your Fatigue And Get More Energy](https://twt-

media.washtimes.com/media/image/2016/08/17/Gundry-85.jpg)

## How To: Fix Your Fatigue And Get More Energy

## Commentary

![staff](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/img/staff/2014/JOSEPHCURL_s85x128.jpg?16424286286e9939f60f4f4896cfd955df2559c2)

### Joseph Curl

Anatomy of a 'fake news' story

![staff](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/img/staff/2013/Keene_David-350_s85x119.jpg?aa9e42ea593811e08acc2f2e2737164ab5d201f0)

### David Keene

Misplaced enthusiasm for sending Trump to jail

![staff](https://twt-thumbs.washtimes.com/media/img/staff/2016/clifford-

may-350_s85x119.jpg?aa9e42ea593811e08acc2f2e2737164ab5d201f0)

### Clifford D. May

Why Trump's brand of nationalism works

View all __

## Question of the Day

### Is Trump right to say Mexico cares more about the border than Democrats?

Question of the Day

Yes

No

Not sure

View results

## Story TOpics

    
        * Social Issues
    

__Print

By Stephen Dinan - The Washington Times - Tuesday, June 10, 2014

Less than half of immigrants speak English very well and about 13 percent
don't speak it at all, according to new numbers the U.S. Census Bureau
released Tuesday.

Immigrants who have been here for more than three decades, however, do better
-- 63 percent report having English-speaking abilities and just 6 percent
don't speak English at all.

"In general, people who migrated to the United States a long time ago speak
English better today than those who migrated recently, and those with more
education have higher English-speaking ability than those with less
education," said demographer Christine Gambino, who was one of the authors of
the new Census report.

* * *

**SPECIAL COVERAGE: Immigration Reform**

* * *

The report also found that immigrants are less likely to speak English at home
now than they were in 1980. Then, about 70 percent of them spoke another
language at home. The rate is now 85 percent.

The new numbers come from the 2012 American Community Survey, which asks
respondents whether they speak only English at home, or speak another
language. If they spoke another language at home they are asked whether they
speak English "very well," "well," "not well," or "not at all."

* * *

* * *

The census says there are 40.6 million immigrants aged five and older in the
U.S.

Mexicans, who are the most numerous and account for more than a quarter of
those immigrants, rank particularly low -- 29 percent say they don't speak
English well, and another 18 percent say they don't speak it at all.

Guatemalans, who number about 852,000, rank lowest, with 31 percent saying
they don't speak English well and 18 percent saying they don't speak it at
all.

Unsurprisingly, education is a major predictor of English skills. About three-
quarters of all immigrants who have a bachelor's degree or higher speak
English very well. Just 19 percent of those with less than high school
education do so.

The report is available here: https://www.census.gov/prod/2014pubs/acs-26.pdf

Copyright (C) 2019 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint
permission.

#### The Washington Times Comment Policy

The Washington Times welcomes your comments on Spot.im, our third-party
provider. Please read our Comment Policy before commenting.

**Click to Read More and View Comments**

**Click to Hide**

## Top Stories

![President Donald Trump stands with Juanita Duggan, president and CEO of

NFIB, before speaking to the National Federation of Independent Businesses

75th anniversary celebration, Tuesday, June 19, 2018, in Washington. \(AP

Photo/Evan Vucci\) ** FILE **](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/AP_18170654681140_c636-0-3987-3351_s85x85.jpg?59ae625777aeb8ddd0f756977ce284c89a5a6a8b)

### 'It's like the Ottoman Empire': Once-powerful business group now 'unseen

and unknown' in D.C.

![Vice President Mike Pence, left, and Secret Service Director Joseph Clancy

stand as President Donald Trump shakes hands with FBI Director James Comey

during a reception for inaugural law enforcement officers and first responders

in the Blue Room of the White House, Sunday, Jan. 22, 2017 in Washington. \(AP

Photo/Alex Brandon\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2017/01/24/trump_78368_c1138-0-4174-3036_s85x85.jpg?5f15660f712c763243df5b9df575e02a94bb1879)

### DOJ reveals scope of Trump campaign surveillance probe

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2014/12/02/122_2014_americanflagpasspor8201_c240-0-1040-800_s85x85.jpg?268321b9ecf14b86741a7ec893e279a0e7482210)

### Quiz: US Citizenship Test - Could You Pass?

![Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II is a family of single-seat, single-engine,

all-weather stealth multirole fighters. The fifth-generation combat aircraft

is designed to perform ground-attack and air-superiority missions. It has

three main models: the F-35A conventional takeoff and landing \(CTOL\)

variant, the F-35B short take-off and vertical-landing \(STOVL\) variant, and

the F-35C carrier-based catapult-assisted take-off but arrested recovery

\(CATOBAR\) variant. The F-35 descends from the Lockheed Martin X-35, the

winning design of the Joint Strike Fighter \(JSF\) program. It is built by

Lockheed and many subcontractors, including Northrop Grumman, Pratt &

Whitney, and BAE Systems. The United States plans to buy 2,663 F-35s, which

will provide the bulk of the crewed tactical airpower of the U.S. Air Force,

Navy, and Marine Corps in coming decades. Deliveries of the F-35 for the U.S.

military are scheduled until 2037 with a projected service life up to

2070](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/03/12/39788632113_aba4b9d2d7_o_c194-0-894-700_s85x85.jpg?652f4c4d4068d2a05b57d8bdccbcd26fa2326b14)

### Pentagon, Lockheed Martin F-35 agreement is largest defense deal in

history

![U.S. Navy and Philippine Coast Guard divers conduct search-and-rescue

operation for the sunken passenger ferry, MV Princess of the Stars, off

Sibuyan Island in central Philippines on Wednesday, June 25, 2008. \(AP

Photo/Bullit Marquez\) ** FILE **](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/AP_08062701004_c0-0-1606-1606_s85x85.jpg?84fb8c463ef7ed3d5a1bf7b1019137ce2cde4e66)

### Pentagon eyes controversial diet in bid to build more lethal warriors

![5632091445_b58c69f551_o](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/03/12/5632091445_b58c69f551_o_c134-0-834-700_s85x85.jpg?c81fcebf420cbdef80d4f3f14c31c522d394b161)

### Fastest combat planes in the US Air Force

![In this May 13, 2019, file photo Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y.,

speaks at the final event for the Road to the Green New Deal Tour at Howard

University in Washington. \(AP Photo/Cliff Owen, File\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/05/congress_green_new_deal_99048_c396-0-1983-1587_s85x85.jpg?7d2f9fa19f0718d8617445356350527451d44889)

### Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez defends pay raises for Congress, calls

opposition 'superficial'

![Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks to members of the media at the State

Department, Monday, June 10, 2019. \(AP Photo/Pablo Martinez

Monsivais\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Pompeo_60842.jpg-c1f33_c822-0-4455-3633_s85x85.jpg?ae392eadde811252d9742867246d4ab8a5083826)

### Mike Pompeo: 45 days to see if U.S.-Mexico border deal is working

![Britain's Prince Harry and Meghan Markle arrive at Nottingham Academy in

Nottingham, England, Dec. 1, 2017. \(AP Photo/Frank Augstein\) ** FILE

**](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/04/25/britain_american_royal_baby__79495_c912-0-4560-3648_s85x85.jpg?efc362f6196cbea0e46b1990670e90b7e847a17f)

### Piers Morgan calls out U.K. media silence on 'selfish' Meghan Markle's

Trump snub

![In this May 23, 2019, photo, the U.S. Supreme Court building at dusk on

Capitol Hill in Washington. The Supreme Court is rejecting a challenge to

federal regulation of gun silencers, just days after a gunman used one in a

shooting rampage that killed 12 people in Virginia. The justices did not

comment Monday, June 10, in turning away appeals from two Kansas men who were

convicted of violating federal law regulating silencers \(AP Photo/Patrick

Semansky\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Supreme_Court_Silencers_08931.jpg-e658c_c912-0-4560-3648_s85x85.jpg?efc362f6196cbea0e46b1990670e90b7e847a17f)

### Justices reject challenge to 'In God We Trust' on U.S. money

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2014/05/16/ap95111701682_c105-0-1209-1104_s85x85.jpg?9e9eb5d2b3b204065b17b6e46e4c560d2e310e29)

### Quiz: Take the political scandals in U.S. history test

![In this Nov. 30, 2017, file photo, Blackwater founder Erik Prince arrives

for a closed meeting with members of the House Intelligence Committee on

Capitol Hill in Washington. \(AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin\) ** FILE

**](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/04/30/congress_trump_investigations_47325_c1271-0-3864-2593_s85x85.jpg?a7a071a078708d4f1df1d17cfbdfcfb56a4223f8)

### Robert Mueller exploited cellphone GPS to track Trump associates

![In this May 20, 2014, file photo, James Geurts, deputy for Acquisition of

the U.S. Special Operations Command at MacDill Airforce Base, looks at

sketches of the Tactical Assault Light Operator Suit \(TALOS\) during the

Special Operations Forces Industry Conference in Tampa, Fla. \(AP Photo/Tamara

Lush\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/09/AP_120093493346_c0-274-1958-2232_s85x85.jpg?0be3c68281a23a97b4d10d5908a7837227a21a8b)

### Pentagon's quest for an Iron Man-inspired suit ignites a technological

revolution

![Maxim Defense PDX Pistol](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/01/18/Maxim_Defense_PDX_Pistol_c101-0-801-700_s85x85.jpg?dcca30bcf2ae8cc98edf0abcd34e3b2608411c67)

### Most exciting new handguns for 2019

![Musicians play music next to the U.S. border wall topped with razor wire in

Tijuana, Mexico, Sunday, June 9, 2019. \(AP Photo/Eduardo

Verdugo\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/10/Mexico_Daily_Life_94698.jpg-392d1_c912-0-4560-3648_s85x85.jpg?efc362f6196cbea0e46b1990670e90b7e847a17f)

### Lawmakers block border wall funds in House version of Pentagon budget

plan

![The words "Tijuana, Mexico" stand on the Mexican side of the

border with the U.S. where migrants wait to be attended to apply for asylum in

the U.S., in Tijuana, Mexico, Sunday, June 9, 2019. The mechanism that allows

the U.S. to send migrants seeking asylum back to Mexico to await resolution of

their process has been running in Tijuana since January, and one element of an

agreement to head off Trump's threat of U.S. tariffs on all imports from

Mexico is to extend that program across the entire border. \(AP Photo/Eduardo

Verdugo\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/09/APTOPIX_Mexico_Migrants_40284.jpg-77392_c936-0-4092-3156_s85x85.jpg?f942d492131a5cf14a3d9c5ea282f57702a97942)

### Mexico pressured to slow migration or face renewed tariff threat under

Trump deal

![obj.0.content_object.caption](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/05/16/2000sEventsQuiz-900_c188-0-712-524_s85x85.jpg?b0254c8db5ed38f9c35532203153253ce3304a2e)

### Quiz: Do you remember the 2000s?

!["The American people want change, real change, and we have got to

provide that change," Democratic presidential candidate Bernard Sanders

said. \(Associated Press\)](https://twt-

thumbs.washtimes.com/media/image/2019/06/09/6_9_2019_election-2020-iowa-28201_c906-0-4535-3629_s85x85.jpg?6d6cfce5f9a6a5078616231ee32e7a9634dee063)

### Sense of urgency: 2020 Democratic candidates fight for Iowa's attention

with absence of Biden

### Newsletters

    
        *  Breaking News
    *  Daily
    *  Weekly
    *  Pruden on Politics
    *  Charles Hurt
    *  Today's Opinion
    

Terms of Use / Privacy Policy

### Find us on Facebook

    
        * The Washington Times
    * Opinion
    * Local
    * Sports
    

### Find us on Twitter

    
        * The Washington Times
    * Opinion
    * Local
    * Sports
    
    * Subscribe
    * Classifieds
    * E-edition
    * Customer Service
    * Careers
    * Terms
    * Privacy
    * RSS
    * Advertise
    * FAQ
    * About
    * Contact
    

###### All site contents (C) Copyright 2019 The Washington Times, LLC | 3600

New York Avenue NE | Washington, DC 20002 | 202-636-3000

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-c69_1G6fdlihY.gif)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/878499686/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

