

# Economic impact of illegal immigrants in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

The **economic impact of illegal immigrants in the United States** is
challenging to measure, and politically contentious. The scarcity of reliable
statistics leaves room for many methods of study, leading to diverse
conclusions.[1]

One possibility is that foreign workers entering the country illegally can
lower wages, decreasing overall costs of production. This comes from the
theory that when there are more illegal immigrants in the country, there will
be more immigrants looking for employment because most illegal immigrants
prefer to work and are willing to work for less than most American
citizens.[2][3] This increases competition among low-skilled local workers,
and this will push wages for the domestic low-skilled labor market down.
Simultaneously the increased supply in unskilled unauthorized immigrants can
offset technological developments and "reduce the country's economy's
competitiveness in the international market".[4]

The opposing theory is that even though this can happen in some areas with
more low-skilled employment, on the net illegal immigration increases the
welfare of domestic workers because their additional consumption outweighs the
costs of welfare.[5] Along the same lines it is argued that illegal immigrants
work for lower wages, then domestic employers recognize these profits and can
either spend or save this new revenue,[6] so the net outcome can be decided by
the net of these two economic forces. Studies have shown that overall in the
long run illegal immigration benefits the country in terms of its general
production, but introducing many people in the labor market can lead to income
distribution that can tend towards domestic workers and immigrant workers on
other occasions. The net short-term impacts of some aspects of illegal
immigration can be inconclusive.[7] Though this net effect changes, the number
of immigrants crossing the border illegally is less unclear.

There were approximately 11.3 million unauthorized immigrants in the U.S. in
2016, roughly unchanged from the prior year but well below the 12.2 million
peak in 2007. There were an estimated 8 million unauthorized immigrants in the
U.S. civilian workforce in 2016, roughly 5%.[8] The Congressional Budget
Office reported in 2007 that "the tax revenues that unauthorized immigrants
generate for state and local governments do not offset the total cost of
services provided to them" but "in aggregate and over the long term, tax
revenues of all types generated by immigrants—both legal and
unauthorized—exceed the cost of the services they use."[9] Unauthorized
immigrants demand goods and services[10] while an estimated 50 to 75 percent
pay taxes.[9] Due to cheaper labor, they contribute to lower prices in the
industries where they work, such as agriculture, restaurants, and
construction.[10]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Illegal immigrant population
    * 2 Economic impact of illegal immigrants
      * 2.1 Consumer demand
      * 2.2 Budgetary impact
      * 2.3 Price levels
      * 2.4 Impact on wages
      * 2.5 Health care
      * 2.6 Effect on income inequality
      * 2.7 Overall benefits and costs
    * 3 Cost-benefit analysis
      * 3.1 Relative contribution by income tax bracket
      * 3.2 Heritage Foundation Study
      * 3.3 Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy Study
    * 4 See also
    * 5 References
    

## Illegal immigrant population[edit]

Main article: Illegal immigrant population of the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/21/Selected_Unauthorized_Immigration_Statistics.png/400px-

Selected_Unauthorized_Immigration_Statistics.png)

Both the population of unauthorized immigrants in the U.S. and southwestern
border apprehensions have declined significantly over the past decade.[11][12]

According to the Pew Research Center, there were 11.3 million illegal
immigrants living in the United States in 2016, statistically unchanged from
the previous year. The number peaked at 12.2 million in 2007, following a
steady increase that began in 1990. An estimated 5.6 million unauthorized
immigrants were from Mexico in 2015 and 2016, down from 6.4 million in 2009.
Non-Mexicans numbered 5.7 million, indicating Mexicans are no longer the clear
majority of unauthorized immigrants. The U.S. civilian workforce includes 8
million unauthorized immigrants, accounting for 5% of those working or looking
for work in 2014. This number has been relatively stable since 2007, ranging
between 8.0 and 8.3 million. Unauthorized immigrants represent 26% of farming
and 15% of construction labor. They are primarily concentrated in six states:
California, New Mexico, Texas, Florida, New York, New Jersey, and Illinois.
About two-thirds have been in the U.S. for more than a decade.[8]

The reduction has been driven mainly by a decrease in the number of new
immigrants from Mexico, the single largest source. Net immigration from Mexico
to the U.S. has stopped and possibly reversed since 2010. At its peak in 2000,
about 770,000 immigrants arrived annually from Mexico; the majority arrived
illegally. By 2010, the inflow had dropped to about 140,000—a majority of whom
arrived as legal immigrants.[13]

At its peak in August 2007, the number of illegal immigrants in the U.S. was
12.5 million. This decreased by 1.3 million to 11.2 million by July 2008 (11%)
due to either increased law enforcement or fewer job opportunities.[14] Based
on the Department of Homeland Security estimates in 2009, unauthorized
immigrant population living in the United States decreased to 10.8 million in
January 2009. On the whole, between 2000 and 2009, the unauthorized immigrant
population grew by 27 percent.[15]

Immigrants to the U.S. are concentrated at both the high and low-income ends
of the U.S. labor market, determined largely by their educational attainment.
In 2004, at the low end, half of workers age 25 and older who lacked a diploma
were from Mexico and Central America. These workers were employed in jobs that
required little formal education, such as construction labor and dishwashing,
and on average they earned much less than did the average native worker.[16]

## Economic impact of illegal immigrants[edit]

### Consumer demand[edit]

An employer may benefit from the illegal status of a migrant who is desperate
for work and therefore prepared to accept poor pay, usually below local norms.
If paid under the table rather than using an ITIN, hiring an illegal worker
also brings the employer the advantage of paying less in the way of welfare
contributions and other non-wage costs.[17]

Nearly every dollar earned by illegal immigrants is spent immediately, and the
average wage for US citizens is $10.25/hour with an average of 34 hours per
week. This means that approximately 8 million US jobs are dependent upon
economic activity produced by illegal immigrant activities within the
US.[18][19][20]

### Budgetary impact[edit]

![Ambox current

red.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/98/Ambox_current_red.svg/42px-

Ambox_current_red.svg.png)

|

This section needs to be **updated**. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information. _( December 2018)_

---|--- 

A 2007 review of the academic literature by the nonpartisan Congressional
Budget Office found that "over the past two decades, most efforts to estimate
the fiscal impact of immigration in the United States have concluded that, in
aggregate and over the long term, tax revenues of all types generated by
immigrants—both legal and unauthorized—exceed the cost of the services they
use." While the overall fiscal impact on the US is beneficial, unauthorized
immigrants have an adverse impact on the budgets of state and local
governments. While cautioning that the reports are not a suitable basis for
developing an aggregate national effect across all states, they concluded
that:[9]

    
        * "State and local governments incur costs for providing services to unauthorized immigrants and have limited options for avoiding or minimizing those costs";
    * "The amount that state and local governments spend on services for unauthorized immigrants represents a small percentage of the total amount spent by those governments to provide such services to residents in their jurisdictions";
    * "The tax revenues that unauthorized immigrants generate for state and local governments do not offset the total cost of services provided to those immigrants"; and
    * "Federal aid programs offer resources to state and local governments that provide services to unauthorized immigrants, but those funds do not fully cover the costs incurred by those governments."
    

IRS estimates that about 6 million unauthorized immigrants file individual
income tax returns each year.[9] Research reviewed by the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office indicates that between 50 percent and 75 percent
of unauthorized immigrants pay federal, state, and local taxes.[9] Illegal
immigrants are estimated to pay in about $7 billion per year into Social
Security.[21] In addition, they spend millions of dollars per year, which
supports the US economy and helps to create new jobs. The Texas State
Comptroller reported in 2006 that the 1.4 million unauthorized immigrants in
Texas added almost $18 billion to the gross state product, and contributed
$1.6 billion in state revenue, while costing the state about $1.2 billion in
services used.[22]

The Social Security and Medicare contributions of illegal immigrants directly
support older Americans, as illegal immigrants are not eligible to receive
these services, although their children born in the United States are eligible
for such benefits.[23] Illegal immigrants pay social security payroll taxes
but are not eligible for benefits. During 2006, Standard & Poor's analysts
wrote: "Each year, for example, the U.S. Social Security Administration
maintains roughly $6 billion to $7 billion of Social Security contributions in
an "earnings suspense file"—an account for W-2 tax forms that cannot be
matched to the correct Social Security number. The vast majority of these
numbers are attributable to undocumented workers who will never claim their
benefits. For 2010, the Social Security Administration estimated that
unauthorized immigrants and their employers paid $13 billion in required
social security payroll taxes.[24]

The Social Security Administration has stated that it believes unauthorized
work by non-citizens is a major cause of wage items being posted as erroneous
wage reports instead of on an individual's earnings record.[25] When Social
Security numbers are already in use; names do not match the numbers or the
numbers are fake, or the person of record is too old, young, dead etc., the
earnings reported to the Social Security Agency are put in an Earnings
Suspense file. The Social Security spends about $100 million a year and
corrects all but about 2% of these. From tax years 1937 through 2003 the ESF
had accumulated about 255 million mismatched wage reports, representing $520
billion in wages and about $75 billion in employment taxes paid into the over
$1.5 trillion in the Social Security Trust funds. As of October 2005,
approximately 8.8 million wage reports, representing $57.8 billion in wages
remained unresolved in the suspense file for tax year 2003.[25]

Estimates indicate that about 4% of the school-age population is made up of
children who are illegal immigrants.[26] Many require remedial assistance in
language skills, which increases costs to the public schools. During April
2006, Standard & Poor's analysts wrote: "Local school districts are estimated
to educate 1.8 million undocumented children. At an average annual cost of
$7,500 (averages vary by jurisdiction) per student, the cost of providing
education to these children is about $11.2 billion." Other estimates of the
costs to educate unauthorized children and US-born children of unauthorized
immigrants reached $30 billion in 2009.[27]

### Price levels[edit]

![Ambox current

red.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/98/Ambox_current_red.svg/42px-

Ambox_current_red.svg.png)

|

This section needs to be **updated**. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information. _( December 2018)_

---|--- 

NPR reported in March 2006 that when the wages of lower-skilled workers go
down, the rest of America benefits by paying lower prices for things like
restaurant meals, agricultural produce and construction. The economic impact
of unauthorized immigration is far smaller than other trends in the economy,
such as the increasing use of automation in manufacturing or the growth in
global trade. But economists generally believe that when averaged over the
whole economy, the effect is a small net positive. Harvard's George Borjas
says the average American's wealth is increased by less than 1 percent because
of unauthorized immigration.[28]

### Impact on wages[edit]

Economists have different conclusions regarding the impact on wages from
immigration, both legal and illegal. It is challenging to separate the impact
of illegal immigration (generally workers with lower educational attainment)
from immigration overall. Studies generally conclude there is a small adverse
impact on the wages of lower-skilled workers from immigration and some benefit
for higher-skilled workers:

    
        * Research by economist David Card (University of California-Berkeley) indicated the effect of immigration on native born workers without high school degrees is limited, perhaps reducing the wages of high school dropouts by 5% over 20 years.[29]
    * Harvard economist George Borjas wrote in 2007 that: "Economic theory implies that immigration should lower the wage of competing workers and increase the wage of complementary workers. For example, an influx of foreign-born laborers reduces the economic opportunities for laborers — all laborers now face stiffer competition in the labor market. At the same time, high-skill natives may gain substantially. They pay less for the services that laborers provide, such as painting the house and mowing the lawn, and natives who hire these laborers can now specialize in producing the goods and services that better suit their skills." Borjas' other research also indicated that "high-school dropouts experience a substantial wage loss from immigration of 6.3% in the short run and 3.1% over the long haul as labor markets adjust to the increased number of workers."[30]
    * A 2015 National Academy of Sciences report concluded that native-born workers who are substitutes for immigrants (e.g., lower-skilled workers in the case of illegal immigrants) "will experience negative wage effects." The report continues: "In summary, the immigration surplus [overall net benefit from immigration] stems from the increase in the return to capital that results from the increased supply of labor and the subsequent fall in wages. Natives who own more capital will receive more income from the immigration surplus than natives who own less capital, who can consequently be adversely affected."[30]
    * The Brookings Institution reported in 2012 that: "[T]he most recent economic evidence suggests that, on average, immigrant workers increase the opportunities and incomes of Americans. Based on a survey of the academic literature, economists do not tend to find that immigrants cause any sizeable decrease in wages and employment of U.S.-born citizens, and instead may raise wages and lower prices in the aggregate." However, certain groups may be adversely affected. Brookings pointed to two studies at the opposite ends of the impact spectrum, one (Borjas-Katz 2007) indicating a 4.5% reduction in the wages of native workers that were high-school dropouts and a roughly 1.6% reduction for native college graduates, with another (Ottaviano-Peri 2008) indicating a small positive for all education levels.[31]
    

In 2008, Gordon H. Hanson at University of California–San Diego and National
Bureau of Economic Research performed a study to see if undocumented
immigration affects native workers employment. From the study was concluded
that unauthorized immigrants provide a source of manpower in agriculture,
construction, food processing, building cleaning and maintenance, and other
low-end jobs.[32] Cities with a high percentage of illegal immigration were
examined in this study and data showed that illegal immigrants overall impact
on the US economy is small. On the other hand, US employers gain from lower
labor costs and the ability to use their land, capital, and technology more
productively.

### Health care[edit]

Further information: Healthcare availability for Illegal immigrants in the
United States

_Reuters_ reported that illegal immigrants, as well as legal immigrants in the
country less than five years, generally are not eligible for Medicaid.
However, they can get Medicaid coverage for health emergencies if they are in
a category of people otherwise eligible, such as children, pregnant women,
families with dependent children, elderly or disabled individuals, and meet
other requirements. The cost of this emergency care was less than 1% of
Medicaid costs in North Carolina from 2001–2004 and the majority was for
childbirth and related complications.[33] _USA Today_ reported that "Illegal
immigrants can get emergency care through Medicaid, the federal-state program
for the poor and people with disabilities. But they can't get non-emergency
care unless they pay. They are ineligible for most other public benefits."[34]

Because of the U.S. Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act of 1986
(42 U.S.C. § 1395dd), most hospitals may not refuse anyone treatment for an
emergency medical condition because of citizenship, legal status, or ability
to pay. An example of the cost conflict between federal government, state and
local government, and private institutions, the Immigration and Naturalization
Service brings injured and ill unauthorized immigrants to hospital emergency
rooms but does not pay for their medical care.[35] Almost $190 million, or
about 25 percent, of the uncompensated costs Southwest border county hospitals
incurred resulted from emergency medical treatment provided to illegal
immigrants.[35]

At least two research studies have been done which attempt to discover the
cost of health care for illegal immigrants by asking the illegal themselves.

    
        * A phone survey in which Alexander Ortega and colleagues at the University of California asked illegal immigrants how often they receive medical care reported that illegal immigrants are no more likely to visit the emergency room than native born Americans.[36]
    * A RAND study concluded that the total federal cost of providing medical expenses for the 78% illegal immigrants without health insurance coverage was $1.1 billion, with immigrants paying $321 million of health care costs out-of-pocket. The study found that illegal immigrants tend to visit physicians less frequently than U.S. citizens because they are younger and because people with chronic health problems are less likely to migrate.[37][38]
    

Moreover, studies have also shown that not providing illegal immigrants with a
decent healthcare might actually cost the country in the long-run rather than
save expenses. In 2000, researchers compared the perinatal outcomes and costs
of illegal women with and without prenatal care and inferred the impact of
denial of prenatal benefits to illegal immigrants in California. Nearly 10% of
illegal women had no prenatal care. These women were nearly 4 times as likely
to be delivered of low birth weight infants and more than 7 times as likely to
be delivered of premature infants as were illegal women who had prenatal care.
For every dollar cut from prenatal care, an increase of $3.33 in the cost of
postnatal care and $4.63 in incremental long-term cost were expected.
Elimination of publicly funded prenatal care for illegal women could save the
state $58 million in direct prenatal care costs but could cost taxpayers as
much as $194 million more in postnatal care, resulting in a net cost of $136
million initially and $211 million in long-term costs. Although their parents
are illegal immigrants, these children are actually U.S citizens.[39]

### Effect on income inequality[edit]

Economist David Card wrote in 2009 that immigration (legal and illegal) has a
minor impact on income inequality and wages: "Together these results imply
that the impacts of recent immigrant inflows on the relative wages of U.S.
natives are small. The effects on overall wage inequality (including natives
and immigrants) are larger, reflecting the concentration of immigrants in the
tails of the skill distribution and higher residual inequality among
immigrants than natives. Even so, immigration accounts for a small share (5%)
of the increase in U.S. wage inequality between 1980 and 2000."[40]

### Overall benefits and costs[edit]

Members of the IGM Economic Experts Panel were asked in December 2013 whether
they agreed or disagreed with the following statement: "The average US citizen
would be better off if a larger number of low-skilled foreign workers were
legally allowed to enter the US each year." Fifty-two percent either agreed or
strongly agreed with the statement, with 28% uncertain and 9% disagreeing.
Regarding a second statement, that low-skilled American workers would be
"substantially worse off" if more low-skilled immigrants were allowed entry,
50% agreed or strongly agreed, with 30% uncertain and 9% disagreeing or
strongly disagreeing. In other words, despite an overall benefit for the
average American, some low-skilled workers already in the U.S. would probably
be adversely impacted by a greater supply of low-skilled labor.[41]

## Cost-benefit analysis[edit]

Aviva Chomsky, a professor at Salem State College, states that "Early studies
in California and in the Southwest and in the Southeast...have come to the
same conclusions. Immigrants, legal and illegal, are more likely to pay taxes
than they are to use public services. Illegal immigrants are not eligible for
most public services and live in fear of revealing themselves to government
authorities. Households headed by illegal immigrants use less than half the
amount of federal services that households headed by documented immigrants or
citizens make use of."[42]

National Public Radio (NPR) wrote in 2006: "Supporters of a crackdown argue
that the U.S. economy would benefit if illegal immigrants were to leave,
because U.S. employers would be forced to raise wages to attract American
workers. Critics of this approach say the loss of illegal immigrants would
stall the U.S. economy, saying illegal workers do many jobs few native-born
Americans will do."[28]

Professor of Law Francine Lipman writes that the belief that illegal migrants
are exploiting the US economy and that they cost more in services than they
contribute to the economy is "undeniably false".[43] Lipman asserts that
"illegal immigrants actually contribute more to public coffers in taxes than
they cost in social services" and "contribute to the U.S. economy through
their investments and consumption of goods and services; filling of millions
of essential worker positions resulting in subsidiary job creation, increased
productivity and lower costs of goods and services; and unrequited
contributions to Social Security, Medicare and unemployment insurance
programs."

### Relative contribution by income tax bracket[edit]

PEW studies on unauthorized immigrants estimates that the average household of
3.1 persons earns about $36,000 per year. This average wage is consistent with
the PEW estimate that 49% of illegal immigrants have not graduated from high
school.[44]

The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that people in this salary
bracket (the second quintile) pay about 6.8% of their income in Federal
taxes.[45]

The Heritage Foundation estimates that the average household in the bottom
quintile received $29,015 in benefits and paid $4,251 in Federal, state and
local taxes. In the second quintile the average household received $24,709 in
benefits and paid $9,524 in Federal, state and local taxes. In the top
quintile, the average household received $21,515 in benefits and services and
paid $69,704 in Federal, state and local taxes.[46] However, it is unclear how
much benefit the average unauthorized immigrant household is eligible for.

### Heritage Foundation Study[edit]

In 2013, Robert Rector and Jason Richwine of The Heritage Foundation released
a study concluding that as of 2010, the "average unlawful immigrant household"
had a net deficit (benefits received minus taxes paid) of $14,387 per
household.[47] Critics of the Rector-Richwine report "questioned several
assumptions made by the report’s authors—everything from the amount that
legalization could boost earnings for immigrants to the amount of welfare they
may use."[48] The Heritage report purported to project costs over a 50-year
period and assumed no changes to Social Security or Medicare, which prompted
criticism that the study was overly speculative.[48] The report also counted
"the cost of benefits paid to the children of those living in the U.S.
illegally, even though many of those children by law are citizens."[48] The
methodology and conclusions of the 2013 Heritage Foundation study were sharply
criticized as flawed by, among others, Alex Nowrasteh of the Cato Institute,
Doug Holtz-Eakin of the American Action Forum, and Tim Kane at the Hudson
Institute. Nowrasteh wrote that the Heritage report's refusal to account for
GDP growth and increased economic productivity from immigration led to "a
massive underestimation of the economic benefits of immigration and
diminishing estimated tax revenue."[49] Republican Senator Marco Rubio of
Florida also criticized the report.[50]

### Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy Study[edit]

The Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy released a report in February
2016, stating that 11 million illegal immigrants in the United States are
paying annually an estimated amount of $11.64 billion in state and local
taxes, "on average an estimated 8 percent of their incomes."[51]

## See also[edit]

    
        * Proposition 187
    * Gallegly amendment
    * DREAM Act
    * Plyler v. Doe
    * Mexica Movement
    * Economic results of migration
    

## References[edit]

    
        1. **^** Liu, Xiangbo (2010). "Labor Market Search and the Dynamic Effects of Immigration". _Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control_. **12** (34).
    2. **^** Griswold, Daniel T. (2012). "Immigration and the Welfare State". _Cato Journal_. **32** (1).
    3. **^** Dudley, Mary Jo (January 10, 2019). "These U.S. industries can't work without illegal immigrants". _CBS_. Retrieved  2019-06-10.
    4. **^** Djajić, Slobodan (February 1997). "Illegal Immigration and Resource Allocation". _International Economic Review_. **38** (1): 97–117. JSTOR 2527410.
    5. **^** Palivos, Theodore (January 2009). "Welfare Effects of Illegal Immigration". _Journal of Population Economics_. **22** (1): 131–144. doi:10.1007/s00148-007-0182-3.
    6. **^** Moy, H.M. (December 2006). "The simple analytics of optimal growth with illegal migrants: A clarification". _Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control_. **30** (12): 2469–2475.
    7. **^** Palivos, Theodore; Yip, Chong (September 2010). "Illegal immigration in a heterogeneous labor market". _Journal of Economics_. **101** (1): 21–47. doi:10.1007/s00712-010-0139-y.
    8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Pew Research Center. "5 facts about illegal immigration in the U.S." _Pew Research Center_. Retrieved  September 2, 2017.
    9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "The Impact of Unauthorized Immigrants on the Budgets of State and Local Governments" (PDF). The Congress of the United States – Congressional Budget Office. December 2007.
    10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Immigration, Panel on the Economic and Fiscal Consequences of; Statistics, Committee on National; Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and; Sciences, National Academies of; Engineering; Medicine, and (2016-09-21). _The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration_. doi:10.17226/23550. hdl:10919/83151. ISBN 9780309444453.
    11. **^** "Department of Homeland Security-Border Security Metrics Report-May 2018" (PDF).
    12. **^** "U.S. Unauthorized Immigration Total Lowest in a Decade - Pew Research Center". 27 November 2018.
    13. **^** Passel, Jeffrey S.; Cohn, D’Vera (6 December 2012). "Unauthorized Immigrants: 11.1 Million in 2011". _Pewhispanic.org_. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    14. **^** Preston, Julia (July 31, 2008). "Decline Seen in Numbers of People Here Illegally". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  May 5, 2010.
    15. **^** Hoffer, Michael; Rytina, Nancy; Baker, Bryan C. (January 2010). "Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the United States: January 2009" (PDF). U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics Policy Directorate. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
    16. **^** "The Role of Immigrants in the U.S. Labor Market" (PDF). The Congress of the United States – Congressional Budget Office. November 2005. Retrieved 11 April 2011.
    17. **^** Tapinos G. (n.d.). "Illegal immigrants and the labour market". Retrieved April 25, 2012.
    18. **^** "Labor Market Impacts of Amnesty: A Comparative Analysis of IRCA and current conditions" (PDF). UCLA North American Integration and Development Center.
    19. **^** "Raising the Floor for American Workers" (PDF). The Advocates for Human Rights. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-05-17.
    20. **^** "Real Earnings – 2011" (PDF). US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
    21. **^** Eduardo Porter (April 5, 2005). "Illegal Immigrants Are Bolstering Social Security With Billions". New York Times.
    22. **^** _Special Report – December 2006 Illegal Immigrants in Texas:A Financial Analysis of the Impact to the State Budget and Economy_, Carole Keeeton Strayhorn, Texas Comptroller
    23. **^** “illegal Workers: Impact on Missouri’s Economy,” The Missouri Budget Project, June 21, 2006 and “Replacing the illegal Work Force,” Center for American Progress, March 2006.
    24. **^** "Social Security Administration-Effects of Unauthorized Immigration on the Actuarial Status of the Social Security Trust Funds" (PDF). _Ssa.gov_. April 2013. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    25. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Administrative Challenges Facing the Social Security Administration. Congressional Testimony – March 14, 2006
    26. **^** The Impact of Unauthorized Immigrants on the Budgets of State and Local Governments,” Congressional Budget Office, Dec. 2009, p. 8.
    27. **^** “S&P Study: Costs and Benefits of illegal Immigrants,” Hispanic News, May 1, 2009, p. 2.
    28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Davidson, Adam (30 March 2006). "Q&A: Illegal Immigrants and the U.S. Economy". National Public Radio. Retrieved 11 April 2011.
    29. **^** "Wage war". 25 August 2016 - via The Economist.
    30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Edsall, Thomas B. (29 September 2016). "Opinion - What Does Immigration Actually Cost Us?" - via NYTimes.com.
    31. **^** Project, Michael Greenstone, Adam Looney, Michael Greenstone and Adam Looney, and The Hamilton. "What Immigration Means For U.S. Employment and Wages".
    32. **^** "The Economics and Policy of Illegal Immigration in the United States" (PDF). _Migrationpolicy.org_. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    33. **^** "Medicaid spends 1 pct on illegal immigrants: study". _Reuters_. 13 March 2007.
    34. **^** Wolf, Richard (22 January 2008). "Rising health care costs put focus on illegal immigrants". _USA Today_. Retrieved  11 April 2011.
    35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The 11 Best Beer Growlers 2018: Insulated Stainless Steel Reviewed". Archived from the original on 2008-04-09. Retrieved  2008-03-24.
    36. **^** "Illegal immigrants not US health care burden – study". _Reuters_. 26 November 2007.
    37. **^** "Medical News Today". Archived from the original on 2007-01-01. Retrieved  2007-02-08.
    38. **^** "News Releases for 2006 – RAND". _Medicalnewstoday.com_. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    39. **^** Lu, M. C., Lin, Y. G., Prietto, N. M., & Garite, T. J. (2000). Elimination of public funding of prenatal care for illegal immigrants in California: a cost/benefit analysis. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology, 182(1), 233–239.
    40. **^** Card, David (1 January 2009). "Immigration and Inequality". National Bureau of Economic Research.
    41. **^** IGM Experts Panel-Low Skilled Immigrants-December 10, 2013
    42. **^** Chomsky, Aviva. _They Take Our Jobs! And Twenty Other Myths about Immigration_ (2007), 40
    43. **^** J. Lipman, Francine, J. (Spring 2006). "Taxing illegal Immigrants: Separate, Unequal and Without Representation". The Tax Lawyer. SSRN 881584.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
    44. **^** Passel, Jeffrey S.; Cohn, D’Vera (14 April 2009). "A Portrait of Unauthorized Immigrants in the United States". _Pewhispanic.org_. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    45. **^** "The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes, 2008 and 2009" (PDF). _Cbo.gov_. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    46. **^** "How the Wealth is Spread: The Distribution of Government Benefits, Services and Taxes by Income Quintile in the United States". _Heritage.org_. Retrieved  2016-08-08.
    47. **^** Robert Rector and Jason Richwine (May 6, 2013). "Cost of Unlawful Immigrants to the U.S. Taxpayers". Heritage Foundation.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
    48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Robert Farley (June 4, 2013). "The Immigration Bill's '$6.3 Trillion Price Tag'". _FactCheck.org_. Annenberg Public Policy Center.
    49. **^** Nowraseth, Alex (2013-05-07). "Heritage's Flawed Immigration Analysis". Cato Institute. Retrieved November 7, 2016.
    50. **^** Leary, Alex (7 May 2013). "Rubio sharply critical of Heritage study, offers parents as evidence of contribution of immigrants". _Tampa Bay Times_.
    51. **^** [Illegal Immigrants' State & Local Tax Contributions], _Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy._ Released February 24, 2016.
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Immigration to the United States and related topics

* * *

Relevant colonial era,  
United States and  
international laws

|

| Colonial era|

    
        * Nationality law in the American Colonies
    * Plantation Act 1740
    

---|---  
18th century|

    
        * Naturalization Act 1790 / 1795 / 1798
    

19th century|

    
        * Naturalization Law 1802
    * Civil Rights Act of 1866
    * 14th Amendment (1868)
    * Naturalization Act 1870
    * Page Act (1875)
    * Immigration Act of 1882
    * Chinese Exclusion (1882)
    * Scott Act (1888)
    * Immigration Act of 1891
    * Geary Act (1892)
    

1900-1949|

    
        * Naturalization Act 1906
    * Gentlemen's Agreement (1907)
    * Immigration Act of 1907
    * Immigration Act 1917 (Asian Barred Zone)
    * Emergency Quota Act (1921)
    * Cable Act (1922)
    * Immigration Act 1924
    * Tydings–McDuffie Act (1934)
    * Filipino Repatriation Act (1935)
    * Nationality Act of 1940
    * Bracero Program (1942-1964)
    * Magnuson Act (1943)
    * War Brides Act (1945)
    * Luce–Celler Act (1946)
    

1950-1999|

    
        * UN Refugee Convention (1951)
    * Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 / 1965
    * Refugee Act (1980)
    * Immigration Reform and Control Act (1986)
    * American Homecoming Act (1989)
    * Immigration Act 1990
    * Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) (1996)
    * Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA) (1997)
    * American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act (ACWIA) (1998)
    

21st century|

    
        * American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act (AC21) (2000)
    * Legal Immigration Family Equity Act (LIFE Act) (2000)
    * H-1B Visa Reform Act (2004)
    * REAL ID Act (2005)
    * Secure Fence Act (2006)
    * DACA (2012)
    * Executive Order 13769 (2017)
    * Executive Order 13780 (2017)
    

Visas and policies|

    
        * Visa policy
      * Permanent residence
      * Visa Waiver Program
      * Temporary protected status
      * Asylum
      * Green Card Lottery
      * Central American Minors
    * US-VISIT
    * Security Advisory Opinion
    * E-Verify
    * Section 287(g)
    * National Origins Formula
    * Expedited removal
    * Detention
    * Trump administration family separation policy
    

Government  
organizations

|

    
        * Department of Homeland Security
    * Immigration and Customs Enforcement
    * U.S. Border Patrol
    * U.S. Customs and Border Protection
    * U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
    * Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
    * Executive Office for Immigration Review
    * Board of Immigration Appeals
    * Office of Refugee Resettlement
    

Supreme Court cases|

    
        * _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ (1898)
    * _United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind_ (1923)
    * _United States v. Brignoni-Ponce_ (1975)
    * Zadvydas v. Davis (2001)
    * _Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting_ (2011)
    

Related issues  
and events

|

    
        * Economic impact
    * Eugenics in the United States
    * Guest worker program
    * Human trafficking
    * Human smuggling
      * Coyotaje
    * Immigration reform
    * Immigration reduction
    * Mexico–United States barrier
    * Labor shortage
    * March for America
    * Illegal immigrant population
    * Reverse immigration
    * 2006 protests
    * Unaccompanied minors from Central America
    * Central American migrant caravans
    * List of people deported from the United States
    

Geography|

    
        * Mexico–United States border
    * Canada–United States border
    * United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints
    

Proposed legislation|

    
        * DREAM Act (2001-2010)
    * H.R. 4437 (2005)
    * McCain-Kennedy (2005)
    * SKIL (2006)
    * Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2006
    * STRIVE Act (2007)
    * Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2007
    * Uniting American Families Act (2000–2013)
    * Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013
    * SAFE Act (2015)
    * RAISE Act (2017)
    

Immigration stations  
and points of entry|

    
        * Angel Island
    * Castle Garden
    * East Boston
    * Ellis Island
    * Sullivan's Island
    * Washington Avenue
    

Operations|

    
        * "Wetback" (1954)
    * "Peter Pan" (1960-1962)
    * "Babylift" (1975)
    * "Gatekeeper" (1994)
    * "Endgame" (2003-2012)
    * "Front Line" (2004-2005)
    * "Streamline" (2005-present)
    * "Return to Sender" (2006-2007)
    * "Jump Start" (2006-2008)
    * "Phalanx" (2010-2016)
    

State legislation|

    
        * California DREAM Act (2006-2010)
    * Arizona SB 1070 (2010)
    * Alabama HB 56 (2011)
    

Non-governmental  
organizations

|

    
        * Arizona Border Recon
    * Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles
    * Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform
    * National Immigration Forum
    * Center for Community Change
    * We Are America Alliance
    * CASA of Maryland
    * Mexica Movement
    * Mexicans Without Borders
    * Federation for American Immigration Reform
    * Minuteman Project
    * Minuteman Civil Defense Corps
    * California Coalition for Immigration Reform
    * Save Our State
    * Center for Immigration Studies
    * National Korean American Service & Education Consortium (NAKASEC)
    * NumbersUSA
    * Negative Population Growth
    * Migration Policy Institute
    * Utah Compact
    * Center for Migration Studies of New York
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_impact_of_illegal_immigrants_in_the_United_States&oldid=901318112"

Categories:

    
        * Economy of the United States
    * Demographic economics
    * Illegal immigration to the United States
    * Informal economy
    * Economic impact of immigration
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
    * CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter
    * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2018
    * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * العربية
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 11 June 2019, at 03:27 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

