

Quora

* * *

Sign In

Great Wall of China (萬里長城)

Seven Wonders of the World

History of China

World History

China

History

# Did the Great Wall of China do more harm for China than good?

UpdateCancel

apbkdqcwrz mfbHiCYnyg UTfBFWoPGBtrXlMogiKAKeunjzO QoFfHZo
LMSECrEymYpfiMiJrEetsJasIspX

If you enjoy city building games, Forge is a must-play.

Journey through historical ages and develop your empire in this award-winning
city building game.

PyHtnalqsarsWys OFkSNCluoiwPCHCl ckTaqapRtTLTDI
YmNfXuXoTChUwrygVewmvCoHOfWxQNeKmepTjiHiOOCrCueevXVfWsUPXRB.OcLWobgJNmxGpMB

You dismissed this ad.

The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the
future.

Undo

### Answer Wiki

4 Answers

![Jonathan Buttall](https://qpho2.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

thumb-72263936-100-fnaipewodqydqvxktdzpxusfmxflhvcc.jpeg)

Jonathan Buttall, former Retired Professional in Behavioral Health Field at
Private Sector; Public Sector.

Answered 102w ago

Answered 102w ago * Author has 7.5k answers and 7.4m answer views

It did protect China from the Mongolians and other enemies for centuries. The
beginnings of it were started by the Emperor Qin 2200 years ago and it wasn’t
until the 1600s that it was breached.

Many lives were lost building some of the early great projects of the US, such
as Hoover Dam and the Panama Canal. These still serve critical needs to the
present day.

![](https://qpho2.fs.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-3f86676242e70927c09186c449fb5f71)

But the Great Wall serves a great purpose today; in the entire history of the
human race, there are only two ultimate icons of human construction that, more
than any other, define our species and it’s accomplishments, and I have posted
photos of both here (taken in 2014 and 2017, respectively).

Oh, and both bring tourism and fame to those countries from around the world
and always will.

![](https://qpho2.fs.quoracdn.net/main-

qimg-e478106dd6c0eb6bce19ba913519b7e2.webp)

10.8k views * View 250 Upvoters

### Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

    
        * How long would it take someone to walk the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Why is the Great Wall of India not as famous as the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Why was the Great Wall of China built?
    
    * How effective was the Great Wall of China?
    
    * What does it feel like to experience the Great Wall of China?
    

View more

### Related Questions

    
        * What effect did the Great Wall of China have?
    
    * How long did it take to build the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Did the Great Wall of China fulfill its intended purpose?
    
    * Why was the great wall of China made?
    
    * Why is the Great Wall of China a wonder?
    
    * What are some surprising facts about the Great Wall of China?
    
    * How was the Great Wall of China successful?
    
    * How do Mongols see China's Great Wall?
    
    * What do you know about the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Where is the Great Wall of China?
    

### Related Questions

    
        * How long would it take someone to walk the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Why is the Great Wall of India not as famous as the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Why was the Great Wall of China built?
    
    * How effective was the Great Wall of China?
    
    * What does it feel like to experience the Great Wall of China?
    
    * What effect did the Great Wall of China have?
    
    * How long did it take to build the Great Wall of China?
    
    * Did the Great Wall of China fulfill its intended purpose?
    
    * Why was the great wall of China made?
    
    * Why is the Great Wall of China a wonder?
    

About * Careers * Privacy * Terms * Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

