

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

__

__

    
        * Research
    * Events
    * Publications
    * Commentary
    * Store
    * Support
    
    * About Cato
    * Blog
    * Our Experts
    * Our Centers
    * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    

## Search form

Search this site

![](/sites/all/themes/cato/styles/images/blog_rev4.png)

# Cato At Liberty

    
        * __RSS
    * Customize
    

May 2, 2017 1:04PM

# How President Trump Could Cheaply & Quickly End Illegal Immigration

By Alex Nowrasteh

Share

    
        *  __Tweet
    * __Like
    * __Submit
    * __Share
    

Border apprehensions of illegal immigrants are substantially down in the first
few months of the Trump administration. In fact, the border apprehension
figure for the month of March is only 16,600, the lowest monthly figure since
2000. Apprehensions are an important proxy metric for the inflow of illegal
immigrants. Many are giving credit to the Trump administration for this rapid
and seemingly historical collapse in illegal immigration.

There was another historical decline in border apprehensions that was even
quicker, more dramatic, and far cheaper than the decline in border
apprehensions that began in 2006 and has trended downward to the Trump
administration. It occurred in the 1950s when the government streamlined the
Bracero guest worker visa program and allowed more legal migration. These two
periods of time lasted about the same number of years and provide an easy
comparison between two means of diminishing illegal immigration: by making it
legal or doubling down on enforcement.

The border patrol apprehended virtually the same number of illegal immigrants
in 1954, when the deregulated Bracero program began operation, as in the year
2006. The deregulated Bracero program lasted from 1954 to about 1965 and the
2006 decline has lasted until today. Apprehensions fell after both of those
but they fell further and much more rapidly in the 1950s (Figure 1).
Apprehensions declined by 93 percent from 1954 to 1956 but only by 34 percent
from 2006 to 2008. Figure 2 shows the same numbers indexed to 1 in the first
year. Clearly, the Bracero Era witnessed a much more rapid and complete
decline in illegal immigrant entries than the crackdown from 2006 to today.

Figure 1  
Border Patrol Apprehensions  
![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/wp-

content/uploads/trumpillegal1.png)

_Sources: USCIS, CBP, and INS._

Figure 2  
Border Patrol Apprehensions, Indexed  
![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/wp-

content/uploads/trumpillegal2.png)

_Sources: USCIS, CBP, and INS._

There are more border patrol agents in the 2006-2017 period than during the
Bracero Era. The 2006-2017 period began with 11.4 times as many agents as in
the Bracero Era and ended with 13.3 times as many while the decline in
apprehensions was slower and less complete (Figure 3). From the beginnings of
the two periods, the number of border patrol agents climbed by 38 percent in
the Bracero Era and by 61 percent in the 2006-2017 period. The indexed number
of border patrol agents shows that the agency grew more under the 2006-2017
period (Figure 4).

Figure 3  
Border Patrol Officers  
![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/wp-

content/uploads/trumpillegal3.png)

_Sources: USCIS, CBP, and INS._

Figure 4  
Border Patrol Officers, Indexed  
![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/wp-

content/uploads/trumpillegal4.png)

_Sources: USCIS, CBP, and INS._

These two periods are not perfectly comparable. The decline in border
apprehensions since 2006 was aided by the housing market collapse, the Great
Recession, the 61 percent increase in the number of border patrol agents, the
relative demographic decline in Mexico, numerous state-level laws immigration
enforcement laws, Secure Communities, and the increase in interior
deportations under Presidents Bush and Obama. The Bracero Era collapse in
illegal immigration occurred during an expanding domestic economy, a 38
percent increase in the number of border patrol agents, accelerating Mexican
fertility, and a fiercely named but relatively moderate interior immigration
enforcement scheme that also legalized many illegal workers. Although
imperfectly comparable, many natural, political, and macroeconomic factors
conspired to lower illegal immigration since 2006 while most of those factors
pushed in the opposite direction during the Bracero Era-providing further
evidence that Bracero was more effective than enforcement-only.

The Bracero Era's immigration enforcement policy was called “Operation
Wetback,” a nasty immigration enforcement operation begun in 1954 that removed
almost two million illegal Mexican migrants. While brutal and unnecessary,
many of the migrants rounded up under Operation Wetback were legalized on the
spot, a process derogatorily referred to as “drying out” illegal migrant
workers, and given a Bracero work visa. The number of migrants “dried out” is
not well recorded but 96,239 were processed thusly in 1950. The Department of
Labor actually preferred legalized illegal migrants over newly-admitted
Braceros. Other apprehended illegal immigrants were made to “walk around the
statute”-basically taking a single step into Mexico and then returning under
the watchful eye of a border patrol agent who then handed him a work visa and
drove him back to his farm. The government did not tolerate illegal
immigration but they made it simple for migrants to get a guest worker visa
and used the border patrol to funnel the migrants into the legal system. Many
border patrol agents and other officials testified to what a success Bracero
was in reducing illegal immigration.

The main goal of modern immigration policy is to end illegal immigration. The
government should choose the cheapest way to accomplish that task-which is by
expanding guest worker visas. Border patrol agents and walls are expensive,
they decrease economic growth, and have never completely stopped illegal
immigration. Guest worker visas are cheap, they increase economic growth, and
they reduced illegal immigration far more rapidly and effectively than the
modern enforcement-only method. If it was easier for would-be illegal
immigrants to instead earn a legal work visa similar to Bracero then almost
all future and current illegal immigrants could be funneled into the legal
market without increased enforcement. This was the policy followed in the
Bracero Era and it worked quicker, more efficiently, more completely, and more
cheaply than the modern enforcement-only approach.

If the Trump administration really wants to end illegal immigration then they
should copy Eisenhower’s policy of enforcement and liberalization toward guest
worker visas rather than Obama’s enforcement-only approach.

Topics:

International Economics, Development & Immigration

Tags:

Trump, illegal immigrants, border crossers, Bracero

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

### Topics

    
        * Cato Publications
    * Constitution, the Law, and the Courts
    * Criminal Law and Civil Liberties
    * Education and Child Policy
    * Energy and Environment
    * Finance, Banking & Monetary Policy
    * Foreign Policy and National Security
    * General
    * Government and Politics
    * Health Care
    * International Economics, Development & Immigration
    * Political Philosophy
    * Poverty & Social Welfare
    * Regulatory Studies
    * Social Security
    * Tax and Budget Policy
    * Telecom, Internet & Information Policy
    * Trade Policy
    

### Archives

    
        * June 2019
    * May 2019
    * April 2019
    * March 2019
    * February 2019
    * January 2019
    * December 2018
    * November 2018
    * October 2018
    * September 2018
    * August 2018
    * July 2018
    * June 2018
    * May 2018
    * April 2018
    * March 2018
    * February 2018
    * January 2018
    * December 2017
    * November 2017
    * October 2017
    * September 2017
    * August 2017
    * July 2017
    * June 2017
    * May 2017
    * April 2017
    * March 2017
    * February 2017
    * January 2017
    * December 2016
    * November 2016
    * October 2016
    * September 2016
    * August 2016
    * July 2016
    * June 2016
    * May 2016
    * April 2016
    * March 2016
    * February 2016
    * January 2016
    * December 2015
    * November 2015
    * October 2015
    * September 2015
    * August 2015
    * July 2015
    * June 2015
    * May 2015
    * April 2015
    * March 2015
    * February 2015
    * January 2015
    * December 2014
    * November 2014
    * October 2014
    * September 2014
    * August 2014
    * July 2014
    * June 2014
    * May 2014
    * April 2014
    * March 2014
    * February 2014
    * January 2014
    * December 2013
    * November 2013
    * October 2013
    * September 2013
    * August 2013
    * July 2013
    * June 2013
    * May 2013
    * April 2013
    * March 2013
    * February 2013
    * January 2013
    * December 2012
    * November 2012
    * October 2012
    * September 2012
    * August 2012
    * July 2012
    * June 2012
    * May 2012
    * April 2012
    * March 2012
    * February 2012
    * January 2012
    * December 2011
    * November 2011
    * October 2011
    * September 2011
    * August 2011
    * July 2011
    * June 2011
    * May 2011
    * April 2011
    * March 2011
    * February 2011
    * January 2011
    * December 2010
    * November 2010
    * October 2010
    * September 2010
    * August 2010
    * July 2010
    * June 2010
    * May 2010
    * April 2010
    * March 2010
    * February 2010
    * January 2010
    * December 2009
    * November 2009
    * October 2009
    * September 2009
    * August 2009
    * July 2009
    * June 2009
    * May 2009
    * April 2009
    * March 2009
    * February 2009
    * January 2009
    * December 2008
    * November 2008
    * October 2008
    * September 2008
    * August 2008
    * July 2008
    * June 2008
    * May 2008
    * April 2008
    * March 2008
    * February 2008
    * January 2008
    * December 2007
    * November 2007
    * October 2007
    * September 2007
    * August 2007
    * July 2007
    * June 2007
    * May 2007
    * April 2007
    * March 2007
    * February 2007
    * January 2007
    * December 2006
    * November 2006
    * October 2006
    * September 2006
    * August 2006
    * July 2006
    * June 2006
    * May 2006
    * April 2006
    * Show More
    

### Email Alerts

Sign up to have Cato At Liberty posts delivered straight to your inbox!

Read Cato At Liberty right on your Kindle. Sign up today!

Subscribe

### Cato Today Newsletter

_Daily dose of liberty delivered straight to your inbox._

View full list of newsletters

### Also from Cato

    
        * Internships and Student Programs
    * DownsizingGovernment.org
    * Libertarianism.org
    * HumanProgress.org
    * Cato Unbound
    * Unlawful Shield
    * Freedom in the 50 States
    * Overlawyered
    * ElCato.org
    * Alt-M
    

### Social Media

    
        * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    * __YouTube
    * __LinkedIn
    * __Instagram
    * __Tumblr
    * __RSS
    

![](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

Cato Institute  
1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW  
Washington, DC 20001-5403

    
        * Phone (202) 842 0200
    

Privacy Policy

Contact Us

Media Contact

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id= 454916984694808&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

