

![](https://logs1242.xiti.com/hit.xiti?s=510544&s2=2&p=TOP+STORIES::Culture::Film::What+Hollywood+movies+do+to+perpetuate+racial+stereotypes&di=&an=&ac=&x1=1&x2=2&x3=47561660&x4=101405&x5=What+Hollywood+movies+do+to+perpetuate+racial+stereotypes&x6=&x7=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dw.com%2Fen%2Fhollywood-

movies-stereotypes-prejudice-data-

analysis%2Fa-47561660&x8=&x9=20190221&x10=TOP+STORIES::Culture::Film&x13=1&x14=&x15=19990010&x16=19990013&x17=&x18=)

We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information
in our data protection declaration.

More info OK

    
        1. Inhalt
    2. Navigation
    3. Weitere Inhalte
    4. Metanavigation
    5. Suche
    6. Choose from 30 Languages
    
    * Albanian Shqip
    * Amharic አማርኛ
    * Arabic العربية
    * Bengali বাংলা
    * Bosnian B/H/S
    * Bulgarian Български
    * Chinese (Simplified) 简
    * Chinese (Traditional) 繁
    * Croatian Hrvatski
    * Dari دری 
    * English English
    * French Français
    * German Deutsch
    * Greek Ελληνικά
    * Hausa Hausa
    * Hindi हिन्दी
    * Indonesian Indonesia
    * Kiswahili Kiswahili
    * Macedonian Македонски
    * Pashto پښتو
    * Persian فارسی
    * Polish Polski
    * Portuguese Português para África
    * Portuguese Português do Brasil
    * Romanian Română
    * Russian Русский
    * Serbian Српски/Srpski
    * Spanish Español
    * Turkish Türkçe
    * Ukrainian Українська
    * Urdu اردو
    

Wrong language? Change it here DW.COM has chosen English as your language
setting.

DW.COM in 30 languages

DW AKADEMIE

ABOUT DW

DW.COM

Deutsche Welle

![Deutsche Welle](/cssi/dwlogo-print.gif)

    
        * TOP STORIES
    
      * Germany
      * Brexit
      * World
        * Europe
          * Germany and Turkey - A difficult relationship
        * Africa
          * The 77 Percent
          * Crime Fighters
          * Africa on the Move
        * Asia
        * Americas
        * Middle East
      * Business
        * Founders Valley
        * Wo+men
        * My 2030
      * Science
      * Environment
        * Global Ideas
          * In focus
          * DoingYourBit
        * Eco Africa
        * Living Planet
      * Culture
        * Film
        * Books
        * Music
        * Arts
        * Digital Culture
        * Lifestyle
        * Travel
        * BTHVN2020
      * Sports
        * More sports
    

#### SPECIAL

    
          * 100 Must-Reads
      * 50 kitchens, one city
      * Baking Bread
      * DW Freedom
      * Expedition Humboldt
      * Gutenberg in the Cyberstorm
      * Planet Berlin
      * The Migration Dilemma
      * World War I
    
    * Media Center
    
      * Live TV
      * All media content
      * Latest Programs
      * Podcasts
    
    * TV
    
      * Schedule and Reception
      * TV Programs
    

#### TV programs

    
          * Arts.21
      * Arts and Culture
      * Business
      * Check-in
      * Close up
      * Conflict Zone
      * DocFilm
      * Drive it!
      * DW News
      * Eco Africa
      * Eco India
      * Euromaxx
      * Faith Matters
      * Focus on Europe
      * Global 3000
      * In Good Shape
      * Kick off!
      * Made in Germany
      * Quadriga
      * Reporter
      * Shift
      * The Bundesliga
      * The Day
      * The 77 Percent
      * Tomorrow Today
      * World Stories
    
    * RADIO
    * LEARN GERMAN
    

#### German Courses

    
          * German Courses
      * Quick start
      * Harry
      * Deutsch Interaktiv
      * Radio D
      * Mission Europe
      * Deutsch - warum nicht?
      * Audiotrainer
      * Deutschtrainer
      * Die Bienenretter
    

#### German XXL

    
          * German XXL
      * Deutsch Aktuell
      * Deutsch im Fokus
      * Telenovela
      * Bandtagebuch
      * Landeskunde
    

#### Community D

    
          * Community D
      * Das Porträt
      * Podcasts & Newsletter
      * Service
    

#### Teaching German

    
          * Teaching German
      * DW im Unterricht
      * Unterrichtsreihen
      * Deutschlehrer-Info
    
    * Germany
    * Brexit
    * World
    * Business
    * Science
    * Environment
    * Culture
    * Sports
    

TOP STORIES / Culture / Film

Advertisement

#### Data analysis

# What Hollywood movies do to perpetuate racial stereotypes

Cinematic stereotypes reflect and shape common prejudices. Perceptions can be
influenced by portrayals of Asians as nerdy, black men as dangerous and
Latinas as fiery. So, how does Hollywood portray various groups?

![Data visualization Hollywood movie sereotypes teaser

\(DW\)](/image/47614104_303.jpg)

In recent years, there has been increased attention on racism and sexism in
Hollywood films, which can be reflected in who acts in front of the camera,
who directs behind it and how people are represented on-screen — and often all
three. To illustrate how stereotypes have developed in Hollywood, DW analyzed
tropes used in more than 6,000 Oscar-eligible movies since 1928.

Hollywood history provides many examples of racist caricatures. Black and
Asian people have been repeated targets. Take the 1961 Audrey Hepburn movie
_Breakfast at Tiffany's_ and the bucktoothed Mr. Yunioshi, whose stereotypical
"Engrish" accent was intended to mock Japanese people. He is notorious, and
there are so many more examples.

![Mickey Rooney as Mr. Yunioshi in Breakfast at

Tiffany's](/image/47400795_404.jpg)

Mickey Rooney as Mr. Yunioshi in "Breakfast at Tiffany's"

**From racist caricatures to lingering stereotypes**

"Racism, in the form of job exclusion and racially stereotyped roles, has
defined the Hollywood film industry since its birth in the early 1900s," the
sociologist Nancy Wang Yuen writes in her book, _Reel Inequality: Hollywood
Actors and Racism_. Indeed, Asian characters in the early days of Hollywood
mostly appeared in the form of racist cliches — either as mysterious, menacing
villains or as laughable caricatures such as Mr. Yunioshi. In addition to
everything else, that character is played by the entirely white American actor
Mickey Rooney, thus making it an example of yellowface: a non-Asian person
impersonating an Asian person.

This practice used to be quite common in Hollywood. Production teams were
reluctant to hire minority actors of any kind, instead often opting to use
white actors in their place. This practice became self-reproducing:
Sociologists have found that prejudices break down when people of various
ethnic groups have increased contact with each other.

But Asian communities have historically been frequently marginalized in the
United States. "Even today, most images of Asians and Asian Americans on
screen weren't created by Asians or Asian Americans, but by people who don't
know much about them," says Kent Ono, who studies media representations of
race at the University of Utah. "This creates a very strange idea of who
Asians and Asian Americans are for those who don't know any Asian people. And
it also creates a very confused and estranged relationship by Asians and Asian
Americans to Hollywood, because they can't fully identify with this bizarre
representation of themselves."

![Data visualization Hollywood movie stereotypes](/image/47568208_7.png)

The information on these stereotypical cinematic devices has been compiled in
the community-generated wiki TVTropes.org, from which the names of the various
tropes detailed in this article are drawn. Users there can document any
recurring motif they observe in a piece of media: Which TV shows claim Elvis
is still alive? Which video games feature a creepy child character? Does a
movie feature a white actor dressed up to look Asian?

In 2012, for example, the movie _Cloud Atlas_ drew criticism for making many
of the non-Asian actors up as Asian characters for part of the film. Many
critics argued that, as there are already so few roles for Asian actors, let
alone roles that are not caricatures, white actors should not be cast to play
Asian characters. That came up again when Scarlett Johansson starred in the
live-action film of the classic Japanese manga series _Ghost in the Shell_ and
then Tilda Swinton played an originally Asian character in _Doctor Strange_.
And the list goes on.

![Tilda Swinton as The Ancient One in a scene from Marvel's Doctor Strange.

The character is Asian in the comic books that are the basis for the

movie.](/image/47400863_401.jpg)

Tilda Swinton as "The Ancient One" in a scene from Marvel's "Doctor Strange."
The character is Asian in the comic books that are the basis for the movie

A trope that began to appear more frequently in the 1960s and '70s is what
TVTropes calls the "Mighty Whitey, Mellow Yellow" dynamic: a powerful white
main character with a submissive Asian love interest. Before the 1950s, strict
self-censorship in US cinema forbade romantic pairings between people of
different ethnicities, or "miscegenation," which meant that there were even
fewer roles available to Asian actors. When self-censorship gave way to the
current system for rating motion pictures, instances of the trope increased,
which indicated that this stereotype of Asian women had already existed before
it was depicted on the screen.

Other tropes also became more prominent in the second half of the century. In
the 1970s and '80s, the popularity of Bruce Lee and martial arts movies in
general led to the entrenchment of the "All Asians Know Martial Arts" trope.

But the most common way of representing Asians and Asian-Americans in US media
today is as the "model minority," Ono said: "They might be scientists, doctors
or in some technical field. By and large, they're good students, come from
good families and don't have any economic problems." This stereotype is not
specifically recorded in the TVTropes wiki, but it overlaps with the "Asian
and Nerdy" trope, which has occurred more frequently in recent decades.

**Minority groups underrepresented**

What this analysis cannot show is the share of movies that have
nonstereotypical nonwhite characters. These don't typically get documented in
the TVTropes wiki. In general, it's difficult to make any large-scale
assessments of whether there are fewer stereotypical depictions now than there
used to be.

What researchers do track, though, is the number of nonwhite actors cast and
how many directors and writers of color see their films produced. "The greater
the range of different roles, the less likely people are to think that a group
is just one of these representations," Ono said. Conversely, there is all the
more weight on individual characters for groups who are rarely represented on-
screen.

Hollywood still has a long way to go, according to the Hollywood Diversity
Report from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA): The share of
female and nonwhite characters on-screen has risen quite steadily over the
past few years, but also quite slowly. Even though Asians, for example, make
up more than half of the world's population, and just under 6 percent of the
US population, only 3 percent of all roles in 2017 and 2018 were played by
Asians. Black characters made up 12.5 percent of all roles, which approaches
proportionate representation for the US population. But in many cases, the
portrayals are quite problematic.

**Black characters die first**

As with Asians, black characters often weren't played by black people in the
early days of Hollywood. In fact, they barely appeared at all, except as
caricatures played by white actors in blackface. This practice originated in
the American theater tradition of minstrelsy, in which racist stereotypes
about black people were a staple.

![Data visualization Hollywood movie stereotypes](/image/47568260_7.png)

Blackface occurs much less frequently now, after a long period of criticism of
the practice: In _Dear White People_ , for example, college fraternity members
throw a blackface-themed party, which the film, as well as the Netflix series
of the same name, use as the basis for a discussion of racism at colleges
across the United States.

But, as Hollywood has featured more black characters and cast more black
actors, it has also emphasized other stereotypes. To this day, black men are
often portrayed as scary or angry and black women as loudmouthed and sassy. If
a movie features one token black character, it's likely to be the black best
friend. And, if people die in a movie, the black character is still likely to
go first. Even with awareness of racial stereotypes rising, Hollywood persists
with these tropes.

**If Africa is featured, it's dangerous and untouched by civilization**

Hollywood's stereotypical depictions of black people mostly refer to black
Americans. Tropes that are about Africans are rarer, partly because few
Hollywood movies have African characters. The most common trope about Africa,
though, is what TVTropes users have dubbed "Darkest Africa": Movies portraying
the continent as a mysterious and dangerous isolated land with only limited
ties to "modern" civilization. That depiction has become less common, however.

**Latino characters are defined by their sex appeal**

Latinos are the largest ethnic minority in the US, making up around 18 percent
of the population. A look at 2,682 movies since the year 2000 finds that
tropes about Latino characters focus most often on their sex appeal. For
women, this translates as the "Spicy Latina" trope: a temperamental temptress
who can hold her own and always looks sexy.

![Data visualization Hollywood movie stereotypes](/image/47568316_7.png)

Men get the role of the seductive "Latin Lover," often a fling for a white
woman. Additionally, films tend to ignore the diversity of Latino cultures
throughout the Americas: A particular brown-skinned, black-haired look is
presented as defining the appearance of all Latinos. TVTropes users call this
trope the "Latino is brown" stereotype.

The stereotypes perpetuated in movies are particularly hurtful to historically
oppressed and marginalized groups. But there are enough tropes in Hollywood to
go around. And for groups who don't feel the detrimental effects of being
stereotyped in their everyday lives, seeing themselves poorly represented
causes much less pain.

**Germans in movies are still often Nazis**

The most common stereotype about Germans in movies since 2000 is that they are
all Nazis. That is closely followed by the character of the German scientist,
filed under "Herr Doctor" on TVTropes. The latter was probably influenced by
the real-life scientists who fled to the US during the Nazi regime, most
notably Albert Einstein, who was born in Germany.

![Data visualization Hollywood movie stereotypes](/image/47568352_7.png)

A curious trope has to do with Germans' supposed love for _Baywatch_ and
_Knight Rider_ star David Hasselhoff. In 1988, Hasselhoff released his version
of the song "Looking for Freedom," which was originally recorded by the German
Marc Seaberg in the 1970s. Hasselhoff performed the song at the Berlin Wall
just weeks after it fell at the end of 1989. The song fit the zeitgeist and
was indeed popular in Germany for a time. Now, the "Germans Love David
Hasselhoff" trope is used by the TVTropes community as a shorthand for any
person or character who receives unexpected popularity outside of their home
country.

**A British accent is an indicator of evil**

Surprisingly, the most dominant trope about the British is not the classic
posh accent or the stereotype of uptightness, though both are on the list. No,
British characters overwhelmingly seem to be a popular choice for villains.
This is so pervasive that the British actors Ben Kingsley, Mark Strong and Tom
Hiddleston even starred in a 2014 Super Bowl commercial poking fun at the
trope.

![Data visualization Hollywood movie stereotypes](/image/47568397_7.png)

A British accent even seems to signal villainous intent in animated
characters: The Egyptians in _The Prince of Egypt_ , the Dreamworks rendering
of the biblical story of Moses, have British accents; an animated car with a
British accent is the bad guy in the Pixar movie _Cars 2_ ; and _The Lion
King_ , _Kung Fu Panda_ and _Rise of the Guardians_ all feature British-
sounding villains, just to name a few films.

**Russians: Tough, rough and played by non-Russians**

Finally, Russians in movies are still very much defined by Cold War-era images
in Hollywood. The most common stereotype is the "hard-fightin', heavy-
drinkin', manly, boorish" character, as the corresponding TVTropes entry
describes it. These characters often bear the brunt of the suffering during
the movie, getting injured or generally leading hard lives.

![Data visualization Hollywood movie stereotypes](/image/47568443_7.png)

Curiously, movie Russians are quite often played by non-Russians. In _Rocky
IV_ , the Swedish Dolph Lundgren started his action career as Russian boxer
Ivan Drago; Arnold Schwarzenegger in _Red Heat_ and Viggo Mortensen in
_Eastern Promises_ are other examples. During the Cold War, there was a
predictable shortage of actual Russian actors in Hollywood. But, even in newer
movies, non-Russians are often cast to play Russian characters.

**Diversity pays**

Changing gears would be in Hollywood’s best interest: According to the report,
movies and TV shows with fairly diverse casts bring in more at the box office
and get higher ratings from audiences. However, Hollywood is still a long way
from representing the diversity of the world — or even that of the United
States. White people are still considerably overrepresented in front of the
camera, as well as behind it. That fact, too, has an influence on how
stereotypes are perpetuated.

![Screenshot from the Netflix movie To All the Boys I’ve Loved

Before](/image/47571941_404.jpg)

Lana Condor in "To All the Boys I've Loved Before"

A few events in recent years have given rise to optimism that this might
change. When she won the Oscar for her performance in _Fences_ in 2017, Viola
Davis became the first black woman to win the triple crown of acting over the
course of career, including her two Tony Awards for stage work and the 2015
Emmy for her role in _How to Get Away With Murder_. In 2018, the romantic
comedy _Crazy Rich Asians_ became a box office hit with an all-Asian cast. And
the Vietnamese-American actor Lana Condor has the lead role in the successful
teen romance _To All the Boys I've Loved Before_ on Netflix.

As the figures from UCLA's Diversity Report indicate, proportionate and
accurate representation is not yet the norm. "We're still facing huge
challenges," says Kent Ono, "and there are always going to be people that go
back to the historical trove of representation. But I'm more hopeful now than
even two years ago. There are great independent people doing the work to push
out those representations. And sometimes, Hollywood listens."

#### DW recommends

## Oscars: The winning factors to land among the best films

What are the tastes of Academy Award voters? DW took a look at the tropes
shared by Best Picture nominees to find out. Dramas based on a true story are
popular — but alcoholics are quite successful, too. (21.02.2019)

## How white is Hollywood?

George Clooney and Lupita Nyong'o are among the latest stars to lament the
film industry's "whitewashing" but not everyone wants to boycott the Oscars.
Lack of diversity, however, is not only a US issue. (20.01.2016)

## What a history-making Oscar nomination reveals about gender equality in

Hollywood

It's about time: Rachel Morrison is the first woman to be nominated for an
Oscar for cinematography. Hollywood is still far from gender equality, but
just how pronounced is the imbalance? (02.03.2018)

#### WWW links

## Data and code behind this analysis

## More data journalism by DW

## TVTropes: Asian Speekee Engrish

## TVTropes: Yellow Peril

## TVTropes: Yellowface

## Washington Post: The complex history of Asian Americans in movies, from

the silent era to ‘Crazy Rich Asians’

## The Guardian: Cloud Atlas under fire for casting white actors in

'yellowface' makeup

## Mighty Whitey and Mellow Yellow

## NPR: Remembering Hollywood's Hays Code, 40 Years On

## Archetypes, Stereotypes and Media Representation in a Multi-cultural

Society

## UCLA: Hollywood Diversity Report 2018

## U.S. Census Bureau QuickFact

## TVTropes: Blackface

## The Hollywood Reporter: Why Former 'Baywatch' Star David Hasselhoff Is Big

in Germany

## Youtube/DigitalCinemaMedia: Jaguar 'F-Type Rendezvous'

#### Audios and videos on the topic

## How to get an Oscar nomination

    
        * **Date** 21.02.2019 
    * **Author** Kira Schacht 
    * **Related Subjects** Hollywood, Data journalism
    * **Keywords** DDJ, Hollywood, prejudice, racism, stereotypes, movies, film
    * **Feedback** : Send us your feedback.
    * **Print** Print this page
    * **Permalink** https://p.dw.com/p/3DYxY
    

#### Related content

![Film Wir von Regisseur Jordan Peele](/image/47961855_301.jpg)

## Jordan Peele's 'Us' explores the horror of doppelgangers 20.03.2019

After conquering Hollywood with his directorial debut, "Get Out," Jordan Peele
is back with "Us," a horror film with a middle-class African-American family
in the center. It stars Lupita Nyong'o and Winston Duke.

![Berlin and Beyond Film Festival Bjarne Mädel](/image/47878773_301.jpg)

## Film festival Berlin and Beyond defies stereotypes 13.03.2019

The largest German-language film festival outside Europe is showing feature
films and documentaries from Germany, Austria and Switzerland. It's a rare
opportunity to view them in the US.

![Schauspieler Jussie Smollett ](/image/47622841_301.jpg)

## US actor Jussie Smollett charged over alleged false police report

09.03.2019

US actor Jussie Smollett is facing 16 charges related to reporting a fake
racist and homophobic attack to police. Police allege that the "Empire" TV
actor staged the attack to gain publicity.

    
        * **Date** 21.02.2019 
    * **Author** Kira Schacht 
    * **Related Subjects** Hollywood, Data journalism
    * **Keywords** DDJ, Hollywood, prejudice, racism, stereotypes, movies, film
    * Send us your feedback.
    * **Print** Print this page
    * **Permalink** https://p.dw.com/p/3DYxY
    

Advertisement

#### Film

![A film still from GODZILLA II KING OF THE MONSTERS shows godzilla battling a

snake-like creature \(Courtesy of Warner Bros. Entertainment

Inc.\)](/image/48894206_301.jpeg)

## 'Godzilla: King of the Monsters' delivers creatures and destruction galore

The latest film about the dinosaur-like destroyer uses a winning forumla that
harkens back to older Godzilla films. While smashing and dashing the world
around him, the Japanese monster has symbolized different things.

#### Books

![Anne Frank Portrait \(Anne Frank Haus Amsterdam \)](/image/48747005_301.jpg)

## Anne Frank's incomplete novel 'Dear Kitty' published

The Jewish girl who became posthumously famous with her diary also hoped to
publish a novel. The unfinished work of the Holocaust victim — who would have
turned 90 on June 12 — has been released in German.

#### Music

![US free jazz alto saxophone player Marshall Allen \(moers

festival\)](/image/49059556_301.jpg)

## How the Moers Festival became a celebration of avant-garde change

The organizers and musicians of the renowned Moers Festival are committed to
promoting and exploring new soundscapes. Here's how the avant-garde music
festival in the small town became legendary.

#### Arts

![Ausstellung im C/O Berlin Food for the Eyes \(Ouka

Leele\)](/image/48970574_301.jpg)

## Feast for the eyes: Food photography on show in Berlin

Featuring works from Cindy Sherman, Wolfgang Tillmans, Nan Goldin and many
more, a new exhibition at C/O Berlin, "Food for the Eyes. The Story of Food in
Photography," celebrates the idea that we are what we eat.

#### Digital Culture

![Videostill Youtube Wozu Geschichte lernen? \(Youtube/MrWissen2go

Geschichte\)](/image/48990506_301.jpg)

## YouTube in schools: A digital revolution in the classroom

Teachers and parents might not have noticed, but students don't only use
YouTube for fun. According to a new study, about half of them watch videos to
learn things as well. How does this affect the educational program?

#### Lifestyle

![Symbolbild - Urlaub am Meer \(Colourbox\)](/image/48639630_301.jpg)

## Knock your socks off!

Free your feet from stinky socks: If Hollywood stars can do it on Cannes' red
carpet, so can you! Here's a celebration of bare feet for No Socks Day on May
8.

#### More culture

## Film

## Books

## Music

## Arts

## Digital Culture

## Lifestyle

    
        * TOP STORIES
    * Germany
    * Brexit
    * World
    * Business
    * Science
    * Environment
    * Culture
    * Sports
    *  
    * A - Z Index
    * MEDIA CENTER
    * Live TV
    * All media content
    * Latest Programs
    * Podcasts
    * TV
    * Schedule and Reception
    * TV Programs
    *  
    * RADIO
    * LEARN GERMAN
    * German Courses
    * German XXL
    * Community D
    * Teaching German
    * ABOUT DW
    * Who we are
    * Press
    * GMF
    * Business & Sales
    * Advertising
    * Travel
    * SERVICE
    * Reception
    * Mobile
    * Smart TV
    * Newsletters & Co.
    * FAQ
    * Contact
    *  
    * DW AKADEMIE
    * About us
    * Media Development
    * Master's Degree
    * Traineeship
    * Training
    

© 2019 Deutsche Welle | Privacy Policy | Legal notice | Contact | Mobile
version

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

