

__Welcome to the United Nations.

Toggle navigation

    
        * العربية
    * 中文
    * English
    * Français
    * Русский
    * Español
    

![Disarmament graphic — on the left | United Nations Office of Disarmament

Affairs — on the right](https://front.un-arm.org/img/unoda-en.png)

Search

    
        * About UNODA 
      * Overview
      * Vision
      * High Representative
      * Organigram
      * Structure
      * Contacts
    * Disarmament Bodies and Institutions
      * Disarmament in the General Assembly
      * Disarmament in the Security Council
      * Conference on Disarmament
      * United Nations Disarmament Commission
      * Secretary-General's Advisory Board
      * Fellowship Programme
      * UNIDIR
    * Databases and Research Tools
      * UNODA Documents Library
      * GA Resolutions and Decisions
      * Disarmament Treaties
      * Military Expenditures Database
      * The Global Reported Arms Trade
      * UNIDIR’s Cyber Policy Portal
    * Resources and Publications
      * UNODA Publications
      * UNODA Update
      * UNODA Calendar
      * Disarmament Education
      * Fact Sheets on Disarmament Issues
      * Proposals for Funding
    * Statements and Press Releases
      * Secretary-General's Statements
      * High Representative's Statements
      * Press Releases
    * Offices Away From UNHQ
      * Geneva, Switzerland
      * Vienna, Austria
      * Lima, Peru
      * Lome, Togo
      * Kathmandu, Nepal
    * Related Links
      * International Organizations
      * Research Institutes, Academic Institutions and NGOs
    * Site Map
    
    * Weapons of Mass Destruction
      * Nuclear
      * Biological
      * Chemical
      * Missiles
      * Security Council Resolution 1540
      * Chemical and Biological Weapons Use Investigations
      * Measures to Prevent Terrorists From Acquiring WMD
    * Conventional Arms
      * Arms Trade
      * Small Arms
      * Ammunition
      * Improvised Explosive Devices
      * Explosive weapons in populated areas
      * Landmines
      * Cluster Munitions
      * Depleted Uranium
      * UN Register of Conventional Arms
      * Military Spending
      * UNSCAR Trust Fund
    * Regional Disarmament 
      * Regional Disarmament Overview
      * Disarmament Field Activities
      * Inter-Agency Coordination
      * Partnerships
      * Resolutions of Regional Disarmament
      * SG Reports
      * UN Regional Centers for Peace and Disarmament
    * Transparency and Confidence-building
      * Confidence-building Measures
      * UN Register of Conventional Arms
      * Military Spending
      * Outer Space
    * Other Disarmament Issues 
      * Counter-Terrorism Strategy
      * Disarmament and development
      * Disarmament Education
      * Environmental Norms
      * Gender Perspectives
      * Information Security
      * Multilateralism
      * Outer Space
      * Science and Technology
      * Special Sessions on Disarmament
    

# Landmines

![](https://unoda-web.s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com/wp-

content/uploads/assets/convarms/landmines/Images/mines.jpg)

Landmines come in two varieties: anti-personnel and anti-vehicle mines. Both
have caused great suffering in the past decades. Anti-personnel landmines are
prohibited under the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction (or
Mine Ban Convention), adopted in 1997. More than 150 countries have joined
this treaty. Its positive impact includes a marked reduction of casualties, an
increased number of mine-free States, destroyed stockpiles and improved
assistance to victims.

eMine — Mine Action by the UN

UN Development Programme (UNDP)

UNICEF

UN Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR)

International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)

CCW protocol II on landmines and booby-traps

International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL)

Learn about landmines at the UN CyberSchoolbus

The Secretary-General calls on all countries to also regulate the use of anti-
vehicle landmines. Such weapons continue to cause many casualties, often
civilian. They restrict the movement of people and humanitarian aid, make land
unsuitable for cultivation, and deny citizens access to water, food, care and
trade.

Every day, people die or lose limbs from stepping on a landmine. Mostly in
countries at peace - and the majority of victims are civilians. The Anti-
personnel Landmine Convention, or the Mine Ban Convention, addresses this
scourge. It bans the stockpiling, transfer and use of anti-personnel
landmines, requires countries to clear them on their territory, while
prescribing States in a position to do so to assist affected countries.

**The Anti-personnel Landmine Convention**

APLC Support Website

List of States Parties and Signatories

Information on Meetings of States Parties

National Reports

List of Qualified Experts

In the 1980s, the use of anti-personnel landmines was regulated under the CCW
treaty. But many countries wanted a complete ban. The ensuing Mine Ban
Convention has been joined by three-quarters of the world's countries. Since
its inception more than a decade ago, it has led to a virtual halt in global
production of anti-personnel mines, and a drastic reduction in their
deployment. More than 40 million stockpiled mines have been destroyed, and
assistance has been provided to survivors and populations living in the
affected areas. Vast numbers of mined and suspected hazardous areas have been
declared free of landmines and released for productive use. As a result of
these efforts, the number of casualties has sharply declined. Other welcome
trends include: increases in national capacity to manage complex mine action
programmes; the great progress in framing victim assistance in the wider
context of disability; and the development of improved risk-reduction tools.
The Mine Ban Convention has been a central framework for States in conducting
mine action activities that led to all these remarkable achievements.

However, well over 10 million stockpiled mines await destruction. Massive
tracts of land are still infested and thus too dangerous for productive use.
Tens of thousands of victims and their families have not yet received adequate
support. The presence of mines continues to impede social and economic
development.

    
        * Small Arms
    * The Arms Trade
    * Arms Trade Treaty
    * Ammunition...
      * Ammunition
      * International Ammunition Technical Guidelines (IATG)
    * Transparency Registers...
      * Register of Conventional Arms
      * Military Spending
      * Arms Export Legislation
    * Landmines...
      * Overview
      * Anti-Personnel Landmines Convention
      * Amended Protocol II of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
      * Cluster Munitions
      * Confidence Building
    

![Child in a rebel camp in the north-eastern Central African

Republic](https://unoda-web.s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com/wp-

content/uploads/assets/convarms/images/demobilize-attribute_Zil-Flickr.jpg)

photo credit...

Child in a rebel camp in the north-eastern Central African Republic

Credit: Pierre Holtz  
UNICEF CAR

Used under Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 2.0 licence

### SITE INDEX

    
        * About UNODA
    * UNODA Offices
    * Related Institutions
    * Databases & Tools
    * Publications & Resources
    * Press Releases
    * Related Links
    
    * Weapons of Mass Destruction
    * Conventional Arms
    * Regional Disarmament
    * Confidence Building
    * Other Disarmament Issues
    

### CONNECT

![twitter icon](https://front.un-arm.org/img/twitter-icon401.png) ![instagram

icon](https://www.un.org/disarmament/wp-

content/themes/unoda/img/instagram_logo.png) ![rss icon](https://front.un-

arm.org/img/rss.png)

The Office for Disarmament Affairs Launches its First eLearning Module
providing an Introduction to #Disarmament Find out more here: bit.ly/2XCDjon
pic.twitter.com/LrSQw3dA4E

About 10 hours ago from ODA's Twitter * reply * retweet * favorite

Opening remarks by High Representative @INakamitsu at @UNIDIR #Cyber Stability
Conference: "We need the public and private sector, together with civil
society and academia, to work earnestly and collaboratively towards our mutual
goal of cyber stability." bit.ly/31fsr1V pic.twitter.com/U2vNzvXYwb

About 5 days ago from ODA's Twitter * reply * retweet * favorite

Read statement by High Representative @INakamitsu for the Global Week of
Action Against #GunViolence, 2-9 June 2019 #Disarmament #UnitedNations Link
here: bit.ly/2HR07ek pic.twitter.com/wreFwt3G92

Last week from ODA's Twitter * reply * retweet * favorite

Watch Secretary-General @antonioguterres’ message on the one-year anniversary
of the launch of his #Disarmament Agenda “Securing Our Common Future”
pic.twitter.com/pRLgFmkyL1

About 3 weeks ago from ODA's Twitter * reply * retweet * favorite

Opinion piece on "Protecting civilians in combat zones" by High Representative
@INakamitsu published in @etribune Read here: tribune.com.pk/story/1975766/…
pic.twitter.com/ETc9Bcei3Q

About 3 weeks ago from ODA's Twitter * reply * retweet * favorite

United Nations

    
        * Site Map
    * Contact Us
    * Copyright
    * Fraud Alert
    * Privacy Notice
    * Terms of Use
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

