

Abort73.com > The Case Against Abortion > Prenatal Development > Part of the
Mother's Body?

    
        * Videos / 
    * Gear / 
    * Blog
    

# ![Abort73.com / Abortion Unfiltered](/images/abort73-logo-wh.png)

    
        * ![](/images/facebook.gif)
    * ![](/images/twitter.gif)
    * ![](/images/youtube.gif)
    * ![](/images/pinterest.gif)
    * ![](/images/instagram.gif)
    * /abort73
    
    * The Case Against Abortion
      * -- WHY ABORTION IS WRONG --
      * Medical Testimony: _A new human being comes into existence during the process of fertilization._
      * Prenatal Development: _Growth in the womb is a rapid process; all systems are in place by week eight._
      * Rights of Personhood: _It is unjust and inaccurate to classify certain human beings as "non-persons."_
      * Abortion Procedures: _All abortion methods violate the most basic medical tenet: "Do No Harm."_
      * Abortion Pictures: _Abortion is an act of violence against an innocent human being._
      * -- WHY THE LAW SHOULD PROTECT UNBORN CHILDREN --
      * The Role of Law: _It is reasonable and necessary for society to outlaw certain "choices."_
      * Competing Rights: _The right to not be killed supersedes the right to not be pregnant._
      * Common Abortion Fallacies: _Poverty, rape, disability, and "unwantedness" do not morally justify abortion._
      * Inconsequential Differences: _The differences between embryos and newborns are differences that don't matter._
      * Systematic Dehumanization: _Abortion is condemnable for the same reasons as slavery and the Holocaust._
      * A Future Lost: _Like any act of homicide, abortion steals from its victims their future life._
      * The Uncertainty Principle: _If abortion might kill a person, then abortion must not be done._
      * -- SECONDARY ARGUMENTS AGAINST ABORTION --
      * Abortion and Race: _For decades, abortion has disproportionately eliminated minority babies._
      * Abortion and Gendercide: _Around the globe, abortion is shrinking the female population at an alarming rate._
      * Abortion for Profit: _Many abortion supporters have a huge financial stake in keeping abortion legal._
      * Post-Abortion Syndrome: _Abortion often leaves women with a lifetime of mental anguish._
      * Abortion Risks: _Significant risk factors (like breast cancer) have been associated with abortion._
      * Child Abuse: _America has become a more violent place for born children since abortion was legalized._
      * Abortion Alternatives: _Pregnancy care centers help eliminate the financial burden of pregnancy._
      * CLICK HERE FOR MORE ARGUMENTS IN THE CASE AGAINST ABORTION
    * Facts About Abortion
      * -- STATISTICS --
      * U.S. Abortion Statistics
      * Canadian Abortion Statistics
      * U.K. Abortion Statistics
      * Australian Abortion Statistics
      * New Zealand Abortion Statistics
      * Worldwide Abortion Statistics
      * -- LEGALITY --
      * U.S. Abortion Law
      * -- HISTORY --
      * U.S. Abortion History
      * Ancient Abortion History
      * -- RELATED TOPICS --
      * Birth Control and Abortion
      * Stem Cell Research and Abortion
      * Vaccines and Abortion
    * Bringing an End to Abortion
      * -- THE ABORT73 APPROACH --
      * Education Before Legislation
      * Marketing Past the Stereotypes
      * 10 Ways to Promote Abort73
      * -- FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS --
      * How Will We Care for the "Extra" Children?
      * What About Illegal Abortions?
      * Is Abortion Ever Justified?
      * -- WHY CHRISTIANS SHOULD CARE --
      * A Biblical Mandate to Do Something About Abortion
      * Biblical Morality
      * Answering Common Objections to Involvement
      * Would Jesus Show Graphic Abortion Pictures?
    
    * Donate
    
    * The Abort73 Blog
    * Abort73 Videos
    * Abort73 Gear
    * Donate to Abort73
    

# thecaseagainstabortion @abort73

# Part of the Mother's Body?

## From conception onward, pregnancy involves two (or more) separate bodies.

# Part of the Mother's Body?

## From conception onward, pregnancy involves two (or more) separate bodies.

> #### Page Summary:

##### The slogan, "My Body, My Choice," betrays a tragic misunderstanding of

what is taking place inside the womb. At no point in pregnancy is the
developing embryo or fetus simply a part of the mother's body.

There are a number of clear biological facts, and all sorts of legal
precedents, that easily refute the claim that the embryo or fetus is simply
part of the mother's body. Consider the following:

    
        1. An individual's body parts all share the same genetic code. If the unborn child were actually a part of the mother's body, the unborn's cells would have the same genetic code as the cells of the mother. This is not the case. Every cell of the unborn's body is genetically distinct from every cell in the mother's body. Though it's possible for someone to have a transplanted organ that does not share the same genetic code as the rest their body, that transplanted organ _does_ match the genetic code of the original donor. The same can not be said of an unborn child.
    2. Human embryos are not independently generated by the woman. According to former United States Surgeon General, C. Everett Koop,"we should not view the unborn baby as an extension of the woman's body [because] it did not originate only from the woman. The baby would not exist without the man's seed."1
    3. In many cases, the blood type of the unborn child is different than the blood type of the mother. Since one body cannot function with two different blood types, this is clearly not the mother's blood. 
    4. In half of all pregnancies, the unborn child is a male, meaning that even the sex of the child is different from the mother. 
    5. As Randy Alcorn states in his book _Pro-Life Answers to Pro-Choice Arguments_ , "A Chinese zygote implanted in a Swedish woman will always be Chinese, not Swedish, because his identity is based on his genetic code, not on that of the body in which he resides."2
    6. It is possible for a fetus to die while the mother lives, and it is possible for the mother to die while the fetus lives. This could not be true if the mother and child were simply one person. 
    7. When the embryo implants in the lining of the uterus, it emits chemical substances which weaken the woman's immune system within the uterus so that this tiny "foreign" body is not rejected by the woman's body. Were this tiny embryo simply "part of the woman's body," there would be no need to locally disable the woman's immunities. 
    8. It is illegal to execute a pregnant woman on death row because the fetus living inside her is a distinct human being who cannot be executed for the crimes of the mother.3
    9. As of February 2013, at least 38 states have fetal homicide laws which protect the rights of unborn children independently of the mother (except in the case of abortion).4 These laws make it possible to charge someone who kills a pregnant woman with _two_ counts of murder.
    10. Sir Albert Liley (the "Father of Fetology") made this observation in a 1970 speech entitled, "The Termination of Pregnancy or the Extermination of the Fetus?"
    

> Physiologically, we must accept that the conceptus is, in a very large
measure, in charge of the pregnancy.... Biologically, at no stage can we
subscribe to the view that the fetus is a mere appendage of the mother. 5

    
        11. The late Christopher Hitchens, a prominent public intellectual, atheist, and abortion advocate wrote the following in his book, _God is Not Great_:
    

> As a materialist, I think it has been demonstrated that an embryo is a
separate body and entity, and not merely (as some really did used to argue) a
growth on or in the female body. There used to be feminists who would say that
it was more like an appendix or even --this was seriously maintained--a tumor.
That nonsense seems to have stopped… Embryology confirms morality. The words
"unborn child," even when used in a politicized manner, describe a material
reality.6

No matter how you spin it, women don't have four arms and four legs when
they're pregnant. Those extra appendages belong to the tiny human being(s)
living inside of them. At _no_ point in pregnancy is the developing embryo or
fetus simply a part of the mother's body.

This page was last updated on July 25, 2014. To cite this page in a research
paper, visit: "Citing Abort73 as a Source."

Footnotes

    
        1. C. Everett Koop, M.D., and Francis A. Schaeffer, _Whatever Happened to the Human Race?_ (Fleming H. Revell Company, 1979), 40.
    2. Randy Alcorn, _Pro-Life Answers to Pro-Choice Arguments_ (Multnomah Publishers, 2000), 57.
    3. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: Article 6.5
    4. "Fetal Homicide Laws," National Conference of State Legislatures http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/health/fetal-homicide-state-laws.aspx February 2013.
    5. Sir William Albert Liley,"The Termination of Pregnancy or the Extermination of the Fetus?" cited by Randy Alcorn, _Pro-Life Answers to Pro-Choice Arguments_ , 58.
    6. Christopher Hitchens, _God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything_ (Hachette Book Group. Kindle Edition, 2009), 378-379.
    

Continue to the next page: Rights of Personhood

#### Parent Page:

    
        * Prenatal Development: _Growth in the womb is a rapid process; all systems are in place by week eight._
    

### Get Help

If you’re pregnant and contemplating abortion, what a mercy that you’ve found
this website! Abortion is not the answer— _no matter what anyone is telling
you._

Click here to find local help.

Click here for hundreds of real-life abortion stories.

### Get Involved

Abortion persists because of ignorance, apathy and confusion. Abort73 is
working to change that; you can help! Get started below:

![Life’s Greatest Blessings Are

Unplanned](/gear_images/graphics/lifes_greatest_blessings_are_unplanned/sidebar.jpg)

#### Social Media Graphics:

Post them online to introduce your friends, fans or followers to Abort73.com.

![Without Life, There is No

Liberty](/gear_images/shirts/without_life_there_is_no_liberty/sidebar.jpg)

#### Abort73 Shirts:

Be a walking billboard for Abort73.com.

![Birth Dates for

All!](/gear_images/promo_cards/birth_dates_for_all/sidebar.jpg)

#### Abort73 Promo Cards:

Stash some in your wallet or purse and be ready to hand them out or
strategically leave them behind.

![Abort73 \(Vandy\)](/downloadable_flyers/abort73_vandy/sidebar.gif)

#### Downloadable Flyers:

Print. Copy. Distribute. Full and quarter-page sizes available. Post to
student bulletin boards or use as handouts!

### Support Abort73

Do you shop on Amazon? If so, use the link below and Abort73 gets 4-7% of your
total spend!

![{title}](/images/amazon.png)

Giving Assistant is another way raise money for Abort73 at thousands of online
retailers. Use the link below to get started:

![Online

Fundraising](https://product.givingassistant.org/ngo/badges/v1/Giving_Assistant_lg_Color_Background_988.png)

Use **Giving Assistant** to save money and support **Loxafamosity Ministries
Inc. (Abort73)**

###### Abort73 Gear:

    
        * Shirts / Retired Shirts
    * Stickers / Pens
    * Accessories / Promo Cards
    * Downloadable Flyers
    * Books / Booklets
    * Graphics
    

###### Abort73 Social:

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * YouTube
    * Pinterest
    * Flickr
    

###### Loxafamosity Ministries:

    
        * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Donate
    * Budget
    * Site Map
    * Citing Abort73 as a Source
    

###### Email List:

Sign up for the latest Abort73 news and announcements:

Copyright © 2005-2019 Loxafamosity Ministries, Inc.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

