

# White trash

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For other uses, see White trash (disambiguation).

![Outdoor scene of a man and woman seated on chairs in front of a group of ten

children of varying ages, barefoot and wearing simple

clothing](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/00/The_10%2C000_Hookworm_Family.jpg/425px-

The_10%2C000_Hookworm_Family.jpg)

This poor white family from Alabama was presented in 1913 as "celebrities"
because they had escaped the debilitating effects of hookworm disease, which,
along with pellagra was endemic among poor Southern whites due to poor
sanitation and the phenomenon of "clay eating" (geophagia).

**White trash** is a derogatory American English slur referring to poor white
people, especially in the rural southern United States. The label signifies a
social class inside the white population and especially a degraded standard of
living.[1]

The term has been adopted for people living on the fringes of the social
order, who are seen as dangerous because they may be criminal, unpredictable,
and without respect for political, legal, or moral authority.[2] While the
term is mostly used pejoritavely by urban and middle-class whites as a class
signifier,[3] some white entertainers self-identify as "white trash" and
celebrate the stereotypes and social marginalization of lower-class
whiteness.[4][5][6]

In common usage, "white trash" overlaps in meaning with "cracker", used of
people in the backcountry of the Southern states; "hillbilly", regarding poor
people from Appalachia; "Okie" regarding those with origins in Oklahoma; and
"redneck", regarding rural origins; especially in the South.[7] The primary
difference is that "redneck", "cracker", "Okie", and "hillbilly" emphasize
that a person is poor and uneducated and comes from the backwoods with little
awareness of and interaction with the modern world, while "white trash" - and
the modern term "trailer trash" - emphasizes the person's moral failings.[8]

Scholars from the late 19th to the early 21st century explored generations of
families who were considered "disreputable", such as The Jukes family and The
Kallikak Family, both pseudonyms for real families. [9]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Description and causes
    * 2 History
      * 2.1 During the Civil War
      * 2.2 During Reconstruction
      * 2.3 Scalawags and rednecks
      * 2.4 The Depression
      * 2.5 "Trailer trash"
    * 3 In popular culture
      * 3.1 Violence
      * 3.2 White popular culture
      * 3.3 Black popular culture
        * 3.3.1 Mainstream literature
    * 4 See also
    * 5 Notes
    * 6 References
    * 7 Further reading
    * 8 External links
    

## Description and causes[edit]

In the popular imagination of the mid-19th century, "poor white trash" were a
"curious" breed of degenerate, gaunt, haggard people who suffered from
numerous physical and social defects. They were dirty, callow, ragged,
cadaverous, leathery, and emaciated, and had feeble children with distended
abdomens who were wrinkled and withered and looked aged beyond their physical
years, so that even 10-year-olds' "countenances are stupid and heavy and they
often become dropsical and loathsome to sight," according to a New Hampshire
schoolteacher. The skin of a poor white Southerner had a "ghastly yellowish-
white" tinge to it, like "yellow parchment", and was waxy looking, or they
were so white they almost appeared to be albinos. They were listless and
slothful, did not properly care for their children, and were addicted to
alcohol. They were looked on with contempt by upper-class Southerners.[10]

Harriet Beecher Stowe described a white trash woman and her children in _Dred:
A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp_ , published in 1856:

> Crouched on a pile of dirty straw, sat a miserable haggard woman, with
large, wild eyes, sunken cheeks, disheveled matted hair, and long, lean hands,
like a bird's claws. At her skinny breast an emaciated infant was hanging,
pushing, with its little skeleton hands, as if to force nourishment which
nature no longer gave; and two scared-looking children, with features wasted
and pinched blue with famine, were clinging to her gown. The whole group
huddled together, drawing as far away as possible from the new comer [ _sic_
], looking up with large, frightened eyes, like hunted wild animals.[11]

Poor white trash were generally only able to locate themselves on the worst
land in the South, since the best land was taken by the slaveholders, large
and small. They lived and attempted to survive on land that was sandy or
swampy or covered in scrub pine and not suited for agriculture; for this they
became known as "sandhillers" and "pineys".[12] These "hard-scratch"
inhabitants were seen to match their surroundings: they were "stony, stumpy,
and shrubby, as they land they lived on."[13]

Restricted from holding political office due to property qualifications, their
ability to vote at the mercy of the courts which were controlled by the slave-
holding planters, poor whites had few advocates within the political system or
the dominant social hierarchy. Although many were tenant farmers or day
laborers, other white trash people were forced to live as scavengers, thieves
and vagrants, but all, employed or not, were socially ostracized by "proper"
white society by being forced to use the back door when entering "proper"
homes. Even slaves looked down on them: when poor whites came begging for
food, the slaves called them "stray goats."[14]

Northerners claimed that the existence of white trash was the result of the
system of slavery in the South, while Southerners worried that these clearly
inferior whites would upset the "natural" class system which held that all
whites were superior to all other races, especially blacks. People of both
regions expressed concern that if the number of white trash people increased
significantly, they would threaten the Jeffersonian ideal of a population of
educated white freemen as the basis of a robust American democracy.[15]

In his classic study, _Democracy in America_ (1835), French aristocrat Alexis
de Tocqueville sees the state of poor white southerners as being one of the
effects of the slave system. He describes them as ignorant, idle, prideful,
self-indulgent, and weak, and writes about southern whites in general:

> From birth, the southern American is invested with a kind of domestic
dictatorship ... and the first habit he learns is that of effortless
domination ... [which turns] the southern American into a haughty, hasty,
irascible, violent man, passionate in his desires and irritated by obstacles.
But he is easily discouraged if he fails to succeed at his first attempt.[16]

Another theory held that the degraded condition of poor white southerners was
the result of their living in such close proximity to blacks and Native
Americans. Samuel Stanhope Smith, a minister and educator who was the seventh
president of Princeton College, wrote in 1810 that poor white southerners
lived in "a state of absolute savagism," which caused them to resemble Indians
in the color of their skin and their clothing, a belief that was endemic in
the 18th and early 19th century. Smith saw them as a stumbling block in the
evolution of mainstream American whites,[17] a view that had previously been
expressed by Michel-Guillaume-Jean de Crèvecoeur in his 1782 book, _Letters
from an American Farmer_. Crèvecoeur, a French soldier-diplomat who resettled
in the United States and changed his name to J. Hector St. John, considered
poor white southerners to be "not ... a very pleasing spectacle" and inferior
to the prototypical American he celebrated in his book, but still hopes that
the effects of progress would improve the condition of these mongrelized,
untamed, half-savage drunken people who exhibit "the most hideous parts of our
society."[18]

For Ralph Waldo Emerson, the transcendentalist and pre-eminant American
lecturer, writer and philosopher of the mid-nineteenth century, poor people of
all kinds - including poor white Southerners - lived in poverty because of
inherent traits in their nature. The poor were "ferried over the Atlantic &
carted to America to ditch & to drudge, to make the land fertile ... and then
to lie down prematurely to make a spot of greener grass..." These people
Emerson referred to as "guano" were fated to inhabit the lowest niches of
society, and he specifically excluded them from his definition of what an
_American_ was. Emerson's "American" was of Saxon heritage, descended from the
Danes, Norsemen, Saxons and Anglo-Saxons, known for their "excess of
virility", their "beastly ferocity", and - at least in Emerson's eyes - their
beauty. These were not traits which were shared by the poor white Southerner.
Americans may have degenerated somewhat in comparison to their ancestors, one
of the weakening effects of civilization, but they still maintained their
superiority over other "races", and white Southerners of all kinds, but
especially poor ones, were themselves inferior to their countrymen from New
England and the north.[19]

Some, such a Theodore Roosevelt, saw poor "degenerate" whites - as well as the
mass of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe (those from northern
Europe having been accepted in the Ango-Saxon white race) - as being a major
part of the problem of "race suicide", the concept that poor whites and
unwanted immigrants would eventually out-procreate those of the dominant and
superior white "race", causing it to die out or be supplanted, to the
detriment of the country.[20]

## History[edit]

Beginning in the early 17th century, the City of London shipped their unwanted
excess population, including vagrant children, to the American colonies -
especially the Colony of Virginia, the Province of Maryland, and the Province
of Pennsylvania - where they became not apprentices, as the children had been
told, but indentured servants, especially working in the fields. Even before
the beginning of the Atlantic slave trade brought Africans to the British
colonies in 1619, this influx of "transported" Britons, Scots, and Irish was a
crucial part of the American workforce. The Virginia Company also imported
boatloads of poor women to be sold as brides. The numbers of these all-but-
slaves was significant: by the middle of the 17th century, at a time when the
population of Virginia was 11,000, only 300 were Africans, who were
outnumbered by British, Irish and Scots indentured servants. In New England,
one-fifth of the Puritans were indentured servants. More indentured servants
were sent to the colonies as a result of insurrections in Ireland. Oliver
Cromwell sent hundreds of Irish Catholics to British North America during the
Irish Confederate Wars (1641-1653). In 1717, the Parliament of Great Britain
passed the Transportation Act 1717, which allowed for the penal transportation
of tens of thousands of convicts to North America, in order to alleviate
overcrowding in British prisons. By the time penal transportation ceased
during the American Revolutionary War (1775-1783), some 50,000 people had been
transported to the New World under the law. When the American market closed to
them, the convicts were then sent to Australia. In total, 300,000 to 400,000
people were shipped to the North American colonies as unfree laborers, between
1/2 and 2/3 of all white immigrants.[21]

The British conceived of the American colonies as a "wasteland", and a place
to dump their underclass.[22] The people they sent there were "waste people",
the "scum and dregs" of society. The term "waste people" gave way to
"squatters" and "crackers", used to describe the settlers who populated the
Western frontier of the United States and the backcountry of some southern
states, but who did not have title to the land they settled on.[23] "Cracker"
was especially used in the south.

The first use of "white trash" in print to describe this population occurred
in 1821.[24] It came into common use in the 1830s as a pejorative used by
house slaves against poor whites. In 1833, Fanny Kemble, an English actress
visiting Georgia, noted in her journal: "The slaves themselves entertain the
very highest contempt for white servants, whom they designate as 'poor white
trash'".[25][26]

The term achieved widespread popularity in the 1850s,[24] and by 1855, it had
passed into common usage by upper-class whites, and was common usage among all
Southerners, regardless of race, throughout the rest of the 19th century.[27]

In 1854, Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote the chapter "Poor White Trash" in her
book _A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin_. Stowe wrote that slavery not only produces
"degraded, miserable slaves", but also poor whites who are even more degraded
and miserable. The plantation system forced those whites to struggle for
subsistence. Beyond economic factors, Stowe traces this class to the shortage
of schools and churches in their community, and says that both blacks and
whites in the area look down on these "poor white trash".[28] In Stowe's
second novel _Dred_ , she describes the poor white inhabitants of that swamp,
which formed much of the border between Virginia and North Carolina, as an
ignorant, degenerate and immoral class of people prone to criminality.[29]
Hinton Rowan Helper's extremely influential 1857 book _The Impending Crisis of
the South_ \- which sold 140,000 copies and was considered to be the most
important book of the 19th century by many people - describes the region's
poor Caucasians as a class oppressed by the effects of slavery, a people of
lesser physical stature who would be driven to extinction by the South's
"cesspool of degradation and ignorance."[30]

### During the Civil War[edit]

During the Civil War, the Confederacy instituted conscription to raise
soldiers for its army, with all men between the ages of 18 and 35 being
eligible to be drafted - later expanded to all men between 17 and 50. However,
exemptions were numerous, including any slave-owner with more than 20 slaves,
political officeholders, teachers, ministers and clerks, and men who worked in
valuable trades. Left to be drafted, or to serve as paid substitutes, were
poor white trash Southerners, who were looked down on as cannon fodder.
Conscripts who failed to report for duty were hunted down by so-called "dog
catchers". Poor southerners said that it was a "rich man's war", but "a poor
man's fight." While upper-class Southern "cavalier" officers were granted
frequent furloughs to return home, this was not the case with the ordinary
private soldier, which led to an extremely high rate of desertion among this
group, who put their families well-being above the cause of the Confederacy,
and thought of themselves as "Conditional Confederates." Deserters harassed
soldiers, raided farms and stole food, and sometimes banded together in
settlements, such as the "Free State of Jones" (formerly Jones County) in
Mississippi; desertion was openly joked about. When found, deserters could be
executed, or humiliated by being put into chains.[31]

Despite the war being fought to protect the right of the patrician elite of
the South to own slaves, the planter class was reluctant to give up their cash
crop, cotton, to grow the corn and grain needed by the Confederate armies and
the civilian population. As a result, food shortages, exacerbated by inflation
and hoarding of foodstuffs by the rich, caused the poor of the South to suffer
greatly. This led to food riots of angry mobs of poor women, who raided
stores, warehouses and depots looking for sustenance for their families. Both
the male deserters and the female rioters put the lie to the myth of
Confederate unity, and that the war was being fought for the rights of all
white Southerners.[32]

Ideologically, the Confederacy claimed that the system of slavery in the South
was superior to the class divisions of the North, because while the South
devolved all its degrading labor onto what it saw as an inferior race, the
black slaves, the North did so to its own "brothers in blood", the white
working class. This the leaders and intellectuals of the Confederacy called
"mudsill" democracy, and lauded the superiority of the pure-blooded Southern
slave-owning "cavaliers" - who were worth five Northerners in a fight - over
the sullied Anglo-Saxon upper class of the North.[33] For its part, some of
the military leaders of the North, especially Generals Ulysses S. Grant and
William Tecumseh Sherman, recognized that their fight was not only to liberate
slaves, but also the poor white Southerners who were oppressed by the system
of slavery. Thus they took steps to exploit the class divisions between the
white trash population and plantation owners. An Army chaplain wrote in a
letter to his wife after the Union siege of Petersburg, Virginia that winning
the war would not only result in the end of American slavery, but would also
increase opportunities for "poor white trash." He said that the war would
"knock off the shackles of millions of poor whites, whose bondage was really
worse than that African." In these respects, the Civil War was in large part a
class war.[34]

### During Reconstruction[edit]

After the war, President Andrew Johnson's first idea for the reconstruction of
the South was not to take steps to create an egalitarian democracy. Instead,
he envisioned what was essentially a "white trash republic", in which the
aristocracy would maintain their property holdings and an amount of social
power, but be disenfranchised until they could show their loyalty to the
Union. The freed blacks would no longer be slaves, but would still be denied
essential rights of citizenship and would make up the lowest rung on the
social ladder. In between would be the poor white Southerner, the white trash,
who while occupying a lesser social position, would essentially become the
masters of the South, voting and occupying political offices, and maintaining
a superior status to the free blacks and freed slaves. Emancipated from the
inequities of the plantation system, poor white trash would become the bulwark
of Johnson's rebuilding of the South and its restoration into the Union.[35]

Johnson's plan was never put into effect, and the Freedmen's Bureau - which
was created in 1865, before President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated - was
authorized to help "all refugees and all freedmen", black and white alike. The
agency did this despite Johnson's basic lack of concern for the freed slaves
the war had supposedly been fought over. But even though they provided relief
to them, the Bureau did not accept Johnson's vision of poor whites as the
loyal and honorable foundation of a reconstructed South. Northern journalists
and other observers maintained that poor white trash, who were now destitute
refugees, "beggars, dependents, houseless and homeless wanderers", were still
victimized by poverty and vagrancy. They were "loafers" dressed in rags and
covered in filth who did no work, but accepted government relief handouts.
They were seen as only slightly more intelligent than blacks. One observer,
James R. Gilmore, a cotton merchant and novelist who had traveled throughout
the South, wrote the book _Down in Tennessee_ , published in 1864, in which he
differentiated poor whites into two groups, "mean whites" and "common whites".
While the former were thieves, loafers, and brutes, the latter were law-
abiding citizens who were enterprising and productive. It was the "mean"
minority who gave white trash their bad name and character.[36]

A number of commentators noted that poor white Southerners did not compare
favorably to freed blacks, who were described as "capable, thrifty, and loyal
to the Union." Marcus Sterling, a Freedmen's Bureau agent and a former Union
officer, said that the "pitiable class of poor whites" were "the only class
which seem almost unaffected by the [bureau's] great benevolence and its bold
reform", while in contrast black freedmen had become "more settled,
industrious and ambitious," eager to learn how to read and improve themselves.
Sidney Andrews saw in black a "shrewd instinct for preservation" which poor
whites did not have, and Whitelaw Reid, a politician and newspaper editor from
Ohio, thought that black children appeared eager to learn. _Atlantic Monthly_
went so far as to suggest that government policy should switch from
"disenfranchis[ing] the humble, quiet, hardworking Negro" and cease to provide
help to the "worthless barbarian", the "ignorant, illiterate, and vicious"
white trash population.[37]

So, during the Reconstruction Era, white trash were no longer seen simply as a
freakish, degenerate breed who lived almost invisibly in the backcountry
wilderness, the war had brought them out of the darkness into the mainstream
of society, where they developed the reputation of being a dangerous class of
criminals, vagrants and delinquents, lacking intelligence, unable to speak
properly, the "Homo genus without the sapien", an evolutionary dead end in the
Social Darwinist thinking of the time. Plus, they were immoral, breaking all
social codes and sexual norms, engaging in incest and prostitution, pimping
out family members, and producing numerous in-bred bastard children.[38]

### Scalawags and rednecks[edit]

One of the responses of Southerners and Northern Democrats after the war to
Reconstruction was the invention of the myth of the "carpetbaggers", those
Northern Republican scoundrels and adventurers who invaded the South to take
advantage of its people, but less well known is that of the "scalawags", those
Southern white who betrayed their race by supporting the Republican Party and
Reconstruction. The scalawag, even if they came from a higher social class,
was often described as having a "white trash heart". They were accused of
easily mingling with blacks, inviting them to dine in their homes, and
inciting them by encouraging them to seek social equality. The Democrats
retaliated with _Autobiography of a Scalawag_ , a parody of the standard
"self-made man" story, in which a white trash southerner with no innate
ambition nevertheless is raised to a position of middling power just by being
in the right place at the right time or by lying and cheating.[39]

Around 1890, the term "redneck" began to be widely used for poor white
southerners, especially those racist followers of the Democratic demagogues of
the time. Rednecks were found working in the mills, living deep in the swamps,
heckling at Republican rallies, and were even occasionally elected to be a
state legislator. Such was the case with Guy Rencher, who claimed that
"redneck" came from his own "long red neck".[40]

### The Depression[edit]

The beginning of the 20th century brought no change of status for poor white
southerners, especially after the onset of the Great Depression. The condition
of this class was presented to the public in Margaret Bourke-White's
photographic series for _Life_ magazine, and the work of other photographers
made for Roy Stryker's Historical Section of the federal Resettlement Agency.
Author James Agee wrote about them in his ground-breaking work _Let Us Now
Praise Famous Men_ (1941), as did Jonathan Daniels in _A Southerner Discovers
the South_ (1938).[41]

A number of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal agencies tried to help the rural
poor to better themselves and to break through the social barriers of Southern
society which held them back, reinstating the American Dream of upward
mobility. Programs such as those of the Subsistence Homesteads Division of the
Department of the Interior; its successor, the Resettlement Administration,
whose express purpose was to help the poor in rural areas; and its
replacement, the Farm Security Administration which aimed to break the cycle
of tenant farming and sharecropping and help poor whites and black to own
their own farms, and to initiate the creation of the communities necessary to
support those farms. The agencies also provided services for migrant workers,
such as the Arkies and Okies, who had been devastated by the Dust Bowl - the
condition of which was well-documented by photographer Dorothea Lange in _An
American Exodus_ (1939) - and been forced to take to the road, jamming all
their belongings into Ford motorcars and heading west toward California.[41]

Important in the devising and running of these programs were politicians and
bureaucrats such as Henry Wallace, the Secretary of Agriculture; Milburn
Lincoln Wilson, the first head of the Subsistence Homesteads Division, who was
a social scientist and an agricultural expert; and Rexford G. Tugwell, a
Columbia University economics professor who managed to be appointed the first
head of the Resettlement Agency, despite refusing to present himself with a
"homely, democratic manner" in his confirmation hearings. Tugwell understood
that the status of tenant farmers would not change if they could not vote, so
he campaigned against poll tax, which prevented them voting, since they could
not afford to pay it. His agency's goals were the four "R's": "retirement of
bad land, relocation of rural poor, resettlement of the unemployed in suburban
communities, and rehabilitation of farm families."[41]

Other individuals important in the fight to help the rural poor were Arthur
Raper, an expert on tenancy farming, whose study _Preface to Peasantry_ (1936)
explained why the south's system held back the region's poor and caused them
to migrate; and Howard Odum, a University of North Carolina sociologist and
psychologist who founded the journal _Social Forces_ , and worked closely with
the Federal government. Odum wrote the 600-page masterwork _Southern Regions
of the United States_ , which became a guidebook for the New Deal. Journalist
Gerald W. Johnson translated Odum's ideas in the book into a popular volume,
_The Wasted Land_. It was Odum who, in 1938, mailed questionnaires to
academics to determine their views on what "poor white" meant to them. The
results were in many ways indistinguishable from the popular views of "white
trash" that had been held for many decades, since the words that came back all
indicated serious character flaws in poor whites: "purposeless, hand to mouth,
lazy, unambitious, no account, no desire to improve themselves, inertia", but,
most often, "shiftless". Despite the passage of time, poor whites were still
seen as white trash, a breed apart, a class partway between blacks and whites,
whose shiftless ways may have even originated from their proximity to
blacks.[41]

### "Trailer trash"[edit]

Trailers got their start in the 1930s, and their use proliferated during the
housing shortage of World War II, when the Federal government used as many as
30,000 of them to house defense workers, soldiers and sailors throughout the
country, but especially around areas with a large military or defense
presence, such as Mobile, Alabama and Pascagoula, Mississippi. In her book
_Journey Through Chaos_ , reporter Agnes Meyer of _The Washington Post_
travelled throughout the country, reporting on the condition of the "neglected
rural areas", and described the people who lived in the trailers, tents and
shacks in such areas as malnourished, unable to read or write, and generally
ragged. The workers who came to Mobile and Pascagoula to work in the shipyards
there were from the backwoods of the South, "subnormal swamp and mountain
folk" whom the locals described as "vermin"; elsewhere, they were called
"squatters". They were accused of having loose morals, high illegitimacy
rates, and of allowing prostitution to thrive in their "Hillbilly Havens". The
trailers themselves - sometimes purchased second- or third-hand - were often
unsightly, unsanitary and dilapidated, causing communities to zone them away
from the more desirable areas, which meant away from schools, stores, and
other necessary facilities, often literally on the other side of the railroad
tracks.[42]

In the mid-20th century, poor whites who could not afford to buy suburban-
style tract housing began to purchase mobile homes, which were not only
cheaper, but which could be easily relocated if work in one location ran out.
These - sometimes by choice and sometimes through local zoning laws - gathered
in trailer camps, and the people who lived in them became known as "trailer
trash". Despite many of them having jobs, albeit sometimes itinerant ones, the
character flaws that had been perceived in poor white trash in the past were
transferred to so-called "trailer trash", and trailer camps or parks were seen
as being inhabited by retired persons, migrant workers, and, generally, the
poor. By 1968, a survey found that only 13% of those who owned and lived in
mobile homes had white collar jobs.[42]

## In popular culture[edit]

### Violence[edit]

American pop culture connects both drinking and violence to being a white,
poor, rural man.[43] The historian David Hackett Fischer, a Professor of
History at Brandeis University, makes a case for an enduring genetic basis for
a "willingness to resort to violence" (citing especially the finding of high
blood levels of testosterone) in the four main chapters of his book _Albion's
Seed_.[44] He proposes that a Mid-Atlantic state, Southern and Western
propensity for violence is inheritable by genetic changes wrought over
generations living in traditional herding societies in Northern England, the
Scottish Borders, and Irish Border Region. He proposes that this propensity
has been transferred to other ethnic groups by shared culture, whence it can
be traced to different urban populations of the United States.[45]

### White popular culture[edit]

Harriet Beecher Stowe's 1854 book _A Key to Uncle Tom’s Cabin_ contains a
chapter entitled "Poor White Trash". Stowe wrote slavery produced “a poor
white population as degraded and brutal as ever existed in any of the most
crowded districts of Europe.” She further expressed that this “inconceivably
brutal” group of whites resemble “some blind, savage monster, which, when
aroused, tramples heedlessly over everything in its way.”[46]

White supremacist Daniel R. Hundley’s 1860 book _Social Relations in Our
Southern States_ includes a chapter entitled "White Trash". He used the
supposed existence of poor whites with bad blood to argue that genetics and
not societal structure was the problem, and that therefore slavery was
justified. He called white trash the "laziest two-legged animals that walk
erect on the face of the Earth", describing their appearance as "lank, lean,
angular, and bony, with ... sallow complexion, awkward manners, and a natural
stupidity or dullness of intellect that almost surpasses belief."[46] George
Bernard Shaw uses the term in his 1909 play _The Shewing-Up of Blanco Posnet_
, set in the wild American west. The prostitute Feemy says to Blanco "I'll
hang you, you dirty horse-thief; or not a man in this camp will ever get a
word or a look from me again. You're just trash: that's what you are. White
trash."

Ernest Matthew Mickler's _White Trash Cooking_ (1986), based on the cooking of
rural white Southerners, enjoyed an unanticipated rise to
popularity.[47][48][49] Sherrie A. Inness writes that authors such as Mickler
use humor to convey the experience of living on the margins of white society,
and to expand the definition of American culinary history beyond upper-class
traditions based on European cooking.[50]

By the 1980s, fiction was being published by Southern authors who identified
as having redneck or white trash origins, such as Harry Crews, Dorothy
Allison, Larry Brown, and Tim McLaurin.[51] Autobiographies sometimes mention
white trash origins. Gay rights activist Amber L. Hollibaugh wrote, "I grew up
a mixed-race, white-trash girl in a country that considered me dangerous,
corrupt, fascinating, exotic. I responded to the challenge by becoming that
alarming, hazardous, sexually disruptive woman."[52]

In 2006, Toby Keith released a platinum album called _White Trash with Money_.

Dolly Parton regularly referred to herself as white trash telling _Southern
Living_ "White trash! I am. People always say, 'Aren't you insulted when
people call you white trash?' I say, 'Well it depends on who's calling me
white trash and how they mean it.' But we really were, to some degree. Because
when you're that poor and you're not educated, you fall in those categories.".
[53][54] Talking about her fame she said "There’s nothing like white trash at
the White House!"[55][56] She cheerfully told _Rolling Stone_ she will always
remain "a white-trash person".[57]

President Jimmy Carter quoted a supporter who called him “white trash made
good”.[58] In his 2001 biography _An Hour Before Daylight: Memories of a Rural
Boyhood_ , Carter wrote about poor white people in the 1920s and 1930s rural
Georgia "For those who were lazy or dishonest, or had repulsive personal
habits, 'white trash' was a greater insult than any epithet based on
race."[59] People Magazine lampooned a book on Carter as a "Southern white
trash novel" [60]

    
        * **1900** - Evelyn Greenleaf Sutherland's play _Po' White Trash_ , exposes complicated cultural tensions in the post-Reconstruction South, related to the social and racial status of poor whites.[61]
    * **1907?** - O Henry's short story "Shoes" refers to the male protagonist "Pink Dawson" - which the narrator consistently confuses with "Dink Pawson" - as "Poor white trash".[62]
    * **1986** - Ernest Matthew Mickler's self-deprecating cookbook _White Trash Cooking_ contains recipes from the American South East.[63]
    

### Black popular culture[edit]

Use of "white trash" epithets has been extensively reported in African
American culture.[64][65][66] Black authors have noted that blacks, when
taunted by whites as "niggers", taunted back, calling them "white trash".[65]
Some black parents taught their children that poor whites were "white
trash".[67] The epithet appears in black folklore.[68] As an example, slaves
(when out of earshot of whites) would refer to harsh slave owners as a "low
down" man, "lower than poor white trash", "a brute, really".[69]

#### Mainstream literature[edit]

    
        * **1948** - Zora Neale Hurston's _Seraph on the Suwanee_ explores images of "white trash" women. In 2000, Chuck Jackson argued in the _African American Review_ that Hurston's meditation on abjection, waste, and the construction of class and gender identities among poor whites reflects the eugenics discourses of the 1920s.[70]
    

## See also[edit]

    
        * Bogan and Hoon, in Australian and New Zealand English slang
    * Chav, in British slang
    * Class prejudice
    * Clay eater
    * Cracker
    * Eurotrash (term)
    * Gopnik
    

|

    
        * Peckerwood
    * Poor White
    * Redneck
    * Stereotypes of white people in the United States
    * Trailer trash
    * Yokel
    * Zef
    * List of ethnic slurs
    

\---|---

## Notes[edit]

    
        1. **^** Donnella, Leah (August 1, 2018). "Why Is It Still OK To 'Trash' Poor White People?". _Code Switch_. Washington, D.C.: National Public Radio. Retrieved  August 3, 2018.
    2. **^** Wray (2006), p. 2.
    3. **^** Hartigan (2003), pp. 97, 105.
    4. **^** Hartigan (2003), p. 107.
    5. **^** Hernandez, Leandra H. (2014). "'I was born this way': The performance and production of modern masculinity in A&E's Duck Dynasty". In Slade, A.F.; Narro, A.J.; Buchanan, B.P. (eds.). _Reality Television: Oddities of Culture_. Lexington Books. p. 27\. ISBN 978-0-73-918564-3.
    6. **^** Carroll, Hamilton (2011). _Affirmative Reaction: New Formations of White Masculinity_. Duke University Press. pp. 102–103. ISBN 978-0-82-234948-8.
    7. **^** Wray (2006), p. x.
    8. **^** Wray (2006), pp. 79, 102.
    9. **^** Rafter, Nicole Hahn (1988) _White Trash: The Eugenic Family Studies, 1877-1919_
    10. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 136, 146, 151-52, 167, 170.
    11. **^** Stowe, Harriet Beecher (2000) [1856]. _Dred: A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp_ Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press. pp.105-06. Quoted in Isenberg (2016), pp. 148-49
    12. **^** Isenberg (2016), p. 146.
    13. **^** Burton, Warren (1839) _White Slavery: A New Emancipation Cause Presented to the United States_. Worcester, Massachusetts. pp.168-69; quoted in Isenberg (2016), p. 146
    14. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 149–50.
    15. **^** Isenberg (2016), p. 136.
    16. **^** Painter (2010), pp. 126-27.
    17. **^** Painter (2010), pp. 117–18.
    18. **^** Painter (2010), pp. 107–109.
    19. **^** Painter (2010), pp. 167–74, 186–87.
    20. **^** Painter (2010), pp. 250–53.
    21. **^** Painter (2010), pp. 41–42.
    22. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. xxvi-xxvii, 17-42.
    23. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 105–132.
    24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Isenberg (2016), p. 135.
    25. **^** Kemble, Fannie (1835) _Journal_. p. 81
    26. **^** Wray (2006) suggests that the term may have originated in the Baltimore-Washington area during the 1840s, when Irish and blacks were competing for the same jobs. (pp. 42,p.44). The quote from Kemble is reprinted in page 41 of the book.
    27. **^** Newitz, Annalee; Wray, Matthew (July 1, 1997). "What is White Trash?" (PDF). In Hill, Mike (ed.). _Whiteness: a Critical Reader_. NYU Press. p. 170.
    28. **^** Wray (2006), pp. 57–58.
    29. **^** Isenberg (2016), p. 137.
    30. **^** Helper, Hinton Rowan (1968) [1857] _The Impending Crisis of the South_. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press; quoted in Isenberg (2016), p. 137
    31. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 159, 163–65.
    32. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 165–66.
    33. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 157–60.
    34. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 157–60, 172.
    35. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 176–78.
    36. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 177–80.
    37. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 179–80.
    38. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 180–81.
    39. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 182–86.
    40. **^** Isenberg (2016), pp. 187–90.
    41. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Isenberg (2016), pp. 206–230.
    42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Isenberg (2016), pp. 240–247.
    43. **^** Jason T. Eastman and Douglas P. Schrock, "Southern Rock Musicians' Construction of White Trash", _Race, Gender & Class_, Vol. 15, No. 1/2 (2008), pp. 205-219
    44. **^** particularly the chapter titled "Borderlands to the Backcountry: The Flight from Middle Britain and Northern Ireland, 1717-1775"
    45. **^** David Hackett Fischer, _Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America_ , (ISBN 0-19-506905-6), Oxford University Press, 1989.
    46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Culture, Center for the Study of Southern. "Revisiting Deliverance". _southernstudies.olemiss.edu_. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    47. **^** McDowell, Edwin (September 22, 1986). "Popular Cookbook Celebrates Down-Home Fare". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  March 4, 2019.
    48. **^** Edge, John T. (2007) " _White Trash Cooking_ , Twenty Years Later", _Southern Quarterly_. 44(2): pp. 88-94;
    49. **^** Smith, Dina (2004). "Cultural Studies' Misfit: White Trash Studies". _The Mississippi Quarterly_. **57** (3): 369–388. ISSN 0026-637X. JSTOR 26466979.
    50. **^** Inness, Sherrie A. (2005). _Secret Ingredients: Race, Gender, and Class at the Dinner Table_. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 147\. ISBN 978-1-34-953164-6.
    51. **^** Bledsoe, Erik (2000) "The Rise of Southern Redneck and White Trash Writers", _Southern Cultures_ 6#1 pp. 68–90 
    52. **^** Hollibaugh, Amber L. (2000). _My Dangerous Desires: A Queer Girl Dreaming Her Way Home_. Duke University Press. pp. 12, 209. ISBN 978-0822326199.
    53. **^** "Dolly Parton thinks she's 'white trash'!". _News24_. September 12, 2014. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    54. **^** https://www.timeinc.net/southernliving/culture/celebrities/dolly-parton-the-southern-living-interview
    55. **^** "Dolly Parton Is for Everyone - Pitchfork". _pitchfork.com_. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    56. **^** "Icon and Identity: Dolly Parton's Hillbilly Appeal". _Southern Cultures_. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    57. **^** "Interview: Dolly Parton". _Rolling Stone_. October 30, 2003. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    58. **^** https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/book-party/wp/2016/06/23/a-cultural-and-political-history-of-white-trash-america/
    59. **^** Stephenson, Wen (September 16, 2002). "Books in Review". Retrieved March 5, 2019 - via American Prospect.
    60. **^** "Picks and Pans Review: Dasher: the Roots and the Rising of Jimmy Carter". _PEOPLE.com_. April 10, 1978. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    61. **^** Hester, Jessica (2008). "Progressivism, Suffragists and Constructions of Race: Evelyn Greenleaf Sutherland's 'Po' White Trash'". _Women's Writing_. **15** (1): 55–68. doi:10.1080/09699080701871443.
    62. **^** Henry, O (1907). "Shoes". _The best short stories of O. Henry_. Random House. p. 146\. ISBN 978-0-679-601227. Archived from the original on 1997-01-01.
    63. **^** "Oxford American.com". _web.archive.org_. September 9, 2006. Retrieved  March 5, 2019.
    64. **^** Wilson, William Julius in Cashmore, Ernest and Jennings, James eds. (2001) _Racism: Essential Readings_ p.188
    65. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kolin, Philip C. (2007) _Contemporary African American Women Playwrights_. p.29
    66. **^** Roediger, David R. (1999) _Take Black on White: Black Writers on What It Means to be White_ pp.13, 123
    67. **^** Obiakor, Festus E. and Ford, Bridgie Alexis (2002) _Creating Successful Learning Environments for African-American Learners With Exceptionalities_ p.198
    68. **^** Prahlad, Anand (2006) _The Greenwood Encyclopedia of African American Folklore_. volume 2, p.966
    69. **^** Nolen, Claude H. (2005) _African American Southerners in Slavery, Civil War and Reconstruction_. p.81
    70. **^** Jackson, Chuck (2000). "Waste and Whiteness: Zora Neale Hurston and the Politics of Eugenics". _African American Review_. **34** (4): 639–660. doi:10.2307/2901423. JSTOR 2901423.
    

## References[edit]

    
        * Hartigan, John Jr. (2003). "Who are these white people?: 'Rednecks,' 'Hillbillies,' and 'White Trash' as marked racial subjects". In Doane, A.W.; Bonilla-Silva, E. (eds.). _White Out: The Continuing Significance of Racism_. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-41-593582-1.
    * Isenberg, Nancy (2016). _White Trash: The 400-year untold history of class in America_. New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-312967-7.
    * Painter, Nell Irvin (2010). _The History of White People_. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-33974-1.
    * Wray, Matt (2006). _Not Quite White: White trash and the boundaries of whiteness_. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-82-233882-6.
    

## Further reading[edit]

    
        * Berger, Maurice (2000). _White Lies: Race and the Myths of Whiteness_. ISBN 0-374-52715-6.
    * Goad, Jim (1998). _The Redneck Manifesto: How Hillbillies Hicks and White Trash Became Americas Scapegoats_. ISBN 0-684-83864-8.
    * Hartigan, John, Jr. (2005) _Odd Tribes: Toward a Cultural Analysis of White People_. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3597-2.
    * Isenberg, Nancy. "Excerpt from _White Trash_ ". Penguin Random House Canada.
    * Pitcher, Ben (2007). "The Problem with White Trash" (review of _Not Quite White_ ). _DarkMatter_. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3873-4.
    * Rasmussen, Dana (2011). _Things White Trash People Like: The Stereotypes of America's Poor White Trash_. BiblioBazaar. ISBN 9781241610449.
    * Sullivan, Nell (2003). "Academic Constructions of 'White Trash'" in Adair, Vivyan Campbell, and Sandra L. Dahlberg, eds. (2003). _Reclaiming Class. Women, Poverty, and the Promise of Higher Education in America_. pp 53-66. Temple University Press. ISBN 1-59213-021-6.
    * Taylor, Kirstine (March 2015). "Untimely Subjects: White Trash and the Making of Racial Innocence in the Postwar South". _American Quarterly_ 67\. pp.55–79.
    * Wray, Matt and Newitz, Annalee eds. (1997). _White Trash: Race and Class in America_. ISBN 0-415-91692-5.
    

## External links[edit]

    
        * Allison, Dorothy "A Question of Class"
    * Entertainers loved By trailer trash (videos)
    

Articles and topics related to White trash

* * *

|

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Ethnic slurs

* * *

by ethnicity

Africans|

| Blacks|

    
        * Abeed
    * Black American princess
    * Black Buck
    * Black Diamonds
    * Boerehaat
    * Choc ice
    * Cocolo
    * Colored
    * Cushi
    * Golliwog
    * House Negro
    * Jim Crow
    * Kaffir
    * Macaca
    * Mammy
    * Negro
    * Nigga
    * Niggardly
    * Nigger
    * Pickaninny
    * Rastus
    * Queen / Queenie
    * Sambo
    * Tar-Baby
    * Uncle Tom
    * Wog
    

\---|---

Americans​ (North & South)|

| Mixed|

    
        * Beaner ( _Mexicans_ )
    * Greaser
    * Naco
    * Pocho ( _non-Spanish speaking Hispanics_ )
    * Spic
    * Wetback
    

\---|---  
Indigenous|

    
        * Cholo ( _Mestizos_ )
    * Eskimo ( _Inuit_ )
    * Half-breed ( _Métis_ )
    * Indian/Injun ( _Native American / First Nations_ )
    * Redskin/Red Indian ( _Native American / First Nations_ )
    * Squaw ( _Native American women_ )
    

Whites|

    
        * Coonass ( _Cajuns_ )
    * Cracker
    * Gringo
    * Haole
    * Hillbilly
    * Peckerwood
    * Redneck
    * Swamp Yankee
    * Trailer trash
    * White trash
    * Whitey
    * Yank / Yankee
    

Others|

    
        * Canuck ( _Canadians_ )
    * Coonass ( _Cajuns_ )
    * Newfie ( _Newfoundlander_ )
    

Asians|

| East​ Asians|

| General|

    
        * Banana ( _westernized East Asians_ )
    * Gook
    

\---|---  
Chinese|

    
        * Ah Beng
    * American-born Chinese (ABC)
    * Chinaman
    * Chink
    * Ching chong
    * Coolie
    * Jook-sing ( _overseas_ / _westernized Chinese_ )
    * Sangokujin ( _also Koreans_ )
    * Shina
    

Japanese|

    
        * Jap
    * Jjokbari
    * Nip
    * Xiao Riben
    

Koreans|

    
        * Gaoli bangzi
    * Sangokujin ( _also Chinese_ )
    

South​ Asians|

| General|

    
        * American-Born Confused Desi (ABCD)
    * Chandala
    * Coolie
    

\---|---  
Bengali Hindus|

    
        * Bongal
    * Dkhar
    * Malaun
    

Indians|

    
        * Chinki ( _Northeast Indians_ )
    * Coolie
    * Keling ( _Maritime Southeast Asian-origin Indians_ )
    

Pakistanis|

    
        * Paki
    

Europeans|

| General|

    
        * Ang mo
    * Bule
    * Farang
    * Guizi
    * Gweilo
    * Honky
    * Mat Salleh
    * Redleg
    * Wasi'chu
    * Wigger
    * Wog
    

\---|---  
Albanians|

    
        * Šiptar
    * Turco-Albanian
    

British|

    
        * Limey ( _English people_ )
    * Taffy ( _Welsh people_ )
    * Teuchter ( _Scottish Highlanders_ )
    

Dutch|

    
        * Cheesehead
    

Finns|

    
        * Chukhna
    * China Swede
    * Finnjävel
    

French|

    
        * Cheese-eating surrender monkeys
    * Frog
    

Germans|

    
        * Hun
    * Kraut
    

Greeks|

    
        * Grecoman
    

Irish|

    
        * Fenian ( _Republicans_ )
    * Knacker ( _Irish Travellers_ )
    * Pikey ( _Irish Travellers_ )
    * Shoneen ( _Anglophile Irish_ )
    * Taig ( _Irish Catholics_ )
    

Italians|

    
        * Goombah
    * Guido
    * Terrone ( _South Italians_ )
    * Polentone ( _Northern Italians_ )
    * Wop
    

Poles|

    
        * Polack
    

Russians|

    
        * Moskal
    * Tibla
    

Serbs|

    
        * Shkije
    * Vlach
    

Spaniards|

    
        * Xarnego
    

Ukrainians|

    
        * Khokhol
    

Welsh|

    
        * Sheep shagger
    * Taffy
    

Others|

    
        * Bulgarophiles ( _Macedonians_ and _Serbs_ )
    * Serbomans ( _Macedonians_ and _Bulgarians_ )
    * Yestonians ( _Russified Estonians_ )
    

Arabs|

    
        * Rafida ( _Shi'ites_ )
    * Raghead
    * Wog
    

Jews|

    
        * Christ killer
    * Jewish-American princess (JAP)
    * Kafir
    * Khazar ( _Ashkenazi Jews_ )
    * Kike
    * Marrano ( _Conversos_ / _Crypto-Jews_ )
    * Wog
    * Yekke ( _German Jews_ )
    * Yid
    * Zhyd / Zhydovka
    * Żydokomuna
    

Romani|

    
        * Didicoy
    * Gypsies
    * Nawar
    * Zott
    

Oceanians|

    
        * Blackfella ( _Indigenous Australians_ )
    * Hori ( _Māori_ )
    * Kanaka ( _Pacific Islander_ )
    * Kanake ( _Polynesians_ )
    

Turks|

    
        * Kebab
    * Mongol
    

Outsiders|

    
        * Ajam ( _non-Arabs_ )
    * Barbarian
    * Fresh off the boat / F.O.B. ( _immigrant_ )
    * Gaijin ( _non-Japanese_ )
    * Goy ( _non-Jew_ )
    * Kafir ( _non-believer_ )
    * Laowai ( _non-Chinese_ )
    * Reffo / Balt ( _Non-Anglo immigrant to Australia_ )
    * Shegetz ( _non-Jewish boy or man_ ) (pl. Shkutzim)
    * Shiksa ( _non-Jewish woman_ )
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    
    * Social class
    

* * *
    
        * **Status**
    * **Stratification**
    

| Theories|

    
        * Gilbert model
    * Marxian
    * Mudsill theory
    * New class
    * Spoon class theory
    * Weberian (three-component)
    

\---|---  
Related​ topics|

    
        * Caste
    * Chattering classes
    * Class conflict
    * Class discrimination
    * Classicide
    * Classless society
    * Euthenics
    * _Nouveau riche_ / _Parvenu_
    * Poverty
    * Ranked society
    * Snobbery
    * Social cleansing
    * Social exclusion
    * Social mobility
    * Social orphan
    * Social position
    * Social stigma
    * Subaltern
    

|

By demographic

* * *

| By status|

    
        * Administrative detainee
    * Alien
      * illegal immigrant
      * refugee
    * Citizen
      * dual or multiple
      * native-born
      * naturalized
      * second-class
    * Convicted
    * Migrant worker
    * Political prisoner
    * Stateless
    

\---|---  
By "collar"|

    
        * Blue
    * Green
    * Grey
    * New
    * Pink
    * White
    

By type|

| Ruling|

    
        * Aristocracy
    * Hanseaten
    * Patrician
    * Political
    * Royal family
    

\---|---  
Intellectual|

    
        * Clergy
    * Knowledge worker
    * Professor
    

Warrior|

    
        * Harii
    * Kshatriya
    * Yadav
    * Nair
    * Chhetri
    * Cossacks
    * Hashashin
    * Knight
    * Vanniyar
    * Samurai
    * Cuāuh
    * Ocēlōtl
    * Spartiate
    

Upper|

    
        * Bourgeoisie
    * Business magnate
    * Elite
    * Gentry
    * Lord
    * Nobility
    * Old money
    * Overclass
    * Robber baron
    * Russian oligarch
    * Seigneur
    * _Superclass_
    

Creative|

    
        * Bohemians
    

Middle|

    
        * Lower middle class
    * Upper middle class
    * Bourgeoisie
    * Petite bourgeoisie
    

Working|

    
        * Working poor
    * Proletariat
    * Lumpenproletariat
    

Under|

    
        * Commoner
    * Outcast
    * Outlaw / Prisoner
    * Peasant / Serf
    * Plebeian
    * Slave
    * Untouchable
    

|

By country or region

* * *

| United States|

|

    
        * Affluence
    * American Dream
    * Conflict
    * History
    * Mobility
    

* * *

Classes|

    
        * Upper
      * Black
      * Donor
      * Gentry
    * Middle
      * Black
      * Mexican-American
      * Upper Middle
    * Lower
    * Under
    

Income|

    
        * Household
    * Inequality
    * Personal
    * Poverty
    

Standard of living|

    
        * Education
    * Homelessness
    * Home-ownership
    * Wealth
    

Other regions​ or countries|

    
        * Africa
    * Cambodia
    * China
    * Colombia
    * Ecuador
    * France
    * Haiti
    * India
    * Iran
    * Italy
    * Nepal
    * New Zealand
    * Romania
    * Sri Lanka
    * Tibet
    * United Kingdom
    * United States
    

Historic|

    
        * Ancient Greece
    * Ancient Rome
    * Aztec
    * Ottoman Empire
    * Soviet Union
    * Pre-industrial East Asia
    * Pre-industrial Europe
    
    * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

White people

* * *
    
        * **Caucasian race**
    * **European peoples**
    * **West Asian peoples**
    * **Central Asian peoples**
    * **North African peoples**
    * **Bold** refers to countries, regions and territories in which Caucasian/European people are the ethnic majority group
    

Worldwide diaspora|

| Africa|

    
        * Algeria
    * Angola
    * Botswana
    * Democratic Republic of the Congo
    * Kenya
    * Morocco
    * Namibia
    * Saint Helena
    * South Africa
    * Tunisia
    * Zambia
    * Zimbabwe
    

\---|---  
Asia|

    
        * Pakistan
    

North America|

    
        * Bahamas
    * Barbados
    * Bermuda
    * **Canada**
    * Cayman Islands
    * **Costa Rica**
    * **Cuba**
    * Dominica
    * Dominican Republic
    * El Salvador
    * Guatemala
    * Haiti
    * Honduras
    * Jamaica
    * Mexico
    * Nicaragua
    * Panama
    * **Puerto Rico**
    * Trinidad and Tobago
    * **United States** (California, **Maryland** )
    

South America|

    
        * **Argentina**
    * Bolivia
    * Brazil
    * Colombia
    * Ecuador
    * Peru
    * Suriname
    * **Uruguay**
    * Venezuela
    

Oceania|

    
        * **Australia**
    * New Caledonia
    * **New Zealand**
    

Historical concepts|

    
        * Apartheid
    * Aryan
    * First white child
    * Honorary whites
    * Play the white man
    * Racial whitening
      * _Branqueamento_ / _Blanqueamiento_
    * White Australia policy
    * _The White Man's Burden_
    * White gods
    

Sociological​ phenomena and theories|

    
        * Acting white (Passing as white)
    * Angry white male
    * Missing white woman syndrome
    * Skin whitening
    * White flight
      * South African farm attacks
    * White fragility
    * White guilt
    * White privilege
    * Whiteness studies
    * Whitewashed film roles
    * White savior
    

White American​ caricatures and stereotypes|

    
        * Poor Whites
      * Redlegs
      * Rednecks
      * Mountain whites
    * White trash
    

Identity politics​ in the United States|

    
        * US definitions of whiteness
      * One-drop rule
    * Alt-right
    * Christian Identity
    * Non-Hispanic whites
    * White Anglo-Saxon Protestant
    * Old Stock Americans
    * White ethnic
    * White Hispanic
    * White nationalism
    * White pride
    * White separatism
    * White supremacy
    

Scientific racism|

    
        * Human skin color
    * Color terminology for race
    * Alpine
    * Armenoid
    * Dinaric
    * East Baltic
    * Irano-Afghan
    * Mediterranean
    
    * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Caricatures and Stereotypes in the United States

* * *

Ethnic & national|

    
        * African and Black Americans
    * Asian and Pacific Islander Americans 
      * East Asians
      * South Asians
    * Hispanics and Latino Americans
    * Native Americans and Alaskan Natives
    * European and White Americans
    * Arabs
    * Jews
    

Regional & social|

    
        * Appalachians
    * Cowboys
    * Poor Whites
      * Crackers
      * Redlegs
      * Rednecks
      * Mountain Whites
    * Ugly Americans
    * Valley Girls
    * White Southerners
    * White Trash
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=White_trash&oldid=899882218"

Categories:

    
        * Words coined in the 1820s
    * American phraseology
    * Anti-European and anti-white slurs
    * Class-related slurs
    * Ethnic and racial stereotypes
    * Ethnic and racial stereotypes in the United States
    * Ethnic and religious slurs
    * Intersectional racial topics
    * Intersectional social class topics
    * Social class subcultures
    * Stereotypes of rural people
    * Stereotypes of white Americans
    * Stereotypes of the working class
    * Social class in the United States
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * العربية
    * Български
    * Brezhoneg
    * Dansk
    * Deutsch
    * Emiliàn e rumagnòl
    * Español
    * فارسی
    * Français
    * 한국어
    * Italiano
    * עברית
    * 日本語
    * Norsk
    * Polski
    * Português
    * Русский
    * Suomi
    * Svenska
    * Türkçe
    * Українська
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 23:45 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

