
    
        * Shows
    
    * This Day In History
    
    * Schedule
    
    * Topics
    
    * Stories
    
    *  _Ad Choices_
    *  _Advertise_
    *  _Closed Captioning_
    *  _Copyright Policy_
    *  _Corporate Information_
    *  _Employment Opportunities_
    *  _FAQ/Contact Us_
    *  _Privacy Notice_
    *  _Terms of Use_
    *  _TV Parental Guidelines_
    *  _RSS Feeds_
    *  _Privacy Settings_
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    
    *     *     *     *     * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
    * Shows
    * This Day In History
    * Schedule
    * Topics
    * Stories
    

![The Chicago Race Riot of

1919](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_768/MTU3ODc5MDgyOTQ0OTY0MzE5/cover-

illustration-of-race-riot-in-springfield-illinois-usa.jpg)

Publish date:

    
        Dec 2, 2009
    

Updated on

    
        Aug 21, 2018
    

# The Chicago Race Riot of 1919

Author:

    
        History.com Editors
    
    *     *     *     * ## Contents
    
    1. Growing Racial Tensions 
    2. A Drowning in Lake Michigan 
    3. Lasting Impact
    

On July 27, 1919, an African-American teenager drowned in Lake Michigan after
violating the unofficial segregation of Chicago's beaches and being stoned by
a group of white youths. His death, and the police's refusal to arrest the
white man whom eyewitnesses identified as causing it, sparked a week of
rioting between gangs of black and white Chicagoans, concentrated on the South
Side neighborhood surrounding the stockyards. When the riots ended on August
3, 15 whites and 23 blacks had been killed and more than 500 people injured;
an additional 1,000 black families had lost their homes when they were torched
by rioters.

## Growing Racial Tensions

The "Red Summer" of 1919 marked the culmination of steadily growing tensions
surrounding the great migration of African Americans from the rural South to
the cities of the North that took place during World War I. When the war ended
in late 1918, thousands of servicemen returned home from fighting in Europe to
find that their jobs in factories, warehouses and mills had been filled by
newly arrived Southern blacks or immigrants. Amid financial insecurity, racial
and ethnic prejudices ran rampant. Meanwhile, African-American veterans who
had risked their lives fighting for the causes of freedom and democracy found
themselves denied basic rights such as adequate housing and equality under the
law, leading them to become increasingly militant.

Did you know? In the summer of 1919, Richard J. Daley, who served as Chicago's
powerful mayor from 1955 until his death in 1976, was a 17-year-old member of
an Irish-American organization called the Hamburg Athletic Club. Though an
investigation later identified the club among the instigators of the rioting,
Daley and his supporters never admitted that he participated in the violence.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

In this fraught atmosphere, the white supremacist Ku Klux Klan organization
revived its violent activities in the South, including 64 lynchings in 1918
and 83 in 1919. In the summer of 1919, race riots would break out in
Washington, D.C.; Knoxville, Tennessee; Longview, Texas; Phillips County,
Arkansas; Omaha, Nebraska and-most dramatically-Chicago. The city's African-
American population had increased from 44,000 in 1909 to more than 100,000 as
of 1919. Competition for jobs in the city's stockyards was particularly
intense, pitting African Americans against whites (both native-born and
immigrants). Tensions ran highest on the city's South Side, where the great
majority of black residents lived, many of them in old, dilapidated housing
and without adequate services.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

## A Drowning in Lake Michigan

On July 27, 1919, a 17-year-old African-American boy named Eugene Williams was
swimming with friends in Lake Michigan when he crossed the unofficial barrier
(located at 29th Street) between the city's "white" and "black" beaches. A
group of white men threw stones at Williams, hitting him, and he drowned. When
police officers arrived on the scene, they refused to arrest the white man
whom black eyewitnesses pointed to as the responsible party. Angry crowds
began to gather on the beach, and reports of the incident-many distorted or
exaggerated-spread quickly.

Violence soon broke out between gangs and mobs of black and white,
concentrated in the South Side neighborhood surrounding the stockyards. After
police were unable to quell the riots, the state militia was called in on the
fourth day, but the fighting continued until August 3. Shootings, beatings and
arson attacks eventually left 15 whites and 23 blacks dead, and more than 500
more people (around 60 percent black) injured. An additional 1,000 black
families were left homeless after rioters torched their residences.

## Lasting Impact

In the aftermath of the rioting, some suggested implementing zoning laws to
formally segregate housing in Chicago, or restrictions preventing blacks from
working alongside whites in the stockyards and other industries. Such measures
were rejected by African-American and liberal white voters, however. City
officials instead organized the Chicago Commission on Race Relations to look
into the root causes of the riots and find ways to combat them. The
commission, which included six white men and six black, suggested several key
issues --including competition for jobs, inadequate housing options for
blacks, inconsistent law enforcement and pervasive racial discrimination--but
improvement in these areas would be slow in the years to come.

President Woodrow Wilson publicly blamed whites for being the instigators of
race-related riots in both Chicago and Washington, D.C., and introduced
efforts to foster racial harmony, including voluntary organizations and
congressional legislation. In addition to drawing attention to the growing
tensions in America's urban centers, the riots in Chicago and other cities in
the summer of 1919 marked the beginning of a growing willingness among African
Americans to fight for their rights in the face of oppression and injustice.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

The Chicago Race Riot of 1919

### Author

History.com Editors

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/topics/black-history/chicago-race-riot-of-1919

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

August 21, 2018

### Original Published Date

December 2, 2009

Tags

terms:

    
        Black HistoryRiotsRace in America
    

By

History.com Editors

    
        *     *     *     * #
    

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

#

VIDEOS

![In this Ask Steve video clip, the racial riots of the 1960's was discussed.

During the civil rights movement there was a lot of progress being made,

however much of it was in the South. Because there was a lot of progress in

the South, the North, knowing that progress was possible, were frustrated by

the fact that they were not experiencing

it.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU3ODIwMjEwNTA1/ask-

steve-the-riots.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Ask Steve: The Riots

![On August 27, 1949, a concert by Paul Robeson and other left-wing singers in

Peekskill, New York, was called off after an outbreak of violence in protest

of Robeson's communist leanings. When the concert was rescheduled for

September 4, CBS News was on hand to record another eruption of violence at

the concert

grounds.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU1OTM3NDI2NzYx/riot-

at-paul-robeson-concert.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Riot at Paul Robeson Concert

![Explore the history of the 1967 Detroit riots, from the political context

that sparked them to the broader consequences of the

conflict.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU2NDcyODU1ODgx/the-

detroit-riots-of-1967.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## The Detroit Riots of 1967

![On September 18, 1895, at the Atlanta Exposition, Booker T. Washington rises

to national fame when he delivers what came to be known as his “Atlanta

Compromise” speech, in which he advocates for the races to work together while

remaining separate

socially.](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc3NjU5MTU3NjAzNjU3/booker-

t-washington-on-race-relations.jpg)

![Play](/assets-global/play-button-blk.svg?v=2019-06-10-215924-5fb89f2-013432)

## Booker T. Washington on Race Relations

# ![SIGN UP FOR MORE

HISTORY!](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU3OTM4MTkyNjk0MTI2NTQy/section_header_art_small_signup.svg)

Subscribe for fascinating stories connecting the past to the present.

SIGN UP

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTY1NzE4MzM0MjE5OTg5/section_header_art_medium_street.jpg)

#

RELATED CONTENT

![us-race-riots-

detroit](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjM2NzE5OTQ1/us-

race-riots-detroit.jpg)

## 1967 Detroit Riots

The 1967 Detroit Riots were among the most violent and destructive riots in
U.S. history. By the time the bloodshed, burning and looting ended after five
days, 43 people were dead, 342 injured, nearly 1,400 buildings had been burned
and some 7,000 National Guard and U.S. Army _...read more_

![burning-buildings-during-race-riot-

of-1921](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDgyNjc0NTYyNzgz/burning-

buildings-during-race-riot-of-1921.jpg)

## Tulsa Race Massacre

During the Tulsa Race Massacre (also known as the Tulsa Race Riot), which
occurred over 18 hours on May 31-June 1, 1921, a white mob attacked residents,
homes and businesses in the predominantly black Greenwood neighborhood of
Tulsa, Oklahoma. The event remains one of the worst _...read more_

![turn-left-or-get-shot-sign-in-

street](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg3MjM1Mjc4MTUz/turn-

left-or-get-shot-sign-in-street.jpg)

## Watts Riots

The Watts Riots, also known as the Watts Rebellion, was a large series of
riots that broke out August 11, 1965, in the predominantly black neighborhood
of Watts in Los Angeles. The Watts Riots lasted for six days, resulting in 34
deaths, 1,032 injuries and 4,000 arrests, _...read more_

![policemen-question-zoot-

suiters](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTY3NjI5MTI5/policemen-

question-zoot-suiters.jpg)

## Zoot Suit Riots

The Zoot Suit Riots were a series of violent clashes during which mobs of U.S.
servicemen, off-duty police officers and civilians brawled with young Latinos
and other minorities in Los Angeles. The June 1943 riots took their name from
the baggy suits worn by many minority youths _...read more_

![nyc-draft-

riots](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2NDM2MDY3MDM5/nyc-

draft-riots.jpg)

## New York Draft Riots

The New York Draft Riots occurred in July 1863, when the anger of working-
class New Yorkers over a new federal draft law during the Civil War sparked
five days of some of the bloodiest and most destructive rioting in U.S.
history. Hundreds of people were killed, many more _...read more_

![chicago-

hero](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTY2NTgwOTU5/chicago-

hero.jpg)

## Chicago

The largest city of the American Midwest, Chicago, Illinois, was founded in
1830 and quickly grew to become, as Carl Sandburg’s 1916 poem put it, “Hog
Butcher, Tool Maker, Stacker of Wheat, Player with Railroads and Freight
Handler to the Nation.” Established as a water transit _...read more_

![LOS ANGELES – April 30 – Rodney King Riot. Near intersection of Pico
Boulevard and Hayworth Avenue, neighborhood residents filling buckets from
open hydrant attempting to put out fires burning local businesses as the
second night nears of riots that broke out after the policemen who beat Rodney
King were found Not Guilty. April 30, 1992

](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg2OTcxNDMwMjE3/los-
angeles-riots.jpg)

## Los Angeles Riots

The Los Angeles riots sprung from years of rising tensions between the LAPD
and the city’s African Americans, highlighted by the 1991 videotaped beating
of motorist Rodney King. On April 29, 1992, anger boiled over after four LAPD
officers were found not guilty of assaulting _...read more_

![arican-american-family-man-woman-2-children-

boys-m](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc5MDg1ODkxNzkwNTU5/arican-

american-family-man-woman-2-children-boys-m.jpg)

## Great Migration

The Great Migration was the relocation of more than 6 million African
Americans from the rural South to the cities of the North, Midwest and West
from about 1916 to 1970. Driven from their homes by unsatisfactory economic
opportunities and harsh segregationist laws, many blacks _...read more_

![ask-zoot-suit-riots-

loc-2](https://www.history.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTU3ODc4NjAzMjQ4NjQxMzUz/ask-

zoot-suit-riots-loc-2.jpg)

## What were the Zoot Suit Riots?

The Zoot Suit Riots were a series of violent clashes during which mobs of U.S.
servicemen, off-duty police officers and civilians brawled with young Latinos
and other minorities in Los Angeles. The June 1943 riots took their name from
the baggy suits worn by many minority youths _...read more_

Loading…

See More

    
        * Ad Choices
    * Advertise
    * Closed Captioning
    * Copyright Policy
    * Corporate Information
    * Employment Opportunities
    * FAQ/Contact Us
    * Privacy Notice
    * Terms of Use
    * TV Parental Guidelines
    * RSS Feeds
    

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

