

#### Before you continue, please understand that:

    
        * This website is run by a private company. We have no connection to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) or any other government agency.
    * **YOU** must send your completed government forms directly to the USCIS or other government agency. We don 't do that for you.
    * **YOU** must pay any required fees directly to the USCIS or other government agency. We don 't do that for you.
    

OK

(must click checkbox to proceed)

![American Immigration](https://www.us-immigration.com/us-immigration-news/wp-

content/themes/aic-astra-child-theme-news/assets-

static/3c6d39251e344aae91f81a48b0e9c79d62e53f76/images/logo-en.png)

Menu

24/7 Help Hotline: 1-800-814-1555(Hablamos Espaol)

Sign In Sign Out

HOME

U.S. CITIZENSHIP

    
        * U.S. Citizenship Application -
    

**Form N-400**

    
        * Certificate of Citizenship -
    

**Form N-600**

    
        * Replace Certificate of Citizenship - **Form N-565**
    * U.S. Citizenship Test and Interview DVD
    

GREEN CARD

    
        * Green Card Renewal and Replacement
    * Green Card Renewal -
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Green Card Replacement -
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Lost or Stolen Green Card
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Green Card Through Family
    * Get Green Card through Family Member Application
    * Get Green Card through Marriage Application
    * Green Card for Parent(s) Application
    * Green Card for Children Application
    * Green Card for Brothers or Sisters Application
    * Green Card Through Employment
    * Green Card Through Employment Application
    * Green Card for Multinational Executives and Managers
    * Green Card for Domestic Employee or Unskilled Labor Application
    * Immigrant Visa Extraordinary Abilities
    * Immigrant Visa for Outstanding Researchers/Professors
    * Labor Certification Application
    * National Interest Waiver
    * Green Card - Related Forms
    * Green Card Lottery
    * Immigrant Petition
    

**Form I-130**

    
        * Adjustment of Status
    

**Form I-485**

    
        * Remove Conditions on Green Card **Form I-751**
    * Petition to Remove the Conditions of Residence
    

**Form I-751**

    
        * Affidavit of Support
    

**Form I-864**

    
        * Advance Parole Document
    

**Form I-131**

    
        * Re-entry Permit
    

**Form I-131**

    
        * Refugee Travel Document
    

**Form I-131**

U.S. VISAS

    
        * **B-1 Business Visa** Application
    * **B-2 Tourist Visa** Application
    * **B-1/B-2 Visitors Visa** Extension Application
    * Visas for Family Members
    * **K-1 Fianc(e) Visa** Application
    * **K-3** and **V1/V2** U.S. Entry Visa for Spouse or Child Application
    * Student Visas
    * **F-1 Student Visa** Application
    * **J-1 Temporary Exchange Visitor Visa** Application
    * **J-1 Waiver** Application
    * U.S. Visas - Related Forms
    * U.S. Green Card Lottery
    

**DV-Lottery**

    
        * Arrival Departure Record
    

**Form I-94**

    
        * Affidavit of Support
    

**Form I-134**

    
        * Nonimmigrant Visa Application
    

**DS-160 Online**

EMPLOYMENT

    
        * Green Card Through Employment
    * Green Card Through Employment Application
    * Green Card for Multinational Executives and Managers
    * Green Card for Domestic Employee or Unskilled Labor Application
    * Temporary Employment Visas
    * Employment Authorization Document **(EAD)**
    * **H-1B** Visa
    * **H-2B** Work Visa for Skilled and Unskilled Workers Application
    * **H-3** Trainee Visa Application
    * **L-1** Temporary Work Visa for Intracompany Transferee Application
    * Individuals of Extraordinary Ability Work Visa Application
    * **R-1** Religious Worker Visa Application
    * **TN Temporary Work Visa** for Citizens of Canada and Mexico
    * **Investment Visa** Application
    

IMMIGRATION FORMS

    
        * Green Card Renewal
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Lost or Stolen Green Card
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * U.S. Citizenship Application
    

**Form N-400**

    
        * Apply for U.S. Visas
    

**DS-160**

    
        * Change of Address
    

**AR-11**

    
        * Application for Travel Document
    

**Form I-131**

    
        * Adjustment of Status
    

**Form I-485**

    
        * Petition to Remove Conditions
    

**Form I-751**

    
        * Employment Authorization
    

**Form I-765**

    
        * Immigrant Petition Family Green Card **Form I-130**
    * Replace Certificate of Citizenship **Form N-565**
    * More Immigration Forms
    

NEWS & INFO

    
        * US Immigration News
    * US Immigration Blog
    

USCIS

    
        * USCIS Filing Fee Increase
    * USCIS Local Offices
    * Immigration Glossary
    * Case Status
    * USCIS Forms
    

ESPAÑOL

# Illegal Immigration in California

February 1, 2011 February 15, 2012 / US Immigration / By US-Immigration.com

In California, illegal immigration is a serious issue. Since California has a
large coastline and shares a border with Mexico, for illegals California
presents an easy point of access into the United States. Although California’s
borders and sea ports receive quite a lot of security support, the sheer size
of the state’s borders make it possible for illegal immigration to occur.

There are many reasons why illegal immigration in California is considered a
serious issue. While California welcomes immigration, illegal immigration
poses a serious threat. Illegal immigrants are not carefully vetted the way
that legal immigrants are for potential diseases, criminal records, and other
issues which may pose a threat to California residents. Since illegals enter
California without speaking to authorities, they sometimes enter with criminal
records, criminal intent, and illnesses which can be passed on to residents.
As well, some people who speak out against illegal immigration in California
note that illegal immigrants entering California often need to commit illegal
acts – such as working illegally – in order to stay within the country.

Illegal immigrants also place a financial burden upon the state. According to
some reports, there were more than 2.9 million illegal immigrants in
California in 2009. Legal immigrants and residents of California pay taxes in
order to support social programs which they use. However, illegal immigrants
do use the public school system, emergency rooms, and other public services
without paying taxes. According to the Federation for American Immigration
Reform (FAIR), illegal immigration costs of California more than $10 billion
annually. In addition, many experts on immigration point out that illegal
immigrants may remove jobs and lower working conditions for legal residents
and legal workers within the state and across the country.

Those who argue for illegal immigrant reform and amnesty sometimes point out
that illegal immigrants actually often perform jobs that legal immigrants and
residents do not wish to perform. Undocumented workers take on hard and low-
paying jobs, such as picking fruit, and cleaning – jobs which are difficult to
fill at low wages with documented workers. Some experts argue that offering
amnesty to some or all illegal immigrants in California would help safeguard
California wages and would help protect both undocumented workers and
residents of the state. Both sides of the California immigration debate have
tried to come up with solutions to illegal immigration California issues but
so far no catch-all solution exists. For illegals, California is still a
plausible place to enter the country and for legal residents of the state
illegal immigration continues to be a difficult and expensive problem.

CLICK HERE TO SEE MORE U.S. IMMIGRATION NEWS

## Post navigation

<\- Previous Post

Next Post ->

Contact Privacy Policy Terms of Use Refund Policy Blog Site map

US Citizenship

    
        * Citizenship Application Form N-400
    * Replace Certificate of Citizenship Form N-565
    * Certificate of Citizenship Form N-600
    * Citizenship Test & Interview
    

US Immigration

    
        * Immigration Forms
    * US Citizenship
    * Green Card
    * US Visas
    * Employment Immigration
    * US Immigration News
    * US Immigration Blog
    * USCIS Forms
    * Immigrant Resources
    

Green Card

    
        * Green Card Renewal Form I-90
    * Green Card Replacement Form I-90
    * Remove Condition on Green Card Form I-751
    * Adjustment of Status Form I-485
    * Green Card by Marriage
    * Green Card for Family
    

New Articles

    
        * International Adoption 
    * Asian American History Timeline
    * FIOA
    * Bill of Rights
    

US Visas

    
        * Visitor Visa (B2 Visa)
    * Business Visa (B1 Visa)
    * Visa Availability Checker
    * Fiancee Visa (K1 Visa)
    * Student Visa (F1 Visa)
    * Visitor Exchange Visa (J1 Visa)
    * Work Visa (H-1B Visa)
    * Skilled/Unskilled Work Visa (H-2B Visa)
    * Trainee Visa (H3 Visa)
    * Intracompany Transferee (L1 Visa)
    * Extraordinary Ability Work Visa (O1 Visa)
    * Religious Worker Visa (R1 Visa)
    * TN Work Visa (TN Visa)
    * US Visa Entry for Spouse and Children
    

US Immigration Forms

    
        * Adjust Status Form I-485
    * US Citizenship Application Form N-400
    * Renew Green Card Form I-90
    * Employment Authorization Document Form I-765
    * Travel Document Application Form I-131
    * Conditional Green Card Form I-751
    * Certificate of Citizenship Replacement Form N-565
    * Certificate of Citizenship Application Form N-600
    * Duplication Approval Notice Form I-824
    * Affidavit of Support Form I-134
    

US Immigration DVDS & Resources

    
        * How to Pass US Citizenship Test & Interview
    * USCIS Approved Immigration Doctors
    

We are not a law firm, and this site and our software are not a substitute for
the advice of a lawyer and do not contain or constitute legal advice. We are
not affiliated with or sponsored by the United States government or any
government agency. This site provides general information on some commonly
encountered immigration matters only and was created to allow you to more
simply navigate your completion of immigration paperwork using online
software. The content on this site should not be relied on to reach
conclusions about any person's specific situation. Self-help software and
customer support services are provided solely at a user's direction. Customer
support is for technical and billing issues only and will not answer legal
questions. We do not provide legal advice, opinions, or recommendations about
any individual's specific legal rights, remedies, defenses, options, or
strategies. We do not make form recommendations or recommend or provide
answers to specific questions on forms, and communications between you and us
are not protected by any privilege. Purchase prices do not include applicable
government agency filing or biometrics fees, if any. The forms that can be
completed using our software can be obtained for free from the U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) as blank forms with written
instructions. Automated eligibility quizzes were created using instructions,
rules and regulations published by the USCIS and only indicate whether you
meet minimum eligibility requirements to apply for the given immigration
benefit. Quiz results do not guarantee eligibility or ineligibility as you may
or may not be eligible based on reasons not addressed in the quizzes. Your
access to and use of this site, including any purchase, is subject to and
constitutes your agreement to the website Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.
Refunds will only be issued if requested within thirty (30) days and before
completed application is printed. Exceptions and restrictions may apply; see
Refund Policy for details.

Copyright (C) 1998-2019. All Rights Reserved.

Menu ![American Immigration](/us-immigration-news/wp-content/themes/aic-astra-

child-theme-news/assets-

static/3c6d39251e344aae91f81a48b0e9c79d62e53f76/images/logo-en.png)

U.S. Citizenship

    
        * U.S. Citizenship Application
    

**Form N-400**

    
        * Certificate of Citizenship
    

**Form N-600**

    
        * Replace Certificate of Citizenship
    

**Form N-565**

    
        * U.S. Citizenship Test and Interview DVD
    

* * *

Green Card

    
        * Green Card Renewal
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Green Card Replacement
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Lost or Stolen Green Card
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * Green Card through Family
    

**Form I-130**

    
        * Adjustment of Status
    

**Form I-485**

    
        * Remove Conditions on Green Card
    

**Form I-751**

    
        * Affidavit of Support
    

**Form I-864**

    
        * Application for Travel Document
    

**Form I-131**

U.S. Visas

    
        * B-1 Business Visa Application
    

* * *
    
        * B-2 Tourist Visa Application
    

* * *
    
        * B-1 / B-2 Visitors Visa Extension Application
    

* * *
    
        * Visa Availability Checker
    * K-1 Fiancé(e) Visa
    

* * *
    
        * Arrival Departure Record
    

**Form I-94**

    
        * Affidavit of Support
    

**Form I-134**

    
        * Nonimmigrant Visa Application
    

**DS-160 Online**

Employment

    
        * Employment Authorization Document
    

**Form I-765**

Immigration Forms

    
        * Green Card Renewal
    

**Form I-90**

    
        * U.S. Citizenship Application
    

**Form N-400**

    
        * Certificate of Citizenship
    

**Form N-600**

    
        * Replace Certificate of Citizenship
    

**Form N-565**

    
        * Affidavit of Support
    

**Form I-134**

    
        * Green Card through Family
    

**Form I-130**

    
        * Adjustment of Status
    

**Form I-485**

    
        * Remove Conditions on Green Card
    

**Form I-751**

    
        * Affidavit of Support
    

**Form I-864**

    
        * Application for Travel Document
    

**Form I-131**

News & Info

    
        * U.S. Immigration News
    

* * *
    
        * U.S. Immigration Blog
    

* * *

USCIS

    
        * USCIS Filing Fee Increase
    

* * *
    
        * USCIS Local Offices
    

* * *
    
        * Immigration Glossary
    

* * *
    
        * Check Case Status
    

* * *
    
        * USCIS Forms
    

* * *

Find a Form

Sign In

Sign OutYour Applications (Application Center)

Contact Us

Call Us

Español

![](//a.analytics.yahoo.com/p.pl?a=1000610573062&js=no)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

