

# Mexico–United States border

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For the barrier separating the countries, see Mexico–United States barrier.

## Mexico–United States border

Characteristics  
Entities|
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fc/Flag_of_Mexico.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mexico.svg.png) Mexico  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States  
Length| 3,145 kilometers (1,954 mi)  
History  
Current shape| December 30, 1853  
Treaties| Adams–Onís Treaty, Treaty of Limits (Mexico–United States), Treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Gadsden Purchase

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e2/Mexico-

United_States_border.svg/300px-Mexico-United_States_border.svg.png)

Border counties in the United States along the Mexican border

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/Border_USA_Mexico.jpg/300px-

Border_USA_Mexico.jpg)

To the left lies San Diego, California and on the right is Tijuana, Baja
California. The building in the foreground on the San Diego side is a sewage
treatment plant built to clean the Tijuana River.

The **Mexico–United States border** (Spanish: _frontera México–Estados Unidos_
) is an international border separating Mexico and the United States,
extending from the Pacific Ocean in the west to the Gulf of Mexico in the
east. The border traverses a variety of terrains, ranging from urban areas to
deserts. The Mexico–United States border is the most frequently crossed border
in the world,[1][2][3] with approximately 350 million documented crossings
annually.[2][4]

The total length of the continental border is 3,145 kilometers (1,954 mi).
From the Gulf of Mexico, it follows the course of the Rio Grande (Río Bravo
del Norte) to the border crossing at Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua, and El Paso,
Texas. Westward from El Paso–Juárez, it crosses vast tracts of the Chihuahuan
and Sonoran deserts to the Colorado River Delta and San Diego–Tijuana, before
reaching the Pacific Ocean.[5]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Geography
      * 1.1 Border region
      * 1.2 Border states
      * 1.3 Border crossing checkpoints
        * 1.3.1 Tijuana-San Ysidro Border
          * 1.3.1.1 Health impact
          * 1.3.1.2 Socioeconomic impact
    * 2 History
    * 3 Security
      * 3.1 Background
      * 3.2 Border enforcement
      * 3.3 Border incursions
      * 3.4 Disagreements over need for more resources
      * 3.5 In context of Trump administration
        * 3.5.1 Proposed wall
      * 3.6 Humanitarian assistance along the border
    * 4 Border zone policies
      * 4.1 Department of Homeland Security Secure Border Initiative
      * 4.2 100-mile border zone
      * 4.3 Operation Streamline
        * 4.3.1 History
        * 4.3.2 Support and criticisms
    * 5 Environment
      * 5.1 History
        * 5.1.1 Impacts of border wall on wildlife
    * 6 Travel
      * 6.1 Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative
    * 7 Barrier
    * 8 Transborder Students
    * 9 Veterinary inspections
      * 9.1 Crossing from Mexico to the United States
      * 9.2 Crossing from the United States to Mexico
    * 10 See also
    * 11 References
    * 12 Further reading
    * 13 External links
    

## Geography[edit]

### Border region[edit]

The Mexico–United States border extends 3,145 kilometers (1,954 mi), in
addition to the maritime boundaries of 29 kilometers (18 mi) in the Pacific
Ocean and 19 kilometers (12 mi) in the Gulf of Mexico.[6][7] According to the
International Boundary and Water Commission,[8] the continental border follows
the middle of the Rio Grande—according to the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
between the two nations, "along the deepest channel" (also known as the
thalweg)—from its mouth on the Gulf of Mexico a distance of 2,020 kilometers
(1,260 mi) to a point just upstream of El Paso and Ciudad Juárez.[9] It then
follows an alignment westward overland and it is marked by monuments for a
distance of 859 kilometers (534 mi) to the Colorado River, when it reaches its
highest elevation at the intersection with the Continental Divide. It then
follows the middle of that river toward the north with a distance of 39
kilometers (24 mi), and ultimately follows an alignment overland toward the
west and marked by monuments with a distance of 227 kilometers (141 mi) to the
Pacific Ocean.

Per the La Paz Agreement,[10] the official "border area" extends 100
kilometers (62 mi) "on either side of the inland and maritime boundaries" from
the Gulf of Mexico west into the Pacific Ocean. There is also a 100-mile
border zone.

The Rio Grande frequently meanders along the Texas–Mexico border. As a result,
the United States and Mexico have a treaty by which the Rio Grande is
maintained as the border, with new cut-offs and islands being transferred to
the other nation as necessary. The Boundary Treaty of 1970 between Mexico and
the United States settled all outstanding boundary disputes and uncertainties
related to the Rio Grande (Río Bravo del Norte) border.

The region is characterized by deserts, rugged hills, abundant sunshine, and
two major rivers—the Colorado and the Rio Grande (Río Bravo del Norte).

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/96/Patrolling_Rio_Grande_%40_Laredo.jpg/280px-Patrolling_Rio_Grande_%40_Laredo.jpg)
    

Border Patrol patrolling the Rio Grande in an airboat in Laredo, Texas

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2c/USA_Mexico_border_New_Mexico.JPG/280px-USA_Mexico_border_New_Mexico.JPG)
    

The start of the border fence in the state of New Mexico—just west of El Paso,
Texas

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/08/El_Camino_del_Diablo%2C_border_patrol.jpg/280px-El_Camino_del_Diablo%2C_border_patrol.jpg)
    

U.S. Border Patrol helicopter along El Camino del Diablo, Arizona–Sonora
border, 2004

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/14/Mexican-American_border_at_Nogales.jpg/315px-Mexican-American_border_at_Nogales.jpg)
    

Border between Nogales, Arizona, on the left, and Nogales, Sonora, on the
right

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/87/US-Mexico-Nogales-Border.jpg/157px-US-Mexico-Nogales-Border.jpg)
    

On the left: Nogales, Arizona; on the right, Nogales, Sonora

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/Borderbeachtj.jpg/280px-Borderbeachtj.jpg)
    

Beach in Tijuana at the border in 2006

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Border_Patrol_Vehicle_near_U.S._Mexico_Border.jpg/374px-Border_Patrol_Vehicle_near_U.S._Mexico_Border.jpg)
    

A CBP Border Patrol vehicle sitting near Mexico-U.S. border

### Border states[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Border_barrier_near_IBM_9.JPG/220px-

Border_barrier_near_IBM_9.JPG)

Vehicle barrier in the New Mexico desert

The U.S. states along the border, from west to east, are California, Arizona,
New Mexico, and Texas. The Mexican states along the border are Baja
California, Sonora, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas.

Among the U.S. states, Texas has the longest stretch of the border with
Mexico, while California has the shortest. Among the states in Mexico,
Chihuahua has the longest border with the United States, while Nuevo León has
the shortest.

Texas borders four Mexican states—Tamaulipas, Nuevo León, Coahuila, and
Chihuahua—the most of any U.S. states. New Mexico and Arizona each borders two
Mexican states (Chihuahua and Sonora; Sonora and Baja California,
respectively). California borders only Baja California.

Three Mexican states border two U.S. states each: Baja California borders
California and Arizona; Sonora borders Arizona and New Mexico; and Chihuahua
borders New Mexico and Texas. Tamaulipas, Nuevo León, and Coahuila each
borders only one U.S. state: Texas.

Along the border are 23 U.S. counties and 39 Mexican municipalities.

### Border crossing checkpoints[edit]

For a more comprehensive list, see List of Mexico–United States border
crossings.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/Borderwallbrownsvile.jpg/170px-

Borderwallbrownsvile.jpg)

Climbing the Mexico–United States barrier fence in Brownsville, Texas

The border separating Mexico and the United States is the most frequently
crossed international boundary in the world,[1][2][3] with approximately 350
million legal crossings taking place annually.[2][4][11]

There are 48 U.S.–Mexico border crossings, with 330 ports of entry. At these
points of entry, people trying to get into the U.S. are required to open their
bags for inspection.[12] Border crossings take place by roads, pedestrian
walkways, railroads and ferries. From west to east, below is a list of the
border city "twinnings"; cross-border municipalities connected by one or more
legal border crossings.

    
        * San Diego, California (San Ysidro) – Tijuana, Baja California (San Diego–Tijuana Metro)
    * Cross Border Xpress, Otay Mesa, California – Tijuana International Airport, Baja California
    * Otay Mesa, California – Tijuana, Baja California
    * Tecate, California – Tecate, Baja California
    * Calexico, California – Mexicali, Baja California
    * Andrade, California – Los Algodones, Baja California
    * San Luis, Arizona – San Luis Río Colorado, Sonora
    * Lukeville, Arizona – Sonoyta, Sonora
    * Sasabe, Arizona – Altar, Sonora
    * Nogales, Arizona – Nogales, Sonora
    * Naco, Arizona – Naco, Sonora
    * Douglas, Arizona – Agua Prieta, Sonora
    * Antelope Wells, New Mexico – El Berrendo, Chihuahua
    * Columbus, New Mexico – Palomas, Chihuahua
    * Santa Teresa, New Mexico – San Jerónimo, Chihuahua
    * El Paso, Texas – Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua (El Paso-Juarez)
    * Fabens, Texas – Práxedis G. Guerrero, Chihuahua municipality
    * Fort Hancock, Texas – El Porvenir, Chihuahua
    * Presidio, Texas – Ojinaga, Chihuahua
    * Heath Canyon, Texas – La Linda, Coahuila ( _closed_ )
    * Del Rio, Texas – Ciudad Acuña, Coahuila
    * Eagle Pass, Texas – Piedras Negras, Coahuila
    * Laredo, Texas – Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas
    * Laredo, Texas – Colombia, Nuevo León
    * Falcon Heights, Texas – Presa Falcón, Tamaulipas
    * Roma, Texas – Ciudad Miguel Alemán, Tamaulipas
    * Rio Grande City, Texas – Ciudad Camargo, Tamaulipas
    * Los Ebanos, Texas – Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Tamaulipas
    * Mission, Texas – Reynosa, Tamaulipas
    * Hidalgo, Texas – Reynosa, Tamaulipas
    * Pharr, Texas – Reynosa, Tamaulipas
    * Donna, Texas – Rio Bravo, Tamaulipas
    * Progreso, Texas – Nuevo Progreso, Tamaulipas
    * Los Indios, Texas – Matamoros, Tamaulipas
    * Brownsville, Texas – Matamoros, Tamaulipas
    

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bd/Bridge_of_the_Americas_%28El_Paso%E2%80%93Ciudad_Ju%C3%A1rez%29%2C_June_2016.jpg/220px-

Bridge_of_the_Americas_%28El_Paso%E2%80%93Ciudad_Ju%C3%A1rez%29%2C_June_2016.jpg)

Going into Mexico from El Paso, US

The total population of the borderlands—defined as those counties and
_municipios_ lining the border on either side—stands at some 12 million
people.

#### Tijuana-San Ysidro Border[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d5/CBP_San_Diego_Operations_-

_San_Ysidro_%2828555925151%29.jpg/220px-CBP_San_Diego_Operations_-

_San_Ysidro_%2828555925151%29.jpg)

San Ysidro Port of Entry through vehicle.

The Mexico–United States border is the world's most transited border.[13] The
San Ysidro Port of Entry is located between San Ysidro, California and
Tijuana, Baja California. Approximately 50,000 vehicles and 25,000 pedestrians
use this entry daily.[14] Due to business of this entry port, it has
influenced the every day life-style of people that live in these border
towns.[15]

##### Health impact[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e7/Tijuana_Border_Traffic.jpg/220px-

Tijuana_Border_Traffic.jpg)

Thousands of cars sit from fifteen minutes to two hours waiting to cross the
border[16]

The world's busiest border is having an impact on communities on both sides of
the border. The average wait time to cross into the United States is
approximately an hour.[16] Having thousands of vehicles transit through the
border every day is causing air pollution in San Ysidro and Tijuana.[17] The
emission of carbon monoxide (CO) and other vehicle related air contaminants
have been linked to health complications such as cardiovascular disease, lung
cancer, birth outcomes, premature death, obesity, asthma and other respiratory
diseases.[18] Due to the high levels of traffic collusion and the extended
wait times, mental health is also impacted by the border's business, affecting
the person's stress levels and aggressive behavior.[18]

##### Socioeconomic impact[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/Border_USA_Mexico.jpg/220px-

Border_USA_Mexico.jpg)

Capture of both sides of the border, Tijuana and San Diego.

The San Ysidro border is heavily militarized, separated by three walls, border
patrol agents and ICE.[19]

Tijuana is the next target for San Diegan developers due to the fast-growing
city, its lower cost of living, cheap prices and proximity to San Diego.[20]
While this would benefit the tourist aspect of the city, it is damaging to
low-income residents that will no longer be able to afford the cost of living
in Tijuana.[21] Tijuana is home to many deportees from the United States, many
who have lost everything and do not have an income to rely on and are now in a
new city in which they have to quickly adapt in order to survive.[22] San
Diego developers would bring many benefits to Tijuana but deportees and the
poor run the risk of being impacted by the gentrification of Tijuana.[23]

## History[edit]

See also: Rio Grande border disputes and Adams-Onís Treaty

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/Mapa_Mexico_1842.PNG/300px-

Mapa_Mexico_1842.PNG)

Map of Mexico in 1842

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2e/San_Diego-

Tijuana_JPLLandsat.jpg/220px-San_Diego-Tijuana_JPLLandsat.jpg)

San Diego together with Tijuana creates the bi-national San Diego–Tijuana
metropolitan area.

In the mid-16th century, after the discovery of silver, settlers from various
countries and backgrounds began to arrive in the area. This period of sparse
settlement included colonizers from different backgrounds. The area was part
of New Spain, but due to the lack of population and the diverse citizenry it
had, it did not seem to belong to any country. This period lasted until the
early 19th century, at which point the United States bought the lands known as
the Louisiana Purchase from France and began to expand steadily (militarily)
westward in its pursuit of Manifest Destiny.[24]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/17/ElPaso-Juarez-

EO.jpg/220px-ElPaso-Juarez-EO.jpg)

El Paso (top) and Ciudad Juárez (bottom) seen from earth orbit; the Rio Grande
is the thin line separating the two cities through the middle of the
photograph. El Paso and Juarez make up the third largest U.S. international
metroplex after Detroit–Windsor and San Diego-Tijuana.

The border itself was not clearly defined and remained so until the Mexican
colony became independent from Spain and entered a period of political
instability. Mexico attempted to create a buffer zone at the border that would
prevent possible invasion from the North. The Mexican government encouraged
thousands of their own citizens to settle in the region that is now known as
Texas and even offered inexpensive land to settlers from the United States in
exchange for populating the area. The influx of people did not provide the
defense that Mexico had hoped for and instead Texas declared its independence
in 1836, which lasted until 1845 when the U.S. annexed it.

The constant conflicts in the Texas region in the mid-19th century eventually
led to the Mexican–American War, which began in 1846 and ended in 1848 with
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. In the terms of the peace treaty, Mexico lost
more than 2,500,000 square kilometers (970,000 sq mi) of land, 55%[25] of its
territory, including what is today California, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah,
Nevada and parts of Colorado, Wyoming, Kansas, and Oklahoma. In addition, all
disputes over Texas and the disputed territory between Rio Grande and Rio
Nueces were abandoned. Five years later the Gadsden Purchase completed the
creation of the current United States–Mexico border. The purchase was
initially to accommodate a planned railway right-of-way. These purchases left
approximately 300,000 people living in the once disputed lands, many of whom
were Mexican nationals. Following the establishment of the current border a
number of towns sprang up along this boundary and many of the Mexican citizens
were given free land in the northern regions of Mexico in exchange for
returning and repopulating the area.[26]

The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and another treaty in 1884 were the agreements
originally responsible for the settlement of the international border, both of
which specified that the middle of Rio Grande was the border—irrespective of
any alterations in the channels or banks. The Rio Grande shifted south between
1852 and 1868, with the most radical shift in the river occurring after a
flood in 1864. By 1873 the moving river-center border had cut off
approximately 2.4 square kilometers (590 acres) of Mexican territory in the El
Paso-Juarez area, in effect transferring the land to the United States. By a
treaty negotiated in 1963, Mexico regained most of this land in what became
known as the Chamizal dispute and transferred 1.07 square kilometers (260
acres) in return to the United States. Border treaties are jointly
administered by the International Boundary and Water Commission (IBWC), which
was established in 1889 to maintain the border, allocate river waters between
the two nations, and provide for flood control and water sanitation. Once
viewed as a model of international cooperation, in recent decades the IBWC has
been heavily criticized as an institutional anachronism, by-passed by modern
social, environmental and political issues.[7]

The economic development of the border region on the Mexican side of the
border depended largely on its proximity to the United States, due to its
remoteness from commercial centers in Mexico. During the years of Mexican
President Porfirio Díaz, between 1876 and 1910, the border communities boomed,
due mostly to close ties to the United States, and the Mexican government's
support for financial investments from the United States.[27] Railroads were
built that connected the northern Mexican states more to the United States
than to Mexico and the population grew tremendously. The mining industry also
developed, as did the United States’ control of it. By the early 20th century
companies from the United States controlled 81% of the mining industry and had
invested five hundred million dollars in the Mexican economy overall, twenty-
five percent of it in the border regions.[28]

The United States Immigration Act of 1891 authorizes the implementation of
inspection stations at ports of entry along the Mexican and Canadian borders.
The United States Immigration Act of 1917 requires the passing of a literacy
test and head tax by Mexicans wanting to enter the United States legally, but
during World War I, where labor shortages were growing, the provisions were
temporarily suspended. The United States Immigration Act of 1924 establishes
the United States Border Patrol.[29]

The Mexican Revolution, caused at least partially by animosity toward foreign
ownership of Mexican properties, began in 1910. The Revolution increased the
political instability in Mexico, but did not significantly slow United States
investment. It did reduce economic development within Mexico, however, and the
border regions reflected this. As the infrastructure of communities on the
United States side continued to improve, the Mexican side began to fall behind
in the construction and maintenance of important transportation networks and
systems necessary to municipal development.[28]

Although the Mexican Revolution caused insecurity in Mexico itself, it also
strained United States-Mexico relations. With the Mexican Revolution lasting
for 10 years, ending in 1920, and World War I simultaneously occurring between
1914 and 1918, the division between the United States and Mexico began to
polarize the two nation-states further apart. Constant battles and raids along
the border made both authorities nervous about borderland security. The
Zimmerman Telegram, allegedly sent by German officials, was meant to bait
Mexico to go to war with the United States in order to reconquer what was
taken from them during the U.S.-Mexican War. This inspired the increase
development of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to monitor suspicious
activities and potential violence at the border.[30] Within 10 years, constant
wars caused border towns to transform into battlefields, which intensified
transborder restrictions, dispatched federal soldiers to patrol the border,
and requested the construction of fences and barriers between border towns.
When the wars concluded, restrictions for crossing the border became more
laxed and most soldiers were sent home; however, the fences remained as a
physical reminder of the division between the two nations. As years passed,
more fences and higher barriers were established as a result of continuous
debates of where the boundary line was officially marked along the United
States and Mexico.[31]

In the first decade of the 21st century, illegal border crossers caused, or
impacted the extinguishing of, several wildfires near the border in
Arizona.[32]

## Security[edit]

### Background[edit]

Data from the United States Border Patrol Agency's (USBP) 2010 annual report
shows that among the total number of border crossings without documentation
from various countries into the United States, 90 percent were from Mexico
alone. In addition, there are more than 6 million undocumented Mexican
nationals residing in the United States.[33] The border, with a length of
3,145 kilometers (1,954 mi), has a very high rate of documented and
undocumented migrant crossings every year. With such a high rate of people
crossing annually to the United States, the country has invested in several
distinct security measures.

In 2010, due to insecurity and instability at the southern border of the U.S.
President Barack Obama signed an appropriation bill, which gave the Customs
and Border Protection, specifically the Border Patrol, 600 million dollars to
implement and improve security. The U.S. government has invested many millions
of dollars on border security, although this has not stopped undocumented
immigration in the United States.[34] In June 2018, the U.S. government
announced installation of facial recognition system for monitoring the
immigrant's activities.[35]

### Border enforcement[edit]

See also: Illegal immigration to the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/04/South_Texas%2C_Border_Patrol_Agents%2C_McAllen_Horse_Patrol_Unit.jpg/220px-

South_Texas%2C_Border_Patrol_Agents%2C_McAllen_Horse_Patrol_Unit.jpg)

Border Patrol agents in southern Texas in 2013

While the Border Patrol has changed a lot since its inception in 1924, its
primary mission remains unchanged: to detect and prevent the illegal entry of
immigrants into the United States. Together with other law enforcement
officers, the Border Patrol helps maintain borders that work – facilitating
the flow of legal immigration and goods while preventing the illegal
trafficking of people and contraband. Since the Border Patrol's strategy has
occasionally changed and most recently within the past two decades, the
present strategy to enforce migration along the United States-Mexico border is
by the means of "prevention through deterrence". Its primary goal is to
completely prevent undocumented immigrants from entering the United States
from Mexico rather than apprehending the unauthorized who are already in the
country. As assertive as it was, "prevention through deterrence" has not been
as successful as it was planned to do, due to the doubling in size of
undocumented immigrants population during the two decades leading up to
2014.[36]

In order to effectively enforce border protection, the United States' policies
and regulations have looked to make border crossings more hazardous through
the implementation of various operations, one of those being the "funnel
effect". The tactic was meant to discourage migration from Mexico into the
United States by forcing migrants to travel further around barriers where the
terrain and weather are more risky, but the strategy was not as successful as
initially planned, due to the will of migrants making the choice to pass
through extreme circumstances.[37] As a result, the effect funneled more
immigrants to their death even with the assistant of coyotes (smugglers). Not
only has this approach caused fatalities throughout the United States-Mexico
border, but it has even stirred up a nuisance for documented immigrants and
American citizens. There has been general concern about the Border Patrol and
other agencies abusing their authority by racial profiling and conducting
unwarranted searches outside the exception of the 25 mile border zone, but
still within the 100 mile border zone. Notwithstanding these setbacks,
billions of dollars of governmental funding are still spent on the "prevention
through deterrence" strategy, especially within the rise of the Trump
administration.[36]

In 2012, Border Patrol agents made over 364,000 arrests of people illegally
entering the country. Considerable success has been achieved in restoring
integrity and safety to the Southwest border, by putting in place a border-
control strategy. These include Operation Gatekeeper in San Diego, CA,
Operation Hold the Line in El Paso, TX, Operation Rio Grande in McAllen, TX,
Operation Safeguard in Tucson, AZ, and the Arizona Border Control Initiative
(ABCI) along the Arizona border.[38][39][40] The border has the highest number
of registered legal crossings of any land border in the world.[1] Over five
million cars and trucks travel through the border annually.[41]

According to Vulliamy, one in five Mexican nationals will visit or work in the
United States at one point in their lifetime.[41] As of 2010, the border is
guarded by more than twenty thousand Border Patrol agents, more than at any
time in its history.[42] However, they only have "effective control" of less
than 1,100 kilometers (680 mi) of the 3,145 km (1,954 mi) of total border,[43]
with an ability to actually prevent or stop illegal entries along 208 km (129
mi) of that border.[44] The border is paralleled by United States Border
Patrol interior checkpoints on major roads generally between 25 and 75 miles
(40 and 121 km) from the U.S. side of the border, and garitas generally within
50 km of the border on the Mexican side.[45][46][47]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ef/Sinaloa_Cartel_Drug_Tunnel.jpg/220px-

Sinaloa_Cartel_Drug_Tunnel.jpg)

Drug trafficking tunnel under the U.S.–Mexico border used by the Sinaloa
Cartel

There are an estimated half a million illegal entries into the United States
each year.[48] Border Patrol activity is concentrated around border cities
such as San Diego and El Paso which have extensive border fencing. This means
that the flow of illegal immigrants is diverted into rural mountainous and
desert areas, leading to several hundred migrant deaths along the Mexico–U.S.
border of those attempting to cross into the United States from Mexico
illegally and vice versa.[48] Undocumented labor contributes $395 billion to
the economy every year. While the U.S. is in favor of immigration, the
increase in undocumented immigration has given border-crossing a negative
image. There are around 11.5 million undocumented workers in the U.S. today,
and 87% of undocumented immigrants have been living in the U.S. for more than
7 years.[38] Local economies that develop on the Mexican side capitalize not
only on available skills but also on available, usually discarded, materials.
Small businesses trade in clothes that are purchased by the pound and
cardboard from the United States. Some items, like the used tires found
everywhere along the border, are made into certain items that support local
economies and define a border.[39]

The Secure Fence Act of 2006 was passed providing for the construction of 700
miles (1,100 km) of high-security fencing. Attempts to complete the
construction of the Mexico–United States barrier have been challenged by the
Mexican government and various U.S.–based organizations.

In January 2013, the Government Accountability Office released a report
stating that the United States Border Patrol only intercepted sixty-one
percent of individuals illegally crossing the border in 2011, which translated
to 208,813 individuals not apprehended.[49] 85,827 of the 208,813 would go on
to illegally enter the United States, while the rest returned to Mexico and
other Central American countries.[49] The report also showed that the number
of illegal border crossings has dropped.[49]

![](/api/rest_v1/page/graph/png/Mexico%E2%80%93United_States_border/0/6ad0e8df4ff0a925396b2fe69762d3db14a3b8d1.png)

The apprehensions per (fiscal) year are shown in the graph; they reached a
maximum of over 1.643 million in the year 2000.[50] Similar numbers had been
reached in 1986 with over 1,615 million. Since 2010, the numbers have
consistently remained beneath half a million.[50]

The increase of border security throughout the years has progressively made
crossings at the United States-Mexico border more dangerous which has
developed a questionable matter of human rights crisis at the border. The
number of migrant deaths occurring along the United States-Mexico border has
dramatically increased, due to the change of migrant traffic moving into rural
areas from urban spaces.[51] Along the Arizona-Mexico border, only seven
migrant deaths were recorded in 1996, however from 2001 until 2012, it was
discovered that there were the remains of over 2,000 migrants. Since the
majority of deaths occur in rural areas, where extreme temperatures are
common, it is most likely that the number of recorded deaths are only a
fraction of the total. Due to harsh, hard to reach terrains, human remains may
not be found for years, if not, ever.[52]

### Border incursions[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Pedestrian_border_crossing_sign_Tijuana_Mexico.jpg/170px-

Pedestrian_border_crossing_sign_Tijuana_Mexico.jpg)

Border for pedestrians in Tijuana, Baja California

According to the U.S. Border Patrol, apprehensions of central Americans at the
US-Mexico border reduced from 70,000 to 55,000 attempted illegal migrants from
2007 to 2011. Thereafter, the number of apprehensions increased dramatically
to 95,000 in 2012, 150,000 in 2013 and 220,000 in 2014. The increased
apprehensions could have been either due to improved border security, due to a
dramatic rise in attempted crossings, or both.[53]

As per the media, in the fiscal year of 2006, there were twenty-nine confirmed
border incursions by Mexican government officials, of which seventeen were by
armed individuals. Since 1996 there have been 253 incursions by Mexican
government officials.[54][55][56] In 2014 the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security informed California Representative Duncan D. Hunter that since 2004,
there have been 300 documented border incursions, which resulted in 131
individuals being detained.[57]

The _Washington Times_ has reported that on Sunday, August 3, 2008, Mexican
military personnel who crossed into Arizona from Mexico encountered a U.S.
Border Patrol agent, whom they held at gunpoint. The soldiers later returned
to Mexico, as backup Border Patrol agents came to investigate.[58]

### Disagreements over need for more resources[edit]

Proponents of greater spending on the border argue that continuing the buildup
is necessary due to increased violence and drug trafficking[ _when?_ ] from
Mexico spilling into the United States.[59] However, critics such as the
Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) have argued that the diminishing
number of border crossings can only be partially attributed to U.S. security
measures. Unintentional factors, such as a weakened U.S. economy in the wake
of the 2008 financial crisis and increased violence in northern Mexico have
made attempting illegal border crossings more risky and less rewarding.[60]

### In context of Trump administration[edit]

See also: 2017 Mexico–United States diplomatic crisis

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6d/2019_US_Mexico_Border_Crossing_apprehension_%2848036606282%29.jpg/220px-2019_US_Mexico_Border_Crossing_apprehension_%2848036606282%29.jpg)

US Border Patrol agents review documents of individuals suspected of attempted
illegal entry in 2019

In 2016, Republican nominee for president Donald Trump insisted he wanted to
build a border wall to control immigration. He declared that, as president, he
would force Mexico to pay all costs.[61][62] On January 25, 2017, several days
after his inauguration and two days in advance of a planned meeting in
Washington, D.C. with Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto, President Trump
signed Executive Order 13767 to enable the building of the wall[63] Peña Nieto
denied that Mexico would pay for the wall and declined the meeting.[64]
Shortly after, Trump announced that he intended to impose a 20% tariff on
Mexican goods.[65] (Since tariffs tax the consumer, this would have been a way
of obtaining funds through a sales tax on Americans, not by making Mexico
pay.)[66]

On September 20, 2017, California Attorney General Becerra filed a lawsuit
alleging that the Trump administration has overstepped its powers in
expediting construction of a border wall.[67][68] As of the end of 2017,
Mexico had not agreed to pay any amount toward the wall, no new tariffs on
Mexican goods had been considered by the U.S. Congress,[69] the U.S. Congress
had not appropriated funding for a wall, and no further wall construction had
started beyond what was already planned during the Obama administration.[69]

In June 2018, the Trump administration established a new policy of separating
parents from their children at the Mexican border. People asking for asylum at
official ports of entry were "being turned away and told there’s no room for
them now."[70] The U.S. and Mexico mutually placed tariffs on each other's
exports.[71]

On November 8, 2018, the Trump administration announced new rules to deny
asylum to anyone who crosses into the United States illegally from any nation,
at Trump's discretion. This was based on the Supreme Court decision of _Trump
v. Hawaii_ and the presidential powers of the Immigration and Nationality Act
of 1965.[72] Trump signed a proclamation the next day to specify that people
crossing the Mexican border illegally would not qualify for asylum; he called
the march of migrants from Central America towards the United States a
"crisis".[73] Civil rights groups strongly criticized the move, and several
groups, including the Southern Poverty Law Center, the American Civil
Liberties Union, and the Center for Constitutional Rights, filed a lawsuit in
the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California to challenge
the proclamation.[73] Judge Jon S. Tigar ruled in favor of the advocacy groups
on November 20, 2018, placing an injunction on the administration to delay
implementation of the rule.[74] The administration appealed to the Ninth
Circuit, where a divided 2-1 panel ruled that the new asylum rules were
inconsistent with existing law and upheld the injunction.[75] On December 21,
2018, the Supreme Court declined to hear the administration's challenge,
leaving the injunction in place and preventing the asylum ban from being
enforced.[76]

During the fiscal year from September 2017 to September 2018, U.S. border
agents arrested 107,212 people traveling in families, a record-high number.
During the following five months (October 2018 through February 2019), that
record was shattered by the arrest of 136,150 people traveling in
families.[77]

On March 31, 2019, Trump threatened to close the border, cutting off trade
between the countries.[78] On April 4, Trump said that instead he would give
Mexico a year to stop illegal drugs from coming into the United States. If
this did not happen, he said tariffs on automobiles would be used first, and
then closing of the border.[79]

#### Proposed wall[edit]

Main article: Trump wall

While running for president, Trump claimed that the wall would cost $8 to $12
billion[80] and that he could force Mexico to pay for it. Serious cost
estimates of the proposed wall vary widely. In early 2017, shortly after Trump
took office, the Department of Homeland Security estimated the cost at $22
billion,[81] while Democratic staff on the Senate Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs Committee estimated $70 billion to build the wall and
$150 million in annual maintenance.[82] Significant cost overruns and missed
deadlines are common in government projects; in recent U.S. history, see, for
example, the Big Dig and the Boeing Dreamliner.

In the summer of 2017, four major construction companies planned to bid for
the contract. The Customs and Border Protection agency budgeted $20 million to
hire these companies to build half-million-dollar prototypes of the wall. At
this time, Congress had only approved $341 million to maintain the existing
wall; no funds had been allocated to build new sections of wall.[83] The
Department of Homeland Security recommended that the wall's height should be
between 18 and 30 ft (5.5 and 9.1 m) and its depth should be up to 6 ft (1.8
m) to deter drug traffickers from building tunnels.[84]

As of March 2019[update], international asylum laws continued to be flouted at
the border.[85]

### Humanitarian assistance along the border[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This article **is written like apersonal reflection, personal essay, or
argumentative essay** that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or
presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by
rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. _( June 2018)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

\---|---

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Water_Stations_at_Border.jpg/220px-

Water_Stations_at_Border.jpg)

A volunteer from the Humane Border group is refilling water stations located
on the desert of the U.S.-Mexico border.

Among the diversity of humanitarian assistance along the U.S.–Mexico border,
there are groups who take on a more hands-on approach. The Humane Borders, No
More Deaths, and Samaritans are all humanitarian groups that provide water in
order to reduce deaths of immigrants who are journeying through the Arizona
desert.[86] Despite having a common goal, a policy passed in 2010 by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife federal agency allowed water drums with 55 gallons of water
to be placed in roads of disturbed areas, which supports method of Humane
Borders and counters the methods of No More Deaths and Samaritans who place
one-gallon jugs of water hanging from trees.[86]

No More Deaths (No Más Muertes) is a non-governmental organization (NGO) that
is headquartered in Tucson, Arizona (roughly 66 miles from the U.S.-Mexico
border) that is designed to assist in ending death and suffering of immigrants
along the U.S.-Mexico border by upholding fundamental human rights. Elemental
services of No More Deaths is to provide humanitarian assistance, giving food
and first aid treatment, witness and respond to human rights abuses,
encouraging humane immigration policy, and making phone calls to relatives of
immigrants.[87] Since its founding in 2004, No More Deaths has provided
assistance to thousands of migrant border crossers, however the Border Patrol
and other public land agencies near the U.S.-Mexico border have challenged the
efforts of various humanitarian groups, by following immigrants to a medical
volunteer camp and raiding it.[88] Humanitarian groups along the border have
been tested by Border Patrol and other agencies, however the authority of the
Trump administration has introduced a new tier of restriction through
unprecedented levels of surveillance, harassment, and intimidation to border
relief efforts.[89] Nevertheless, volunteers of No More Deaths are committed
each day to hike the trails in search of a sick or wounded abandoned by their
coyote (guide), and most importantly, they walk to bear witness of injustice
sufferings against basic human rights.[90]

In contrast, there are other humanitarian groups whose goal is create
healthier communities along the U.S.–Mexico border. Due to an incidence rate
of HIV and tuberculosis being higher in border towns such as El Paso, Texas
and Ciudad Juarez, Sonora than at the national level in both countries, the
Nuestra Casa Initiative, developed with the help of Project Concern
International, the US Agency for International Development, the Alliance of
Border Collaborative, Dr. Eva Moya and Damien Schumman, tried to counter the
health disparities by using a cross-border strategy that moved around an
exhibit prominent in various Museums and universities.[91][92] Similarly,
Special Action Groups as part of the Border Health Strategic Initiative
created by the University of Arizona with other groups helped create a
healthier Hispanic community in Arizona border towns by creating policy and
infrastructure changes both in the public and private factor.[93] These groups
provided humanitarian assistance to counter the prominence of Type 2 diabetes
among the Hispanic community since they acquired a block grant for new walking
trails and encouraged public elementary schools to provide healthier food
choices for students.[93]

A shelter is an example of a place where immigrants can feel safe from
mistreatment, discrimination, extreme temperatures, and hunger. After many
days, people are physically and mentally exhausted and are usually in
desperate need of basic human necessities. Upon arriving at a shelter,
travelers are finally able to properly bathe themselves and receive a new pair
of clothes. In recent years, the number of unaccompanied children migrating
through the United States-Mexico border has substantially increased and many
find a shelter as a respite from their sufferings. In these shelters, children
have a right to educational, mental, and health care along with other
developmental services where they can rest from a troubled home country or
traumatic journey.[94] Even though there are frequent hazards that many
immigrants have to encounter when crossing the desert near the Mexico-United
States border, they still need to be cautious of local gangs. Immigrants are
considered easy targets by gang members, because they do not have the strength
to resist aggressive offenders and end up left with nothing. In June 2018,
U.S. Attorney General, Jeff Sessions, disqualified victims of gangs or
domestic violence to be reasonable causes for asylum seekers.[95] Despite the
physical dangers of nature and thugs, immigrants at shelters still fall victim
to trolling researchers and journalists. Fortunately, they do not harm those
they are interviewing, but constantly looking for a "good" story can aggravate
anyone who is still recovering from an arduous journey.[96] A shelter like the
Juan Bosco Shelter in Nogales, Sonora is supported by the Border Community
Alliance, a nonprofit organization who looks to bridge the Mexico-United
States border through fostering a community.[97]

Not only do these Hispanic communities faced health inequalities, but
political inequalities as well.[ _citation needed_ ] The need for political
change was so huge that it has encouraged Hispanic women to engage in activism
at a local level. The Neighborhood Action Group in Chula Vista, California is
one of the groups of the attracted the help of local Hispanic women to
implement a feminist perspective in activism in spite of the social and
economic obstacles as well as Assembly Bill No. 775, 2005 that prohibited
children being used as interpreters.[98] These humanitarian groups have
implemented various strategies to pursue their goals that ultimately try to
counter the number of immigrant deaths and abuses in immigrant detention even
if it means the criminalization and higher levels of discrimination against
them.[99] In regards to the Humanitarian assistance along the U.S.–Mexico
border on the Mexico side, most humanitarian groups focus on assisting the
deportees. As rates of deportation continue to drastically increase, “the
deportation of many individuals is becoming more and more notable” in the
streets of Mexico cities.[100] As a result, many humanitarian groups have form
along the Mexico cities where undocumented individuals are deported such as
Nogales, Mexico. The humanitarian groups consist of faith-based communities
and primarily non-profit organizations that assist the exhausted deportees.
Not only are the deportees exhausted, but also many of them do not have any
resources with them such as money, food, or family information that can help
them. This oftentimes leads them to be homeless and go days without eating.
They often go homeless because they "do not know where to turn to receive a
meal, find shelter and to make a phone call".[101] Along with them arriving
without those resources, many immigrants "find themselves in distress" due to
the fact that they arrive to Mexico emotionally and psychologically
devastated.[102] Contributing factors that might have caused them to be
devastated can either be that they were separated from "their family members
or the inability to work legally in the United States".[103] Therefore, the
primary purpose of the humanitarian groups on the Mexico side of the border is
to create a pathway for transitional support such as providing the deportees
food, shelter, clothing, legal help and social services.[100] In addition,
there are humanitarian groups that provides meals and shelter to deportees
according to their deportation documents. Humanitarian groups along the border
in Mexico are El Comedor, Nazareth House, Camino Juntos, La 72, and FM4: Paso
Libre.

## Border zone policies[edit]

### Department of Homeland Security Secure Border Initiative[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/b4/Ambox_important.svg/40px-

Ambox_important.svg.png)

|

**This section has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss
these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these
template messages)_

|

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Mexico–United States border" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( March 2015)_ _(Learn how and when to remove
this template message)_

\---|---

![Question book-

new.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **relies largely or entirely on a singlesource**. Relevant
discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by
introducing citations to additional sources. _( June 2018)_

\---|---

_(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e2/Defense.gov_photo_essay_060719-A-3715G-077.jpg/220px-

Defense.gov_photo_essay_060719-A-3715G-077.jpg)

A U.S. Army National Guard member working with the U.S. Border Patrol in
support of Operation Jump Start, Arizona, July 2006

A National Border Patrol Strategic Plan was first developed in 1994 to deal
with the fact that borders were being overrun by illegal immigrants and drug
dealers. It was then updated in 2004 and 2012. In 2004 the updated strategy
focused on command structures, intelligence and surveillance, enforcement and
deployment of U.S. Border Patrol agents to better respond to threats at the
border. The strategic planning led to broader policy development for the
Department of Homeland Security which led to the Secure Border Initiative
(SBI) in 2005 to secure U.S. borders and reduce illegal migration. The main
components of SBI dealt with staffing concerns, removal capacity, surveillance
and tactical infrastructure and interior enforcement.[104]

An additional component was “high consequence enforcement”, which was not the
subject of a formal public policy document. There was the allowance,
historically, for voluntary returns of individuals apprehended at the border
by Border Patrol agents. These voluntary returns, after the SBI of 2005, were
limited to three “high consequence outcomes”.[104]

One "high consequence outcome" was formal removal, which meant the individual
would be deemed ineligible for a visa for at least five years and subject to
criminal charges if caught re-entering illegally. The Immigration and
Nationality Act permitted aliens to be formally removed with “limited judicial
processing” known as expedited removal. The Department of Homeland Security
has expanded between 2002 and 2006, expedited removal for “certain aliens that
entered within previous two weeks and were apprehended within 100 miles (160
km) of the border”.[104]

Another “high consequence outcome” is the increase in criminal charges.
Department of Homeland Security has also worked with the Department of Justice
to increase the number of apprehended individuals crossing the border
illegally who are charged with criminal offenses. Most of these cases are
prosecuted under Operation Streamline.[104] The third “high consequence
outcome” is known as remote repatriation. This is the return of apprehended
Mexicans to remote locations by Border Patrol rather than the nearest Mexican
port of entry.[104]

### 100-mile border zone[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Mexico–United States border" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( March 2015)_ _(Learn how and when to remove
this template message)_

\---|---

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/Border_Region.png/220px-

Border_Region.png)

100-mile border region on the U.S.–Mexico border

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d5/USMC-10343.jpg/220px-

USMC-10343.jpg)

Members of the North Carolina Army National Guard monitoring the U.S.–Mexico
border in southwest Arizona

The United States has established a 100-mile (160 km) border zone which
applies to all U.S. external borders including all coasts, in effect covering
two-thirds of the U.S. population,[105] including a majority of the largest
cities in the U.S. and several entire states (namely Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Hawaii, Maine, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, and Rhode
Island).[106] The border zone was established by the U.S. Department of
Justice in its interpretation of the _Immigration and Nationality Act of
1952_.[106] Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officials have authority to
stop and search within this zone, and are authorized to enter private property
without a warrant within 25 miles (40 km) of the border as well as establish
checkpoints.[106][107]

The Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution protects against unreasonable
search and seizure. However, under the border search exception, this
protection does not fully apply at borders or border crossings (also known as
ports of entry) or in the border zone. This means that much of the U.S.
population is subject to CBP regulations including stop and search. There are
some limits to CBP officials’ ability to stop and search. For instance CBP
officials are not allowed to pull anyone over without a reasonable suspicion
of immigration violation or crime, or search vehicles without warrant or
probable cause.[106] The ACLU, however, found that CBP officials routinely
ignore or misunderstand the limits of authority, and this is compounded by
inadequate training, lack of oversight and failure to hold officials
accountable for abuse—incidence of abuse is common.[106]

### Operation Streamline[edit]

Main article: Operation Streamline

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9a/Tucson_Federal_Courthouse.jpg/220px-

Tucson_Federal_Courthouse.jpg)

Federal courthouse in Tucson, AZ, where Operation Streamline proceedings take
place

Operation Streamline refers collectively to zero-tolerance policies
implemented at the Mexico–U.S. border that seek to remove undocumented
immigrants through an expedited process if they have arrived with missing or
fraudulent identification or have previously been convicted for an immigration
crime.[108]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e3/ICE_Arrest.jpg/220px-

ICE_Arrest.jpg)

ICE ERO officers deporting a man wanted for two murders in Mexico

#### History[edit]

Operation Streamline was first implemented in Del Rio, Texas, in 2005.[109]
The program has since expanded to four out of the five federal judicial
districts on the U.S.–Mexico border: Yuma, Arizona; Laredo, Texas; Tucson,
Arizona; and Rio Grande Valley, Texas.[108][110]

Previously, immigrants apprehended at the border were either given the option
to voluntarily return to their home country or they were placed in civil
immigration proceedings.[108] After Operation Streamline was implemented,
nearly all people apprehended at the border who are suspected of having
crossed illegally are subject to criminal prosecution.[110] Defendants who are
charged with crossing into the U.S. illegally are tried en masse to determine
their guilt.[109] Defense attorneys often are responsible for representing
anywhere from six to forty immigrants at once.[109] Around 99% of defendants
in Operation Streamline proceedings plead guilty.[108] The defendants are
charged with a misdemeanor if convicted of crossing the border illegally for
the first time, and a felony if it is a repeat offense.[109]

In December 2009, it was decided in _United States v. Roblero-Solis_ that en
masse judicial proceedings like those in Operation Streamline violated Rule 11
in the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. Rule 11 states that the court must
determine that a guilty plea is voluntarily made by addressing the defendant
personally in court. The _Roblero-Solis_ case determined that “personally”
means that the judge must address the defendant in a person-to-person manner.
Though many courts have changed their procedures to adapt to the ruling, there
are still forms of en masse trials practiced at the border.[109]

#### Support and criticisms[edit]

Proponents of Operation Streamline claim that the harsher prosecution has been
an important factor in deterring immigrants from crossing the border
illegally. Apprehensions have decreased in certain sectors after 2005, which
is seen as a sign of success. For example, the Del Rio, Texas, sector saw a
decline from 2005 to 2009 of 75% (from 68,510 to 17,082). Similarly,
apprehensions declined in Yuma, Arizona, by 95% (from 138,438 to 6,951) from
2006 to 2009.[110]

Criticisms of Operation Streamline point to the program’s heavy use of federal
court and enforcement resources as a negative aspect.[110] In addition, the
prosecution of all illegal border crossings takes the focus away from
prosecuting more serious crimes.[110] They claim that the program’s cost is
too high for the effectiveness of the work it is accomplishing.[109] In
response to the claim that Operation Streamline is an effective deterrent,
critics of the program claim that the incentives to cross the border in order
to work or be with family are much stronger.[109]

## Environment[edit]

Further information: Environmental issues along the Mexico–United States
border

### History[edit]

The Agreement on Cooperation for the Protection and Improvement of the
Environment in the Border Area, known as the _La Paz Agreement_ , was signed
into law on August 14, 1983, and became enforceable on February 16, 1984.[111]
This agreement to protect the environment is the political foundation between
the U.S. and Mexico for 4 subsequent programs. Each program has addressed
environmental destruction in the border region resulting from the rise of the
maquiladora industries, those who migrated to Northern Mexico to work in the
industries, the lack of infrastructure to accommodate the people, Mexico's lax
regulations concerning all these factors, the resulting spillover into the
U.S., and the U.S.'s own environmentally destructive tendencies. The programs
were: IBEP (1992), Border XXI (1996), Border 2012 (2003) and Border 2020
(2012).[112]

#### Impacts of border wall on wildlife[edit]

![Question book-

new.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **relies largely or entirely on a singlesource**. Relevant
discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by
introducing citations to additional sources. _( June 2018)_

\---|---

In 2006, during the presidency of George W. Bush, Congress approved Secure
Fence Act which allowed the Department of Homeland Security to erect a border
fence along the United State and Mexico border. A total of $2.2 billion was
allocated to building this wall in five different areas of the border.
Congress also approved a different law called the REAL ID Act which gave the
Department of Homeland Security the approval to build the wall without taking
into consideration the environmental and legal issues related to the wall. The
United States Congress insisted that the act was passed for the sake of
national security of the United States.[113]

According to a delegation of Arizona park and refuge managers, wildlife
biologists, and conservationists who studied the United State and Mexico
border concluded that building a wall along the Mexico border will also have
negative impacts on the natural environment in the region. They argued that
the border wall will negatively affect the wildlife in the Sonoran Desert
including plants and animals. Naturally, animals do not tend to stay in one
place and instead, they expedite to various places for water, plants, and
other means in order to survive. The wall would restrict animals to a specific
territory and would reduce their chances of survival. According to Brian
Segee, a staff attorney with Wildlife Activists says that except high flying
birds, the rest of the animals would not be able to move to other places due
to the wall along the border. For instance, participants in this study argued
that some of the animal kinds such as javelinas, ocelots, and Sonoran
pronghorn would not be able to freely move along the border areas. It would
also restrict the movement of jaguars from Sierra Madre Occidental forests to
the southwestern parts of the United States. According to Brian Nowicki, a
conservation biologist at the Center for Biological Diversity, there are 30
animal species living in the Arizona and Sonora that face danger and their
movement to find new habitat and sources of survival would be restricted by
the border wall.[113]

## Travel[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/Mexico_Baja_California_passport_stamp.jpg/200px-

Mexico_Baja_California_passport_stamp.jpg)

Passport stamp upon arrival in Tijuana, Baja California land border crossing

### Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative[edit]

Main article: Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative

In late 2006, the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
announced a rule regarding new identification requirements for U.S. citizens
and international travelers entering the United States implemented on January
23, 2007. This final rule and first phase of the WHTI specifies nine forms of
identification, one of which is required to enter the United States by air: a
valid passport; a passport card; a state enhanced driver's license or state
enhanced non-driver ID card (available in Michigan, New York, Vermont, and
Washington[114]) approved by the Secretary of Homeland Security; a trusted
traveler program card (NEXUS, FAST, or SENTRI); an enhanced tribal
identification card; a Native American Tribal Photo Identification Card; Form
I-872 – American Indian Card; a valid Merchant Mariner Document when traveling
in conjunction with official maritime business; or a valid U.S. military
identification card when traveling on official orders.[115][116][117][118]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/92/SanYsidroBorderCrossing.JPG/220px-

SanYsidroBorderCrossing.JPG)

The San Ysidro border crossing between San Diego and Tijuana

The Mexico–United States border is the world's busiest border, specifically
the crossing at San Diego, California, to Tijuana, Baja California (15.6 miles
between the cities), known as the San Ysidro Port of Entry.[119] In the U.S.,
Interstate 5 crosses directly to Tijuana, and the highway's southern terminus
is this crossing. In 2005, more than 17 million vehicles and 50 million people
entered the U.S. through San Ysidro.[120][121][122][123] Among those who enter
the United States through San Ysidro are _transfronterizos_ , American
citizens who live in Mexico and attend school in the United States.[124]

Along the coast of Baja California, there are neighborhoods of Americans
living in Tijuana, Rosarito Beach, and Ensenada, whose residents commute to
the United States daily to work.[125] Additionally, many Mexicans also enter
the United States to commute daily to work.[126] In 1999, 7.6% of the labor
force of Tijuana was employed in San Diego.[127]

In August 2015, Mexico began enforcing a rule that all foreign citizens that
plan to stay in the country for more than seven days or are travelling on
business will have to pay a 330 peso (21 dollar) fee and show their
passport.[128][129][130]

## Barrier[edit]

Main article: Mexico–United States barrier

The U.S. government had plans in 2006, during the Bush administration, to
erect a border fence along the Mexico–U.S. border. The controversial proposal
included creating many individual fences. Almost 600 miles (970 km) of fence
was constructed, with each of the individual fences composed of steel and
concrete.[41] In between these fences are infrared cameras and sensors,
National Guard soldiers, and SWAT teams on alert, giving rise to the term
"virtual fence".[41] Construction on the fence began in 2006, with each mile
costing the U.S. government about $2.8 million.[12] In 2010, the initiative
was terminated due to costs, after having completed 640 miles (1,030 km) of
either barrier fence or vehicle barriers, that were either new or had been
rebuilt over older, inferior fencing. The Boeing-built SBI-net systems of
using radar, watchtowers, and sensors (without a fence or physical barrier)
were scrapped for being over budget, full of glitches, and far behind
schedule.[131]

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/02/US-Mexico_border_fence.jpg/340px-US-Mexico_border_fence.jpg)
    

The U.S.–Mexico border fence near El Paso, Texas

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/40/BorderAtJacumba.jpg/340px-BorderAtJacumba.jpg)
    

Portion of border near Jacumba, California, in 2003

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/BorderAtJacumba2.jpg/436px-BorderAtJacumba2.jpg)
    

Portion of border near Jacumba, California, in 2009 with enhanced security

## Transborder Students[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section by
adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
removed. _( May 2019)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

\---|---

Many schools near the border in America have students who live on the other
side of the border. These students can be referred to as transborder students
as they live in Mexico but attend school in the United States. There are
thousands of elementary through high school students that cross the Mexican-
American border. They are known to wake up in the early hours of the morning
to make their way to the border, where they wait in long lines to cross into
the United States. After crossing the border, the students find a ride to
school. Many students come to America for the opportunity, because it has a
more developed and organized educational system. Students who go to school in
America have a better chance of reaching higher education in the US. In many
parts of Mexico schooling is only required for students up to age sixteen.
Many of the transborder students are natural born US citizens. Students that
were born in America have the right to an American education even if they do
not live in America. In places like the San Diego and Tijuana border, it is
much cheaper to live in Mexico. San Diego has a high cost of living and one of
the highest student homeless rates in the country, so many families move to
Tijuana because it is more affordable to raise a family.

In order to stop kids living in Mexico from coming to America for school, some
Bordertown schools require official documentation (such as bills, mail, etc.)
from the students, to show that the students live in that specific school
district.

In Brownsville, Texas, a city on the southern border of Texas that neighbors
Matamoros, Mexico there was the case that ruled that the districts cannot deny
students education if they have the proper paperwork. Many transborder
students who live in these districts with these requirements will use extended
family members’ addresses to prove their residency. Many questions about the
legitimacy of students have risen since the Trump administration took office
in 2017, making it more of a risk to cross the border for school. There is so
little statistical information because students are less open about talking.

## Veterinary inspections[edit]

When animals are imported from one country to another, there is the
possibility that diseases and parasites can move with them. Thus, most
countries impose animal health regulations on the import of animals. Most
animals imported to the United States must be accompanied by import permits
obtained in advance from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service (APHIS) and/or health certification papers from the
country of origin.

Veterinary inspections are often required, and are available only at
designated ports;[132] advance contact with port veterinarians is
recommended.[133] Animals crossing the United States–Mexico border may have a
country of origin other than the country where they present for inspection.
Such animals include those from the U.S. that cross to Mexico and return, and
animals from other countries that travel overland through Mexico or the U.S.
before crossing the border.

### Crossing from Mexico to the United States[edit]

APHIS imposes precautions to keep out several equine diseases, including
glanders, dourine, equine infectious anemia (EIA), equine piroplasmosis (EP),
Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE), and contagious equine metritis
(CEM).[134] APHIS also checks horses to prevent the introduction of ticks and
other parasites. In the Lower Rio Grande Valley, U.S. Department of
Agriculture inspectors look for horses and livestock that stray across the
border carrying ticks. These animals are often called wetstock, and the
inspectors are referred to as tickriders.[135]

Per APHIS, horses originating from Canada can enter the United States with a
Canadian government veterinary health certificate and a negative test for
EIA.[134] Horses from Mexico must have a health certificate; pass negative
tests for EIA, dourine, glanders, and EP at a USDA import center; and undergo
precautionary treatments for external parasites at the port of entry. Horses
from other Western Hemisphere countries must have the same tests as those from
Mexico and, except for horses from Argentina, must be held in quarantine for
at least seven days as a check for VEE.

APHIS imposes similar testing and certification requirements on horses from
other parts of the world but without the quarantine for VEE. These horses are
held in quarantine—usually three days—or until tests are completed. Because
the disease equine piroplasmosis (equine babesiosis) is endemic in Mexico but
not established in the United States,[136] transportation of horses from
Mexico to the United States requires evaluation of horses for the presence of
this disease.

Transportation of horses from Mexico to the United States normally requires at
least three days in quarantine, which is incompatible with most recreational
equestrian travel across the border. A leading exception to this rule is the
special waiver obtained by riders participating in the Cabalgata Binacional
Villista (see cavalcade).

### Crossing from the United States to Mexico[edit]

Import from the United States to Mexico requires evidence within the prior 45
days of freedom from equine infectious anemia, among other requirements.[137]

## See also[edit]

    
        * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fc/Flag_of_Mexico.svg/32px-Flag_of_Mexico.svg.png)Mexico portal
    * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/32px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png)United States portal
    * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f5/Terra.png/28px-Terra.png)International relations portal
    
    * Mexico–United States barrier
    * Mexico–United States international park
    * Mexico–United States relations
    * 2017 Mexico–United States diplomatic crisis
    * Border Protection, Anti-terrorism, and Illegal Immigration Control Act of 2005
    * List of municipalities (municipios) and counties on the Mexico–United States border
    * Migrant deaths along the Mexico–United States border
    * Roosevelt Reservation
    * Secure Fence Act of 2006
    * Sexual assault of migrants from Latin America to the United States
    * Treaty of Limits (Mexico–United States)
    * United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints
    * Border War (1910–19)
    * Operation Jump Start
    * Operation Phalanx (2010-2016)
    * Canada–United States border
    

## References[edit]

    
        1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Edwin Mora (May 19, 2010). "Senate Democratic Whip Compares Sealing the Mexican Border to Trying to Keep Drugs Off of I-95". _Cybercast News Service_. Retrieved  March 9, 2011.
    2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Golson, Barry; Thia Golson (2008). _Retirement Without Borders: How to Retire Abroad—in Mexico, France, Italy, Spain, Costa Rica, Panama, and Other Sunny, Foreign Places_. New York, New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 75\. ISBN 978-0-7432-9701-1. Retrieved March 9, 2011.
    3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Glenday, Craig (2009). _Guinness World Records 2009_. Random House Digital, Inc. p. 457\. ISBN 978-0-553-59256-6. Retrieved March 9, 2011.
    4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "US, Mexico open first new border crossing in 10 years". _AFP_. Washington. January 12, 2010. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved  December 3, 2012. "The US–Mexico border is the busiest in the world, with approximately 350 million crossings per year."
    5. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved  September 4, 2015.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
    6. **^** "Treaty to Resolve Pending Boundary Differences and Maintain the Rio Grande and Colorado River as the International Boundary between the United States of America and México" (PDF). November 23, 1970. Retrieved December 7, 2014.
    7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McCarthy, Robert J. (Spring 2011). "Executive Authority, Adaptive Treaty Interpretation, and the International Boundary and Water Commission, U.S.–Mexico". _Water Law Review_ : 3–5. SSRN 1839903.
    8. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved  January 25, 2018.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
    9. **^** "United States Section Directive" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 15, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2011.
    10. **^** "La Paz Agreement" (PDF). _Epa.gov_. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    11. **^** "The United States–Mexico Border Region at a Glance" (PDF). _United States–Mexico Border Health Commission_. New Mexico State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 15, 2012. Retrieved December 3, 2012. "In 2001, over 300 million two-way border crossings took place at the 43 POEs."
    12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hodge, Roger D. (2012). "Borderworld: How the U.S. Is Reengineering Homeland Security". _Popular Science_. **280** (1): 56–81.
    13. **^** Bogan, Jesse. "In Pictures: America's Busiest Border Crossings". _Forbes_. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    14. **^** "A Day at the Busiest Border Crossing in the World". _POLITICO Magazine_. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    15. **^** Ahmed, Azam. "Before the Wall: Life Along the U.S.-Mexico Border". Retrieved July 27, 2018.
    16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ MESA, OTAY. "Border Wait Times and Border Crossing Statistics - OTAYMESA". _OTAYMESA_. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    17. **^** "San Ysidro Is Getting a Clearer Look at Just How Polluted it Is - Voice of San Diego". _Voice of San Diego_. April 23, 2018. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Border Health Equity Transportation Study" (PDF). February 27, 2015.
    19. **^** "The World's Most Dangerous Borders". _Foreign Policy_. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    20. **^** "Cost of Living in Tijuana, Mexico. Jul 2018 prices in Tijuana". _Expatistan, cost of living comparisons_. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    21. **^** "Tijuana Wants You To Forget Everything You Know About It". _BuzzFeed News_. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    22. **^** Lakhani, Nina (December 12, 2017). "This is what the hours after being deported look like". _The Guardian_. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    23. **^** "San Diego Developers See a New Frontier in Tijuana". _Voice of San Diego_. November 30, 2015. Retrieved  July 27, 2018.
    24. **^** Martínez, Oscar J. (1988). _Troublesome Border_. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. ISBN 978-0-8165-1104-4.
    25. **^** "Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo". _Ourdocuments.gov_. 1848. Retrieved  December 6, 2014.
    26. **^** Byrd, Bobby; Mississippi, Susannah, eds. (1996). _The Late Great Mexican Border: Reports from a Disappearing Line_. El Paso: Cinco Puntos Press. ISBN 978-0-938317-24-1.
    27. **^** Hart, John M. (2000). "The Mexican Revolution, 1910–1920". _Oxford History of Mexico_. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 433–66. ISBN 978-0-19-511228-3.
    28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Lorey, David E. (1999). _The U.S.-Mexican Border in the Twentieth Century_. Wilmington: Scholarly Resources, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8420-2756-4.
    29. **^** "Some Events in the History of Mexico and the Border". _The Journal of American History_. **86** (2): 453–54. 1999. doi:10.2307/2567039. JSTOR 2567039.
    30. **^** Sherman, John W. (Fall 2016). "Fascist 'Gold Shirts' on the Río Grande: Borderlands Intrigue in the Time of Lázaro Cárdenas". _Journal of South Texas_. **30** : 8–21 - via EBSCOhost.
    31. **^** St. John, Rachel (2011). _Line in the Sand: A History of the Western U.S.-Mexico Border_. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 4\. ISBN 9780691156132.
    32. **^** Anu K. Mattal (November 22, 2011). Federal Agencies Could Better Utilize Law Enforcement Resources in Support of Wildland Fire Management Activities (Report). United States Government Accountability Office. Retrieved July 4, 2018.
    

"McCain blames some Arizona wildfires on illegal immigrants". _CNN_. June 19,
2011\. Retrieved July 4, 2018.

    
        33. **^** _Options for Estimating Illegal Entries at the U.S.–Mexico Border The National Academies Press_. Washington D.C.: The National Academies Press. 2013. doi:10.17226/13498. ISBN 978-0-309-26426-6.
    34. **^** Martínez, Ruben (2004). "Fortress America". _Index on Censorship_. **33** (3): 48–52.
    35. **^** Levin, Sam (June 5, 2018). "US government to use facial recognition technology at Mexico border crossing". _the Guardian_. Retrieved  June 6, 2018.
    36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ewing, Walter A. (2014). "Enemy Territory: Immigration Enforcement in the US - Mexico Borderlands". _Journal on Migration and Human Security_. **2** : 198–222 - via HeinOnline.
    37. **^** Newell, Bryce Clayton (May 2016). "Information seeking, technology use, and vulnerability among migrants at the United States–Mexico border". _Information Society_. **32** : 176–91 - via EBSCOhost.
    38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The U.S.–Mexico border: under the economic lens and in the historical frame". _pulsamerica.co.uk_.
    39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Borders and Identity". _smithsonianeducation.org_.
    40. **^** "Border Patrol Overview". _cbp.gov_.
    41. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Vulliamy, Ed (2010). _Amexica: War Along the Borderline_. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-10441-2.
    42. **^** U.S. Department of Homeland Security (June 23, 2010). "Fact Sheet: Southwest Border Next Steps". Retrieved August 6, 2010.
    43. **^** Jeffrey, Terence P. (September 24, 2009). "Administration Will Cut Border Patrol Deployed on U.S.–Mexico Border". Cybercast News Service. Archived from the original on December 9, 2009. Retrieved September 25, 2009.
    44. **^** Terence P. Jeffrey (March 31, 2011). "Federal Auditor: Border Patrol Can Stop Illegal Entries Along Only 129 Miles of 1,954-Mile Mexican Border". _Cybercast News Service_. Retrieved  March 31, 2011.
    45. **^** "BORDER PATROL: Available Data on Interior Checkpoints Suggest Differences in Sector Performance" (PDF). United States General Accounting Office. July 2005.
    46. **^** "BORDER PATROL: Checkpoints Contribute to Border Patrol's Mission, but More Consistent Data Collection and Performance Measurement Could Improve Effectiveness" (PDF). United States General Accounting Office. August 2009.
    47. **^** Aduana Mexico (2007). "Aduanas 25 de las Reglas de Caracter General en Materia de Comercio Exterior para 2007" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on February 24, 2012.
    48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Illegal Immigration – Border-Crossing Deaths Have Doubled Since 1995; Border Patrol's Efforts to Prevent Deaths Have Not Been Fully Evaluated" (PDF). Government Accountability Office. August 2006. p. 42.
    49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Dinan, Stephen (January 9, 2013). "Interceptions of immigrants stubbornly low". _Washington Times_. Retrieved  January 12, 2013.
    50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "United States Border Patrol" (PDF). Retrieved June 27, 2018.
    51. **^** Johnson, Leif (November 2015). "Material Interventions on the US-Mexico Border: Investigating a Sited Politics of Migrant Solidarity". _Antipode_. **47** : 1244 - via EBSCOhost.
    52. **^** Martinez, Daniel E.; Reineke, Robin; Rubio-Goldsmith, Raquel; Anderson, Bruce E.; Hess, Gregory L.; Parks, Bruce O. (2013). "A Continued Humanitarian Crisis at the Border: Undocumented Border Crosser Deaths Recorded by the Pima County Office of the Medical Examiner, 1990-2012". _SSRN Electronic Journal_. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2633209. ISSN 1556-5068.
    53. **^** "Statistics - SW Border apprehensions". _www.cbp.gov_. CBP - US Border patrol (Official website). Retrieved  November 6, 2018.
    54. **^** "Report: Border Patrol confirms 29 incursions by Mexican officials into U.S. in 2007". San Diego Union Tribune. Retrieved  January 17, 2008.
    55. **^** "MSNBC report on Border incursion Oct 18 2007". MSNBC. Retrieved  January 17, 2008.
    56. **^** "Mexican incursions inflame border situation". MSNBC. Retrieved  January 17, 2008.
    57. **^** "DHS to Hunter: More than 300 border incursions by Mexican military and law enforcement authorities since January 2004". _Congressman Duncan Hunter_. United States House of Representatives. June 17, 2014. Retrieved  June 17, 2014.
    58. **^** "Border patrol agent held at gunpoint". _Washington Times_. August 8, 2008.
    59. **^** Potter, Mark. "Debate rages over Mexico 'spillover violence' in U.S". NBC News. Retrieved September 24, 2012.
    60. **^** "Further Buildup on US–Mexico Border Unnecessary: Report". _InSight Crime_. April 20, 2012. Retrieved  December 7, 2014.
    61. **^** CNN, Stephen Collinson and Jeremy Diamond. "Mexican president disputes Trump over border wall payment discussion". _CNN_. Retrieved  October 7, 2016.
    62. **^** "How realistic is Donald Trump's Mexico wall?". _BBC News_. September 1, 2016. Retrieved  October 7, 2016.
    63. **^** BBC News (January 26, 2017). "Trump orders wall to be built on Mexico border". _BBC News_. Retrieved  January 26, 2017.
    64. **^** BBC News (January 26, 2017). "Mexico: We will not pay for Trump border wall". _BBC News_. Retrieved  January 26, 2017.
    65. **^** Reuters (January 26, 2017). "Trump seeks 20 percent tax on Mexico goods to pay for wall, crisis deepens". _Reuters_. Retrieved  January 26, 2017.
    66. **^** Baum, Caroline (March 6, 2019). "Forget what Donald Trump said: Tariffs are a tax on American consumers". MarketWatch. Retrieved March 7, 2019.
    67. **^** latimes.com: _California again steps up to Trump, this time to stop the border wall_
    68. **^** State of California Department of Justice, September 20, 2017: _Attorney General Becerra: Constitution, Rule of Law Barriers to Trump Border Wall_ (Press Release)
    69. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sullivan, Sean; Snell, Kelsey (March 16, 2017). "Republicans skeptical about paying for wall as Trump releases budget". _Washingtonpost.com_. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    70. **^** "Trump keeps making it harder for people to seek asylum legally". Vox. June 5, 2018. Retrieved  June 20, 2018.
    71. **^** Aleem, Zeeshan (June 6, 2018). "Trump hit Mexico with steel tariffs. Mexico is hitting back — and targeting Republicans". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 7, 2019.
    72. **^** Shear, Michael (November 8, 2018). "Trump Claims New Power to Bar Asylum for Immigrants Who Arrive Illegally". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  December 21, 2018.
    73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Shear, Michael; Sullivan, Eileen (November 9, 2018). "Trump Suspends Some Asylum Rights, Calling Illegal Immigration 'a Crisis'". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  December 21, 2018.
    74. **^** Jordan, Miriam (November 20, 2018). "Federal Judge Blocks Trump's Proclamation Targeting Some Asylum Seekers". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  December 21, 2018.
    75. **^** "US Appeals Court Won't Immediately Allow Trump Asylum Ban". Associated Press. December 7, 2018. Retrieved  December 21, 2018 - via The New York Times.
    76. **^** Kelly, Caroline; de Vogue, Ariane (December 21, 2018). "Supreme Court upholds block on Trump's asylum ban". _CNN_. Retrieved  December 21, 2018.
    77. **^** "U.S. Border Patrol Southwest Border Apprehensions by Sector FY2018". _U.S. Customs and Border Protection_. Retrieved  March 7, 2019.
    78. **^** Gomez, Alan (April 1, 2019). "Cutting aid and closing ports: Here's what's happening at the southern border". _USA Today_. Retrieved  April 1, 2019.
    79. **^** Collins, Michael; Fritze, John; Jackson, David (April 4, 2019). "President Trump says he will delay closing the border with Mexico for a year". _Asheville Citizen-Times_. Retrieved  April 4, 2019 - via USA Today.
    80. **^** Bennett, Brian; Berenson, Tessa; Abramson, Alana (February 13, 2019). "How Republicans Are Talking Trump Into Accepting a Smaller Border Wall Deal". Time. Retrieved March 7, 2019.
    81. **^** Greenwood, Max (February 9, 2017). "DHS report pegs cost of border wall at up to $21.6 billion: report". The Hill. Retrieved March 7, 2019.
    82. **^** Carney, Jordain (April 18, 2017). "Senate Dems: Trump's border wall could cost nearly $70 billion". The Hill. Retrieved March 7, 2019.
    83. **^** Nixon, Ron (August 31, 2017). "U.S. Moves to Build Prototypes for Mexican Border Wall". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  August 27, 2018.
    84. **^** THE WALL The real costs of a barrier between the United States and Mexico. https://www.brookings.edu/essay/the-wall-the-real-costs-of-a-barrier-between-the-united-states-and-mexico/
    85. **^** "Trapped in Tijuana: Migrants face a long, dangerous wait to claim asylum". _NBC News_. March 18, 2019. Retrieved  March 19, 2019.
    86. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Star, Brady McCombs Arizona Daily. "US allows new water stations by border". _Arizona Daily Star_. Retrieved  April 6, 2018.
    87. **^** Bird, Jo (November 2014). "Human Rights on the US/Mexico Border". _Pandora’s Box (1835-8624)_. **21** : 94–101 - via EBSCOhost.
    88. **^** Boodman, Eric (July 6, 2017). "After Trump's immigration crackdown, a desert clinic tries to save lives without breaking the law". _STAT_. Retrieved  December 1, 2018.
    89. **^** Smith, Sophie (October 2017). "No More Deaths: Direct Aid in the US-Mexico Border Zone" (PDF). _South Atlantic Quarterly_. **116** : 851–62 - via EBSCOhost.
    90. **^** Sundberg, Juanita (April 2013). "Prayer And Promise Along The Migrant Trail". _Geographical Review_. **103** : 230–34 - via EBSCOhost.
    91. **^** Moya, Eva, et al. “Nuestra Casa: An Advocacy Initiative to Reduce Inequalities and Tuberculosis along the US–Mexico Border.” _International Public Health Journal_ , vol. 8, no. 2, 2016, pp. 107–119.
    92. **^** Moya, Eva; Chavez-Baray, Silvia; Wood, William W.; Martinez, Omar (2016). "Nuestra Casa: An advocacy initiative to reduce inequalities and tuberculosis along the US–Mexico border". _International Public Health Journal_. **8** : 107–119. ISSN 1947-4989. Retrieved June 23, 2018.
    93. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohen, Stuart J.; Meister, Joel S.; deZapien, Jill G. (2016). "Special Action Groups for Policy Change and Infrastructure Support to Foster Healthier Communities on the Arizona–Mexico Border". _Public Health Reports_. **119** (1): 40–47. doi:10.1177/003335490411900110. ISSN 0033-3549. PMC 1502256. PMID 15147648.
    94. **^** Sweas, Megan (July 2014). "Brief Moments to Care for Immigrant Kids". _National Catholic Reporter_. **50** : 15–16 - via EBSCOhost.
    95. **^** Rhodan, Maya (November 2018). "Give Me Shelter". _Time_. **192** : 36–41 - via EBSCOhost.
    96. **^** "Our Mission". Retrieved  November 9, 2018.
    97. **^** De León, Jason (2015). _The Land of Open Graves: Living and Dying on the Migrant Trail_. University of California Press. p. 104\. ISBN 0520282752.
    98. **^** Bosco, Fernando J.; Aitken, Stuart C.; Herman, Thomas (2011). "Women and children in a neighborhood advocacy group: engaging community and refashioning citizenship at the United States–Mexico border". _Gender, Place & Culture_. **18** (2): 155–178. doi:10.1080/0966369X.2010.551652. ISSN 0966-369X.
    99. **^** Androff, D. K.; Tavassoli, K. Y. (2012). "Deaths in the Desert: The Human Rights Crisis on the U.S.–Mexico Border". _Social Work_. **57** (2): 165–173. doi:10.1093/sw/sws034. ISSN 0037-8046. PMID 23038878.
    100. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "New Organization Emerges to Aid Deported Mexican Nationals | San Miguel de Allende | Atención San Miguel". _Atencionsanmiguel.org_. Retrieved  April 6, 2018.
    101. **^** Burr, Pete (February 28, 2017), _Kino Border Initiative - the church without frontiers_ , retrieved April 6, 2018
    102. **^** "Humanitarianism from the ground: humanitarian aid to migrants and refugees in Mexico | Oxford Department of International Development". _Qeh.ox.ac.uk_. Retrieved  April 6, 2018.
    103. **^** "Kino Border Initiative - Iniciative Kino para la Frontera". _Kino Border Initiative_. Retrieved  April 6, 2018.
    104. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Seghetti, Lisa (December 31, 2014). "Border Security: Immigration Enforcement Between Ports of Entry" (PDF). _Congressional Research Service_.
    105. **^** Catherine E. Shoichet (May 24, 2018). "The US border is bigger than you think". CNN. Retrieved July 16, 2018.
    106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "The Constitution in the 100-Mile Border Zone". _American Civil Liberties Union_.
    107. **^** Rickerd, C. "Customs and Border Protection's (CBP's) 100-Mile Rule" (PDF). _American Civil Liberties Union_.
    108. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Lydgate, L. (2010). "Assembly-Line Justice: A Review of Operation Streamline". _California Law Review_. **98** (2): 481–544. JSTOR 20743978.
    109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Nazarian, E. (2011). "Crossing Over: Assessing Operation Streamline and the Rights of Immigrant Criminal Defendants at the Border". _Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review_. **44** : 1399–430. hdl:hein.journals/lla44. Archived from the original on 2011.
    110. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Kerwin, D.; McCabe, K. "Arrested on Entry: Operation Streamline and the Prosecution of Immigration Crimes". Migration Policy Institute.
    111. **^** "Agreement on Cooperation for the Protection and Improvement of the Environment in the Border Area" (PDF). US Environmental Protection Agency. 1983. Retrieved December 2, 2014.
    112. **^** Smith, Colin. "1 U.S.  – Mexico Cooperation for the Health of the Environment in the Border Region: A Policy History Analysis". Archived from the original on November 13, 2013.
    113. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cohn, Jeffrey P. (2007). "The Environmental Impacts of a Border Fence". _BioScience_. **57** (1): 96. doi:10.1641/B570116. ISSN 1525-3244. JSTOR 10.1641/b570116.
    114. **^** "WHTI: Enhanced Drivers License". _Getyouhome.gov_. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    115. **^** _DHS Announces Final Western Hemisphere Air Travel_, Association of Cotpotrate Travel Executives, December 5, 2006, archived from the original on December 16, 2007 , retrieved December 2, 2007
    116. **^** _Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative: The Basics_, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, archived from the original on December 26, 2007 , retrieved December 2, 2007
    117. **^** _Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative_, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, January 13, 2008, archived from the original on January 25, 2007 , retrieved January 12, 2007
    118. **^** "Traveling to USA?". _archive.org_. Archived from the original on September 11, 2004.
    119. **^** Sandra Dibble (July 11, 2010). "Number of border crossings stabilizes". _San Diego Union Tribune_. Retrieved  January 5, 2013.
    120. **^** OECD (September 28, 2010). _Regional Development Policies in OECD Countries_. OECD Publishing. p. 331\. ISBN 978-92-64-08725-5.
    121. **^** Berndes, Barry (2009). _The SAN DIEGAN – 41st Edition_. The SAN DIEGAN. p. 227\. ISBN 978-1-890226-13-8.
    122. **^** Gaynor, Tim (2009). _Midnight on the Line: The Secret Life of the U.S.–Mexico Border_. Macmillan. p. 81\. ISBN 978-1-4299-9462-0.
    123. **^** _Border Security: Despite Progress, Weaknesses in Traveler Inspections Exist at Our Nation's Port of Entry_ (PDF). United States Government Accountability Office. November 2007. p. 10\. GAO-08-219. Retrieved September 8, 2014. "and the busiest land crossing in the United States at San Ysidro, California, which processes over 17 million vehicles a year (see fig. 1);"
    124. **^** Brown, Patricia Leigh (January 16, 2012). "Young U.S. Citizens in Mexico Brave Risks for American Schools". _New York Times_. Retrieved  September 8, 2014.
    125. **^** Yogerst, Joe; Mellin, Maribeth (2002). _Traveler's Companion California_. Globe Pequot. p. 341\. ISBN 978-0-7627-2203-7. Retrieved September 8, 2014.
    126. **^** Levine, Robert N. (2008). _A Geography Of Time: On Tempo, Culture, And The Pace Of Life_. Basic Books. p. 190\. ISBN 978-0-7867-2253-2. Retrieved September 8, 2014.
    127. **^** Mendoza, Cristobal; Loucky, James (2008). "Recent Trends in Mexico-U.S. Border Demographics". In Alper, Donald K.; Day, John Chadwick; Loucky, James (eds.). _Transboundary Policy Challenges in the Pacific Border Regions of North America_. University of Calgary Press. p. 55\. ISBN 978-1-55238-223-3.
    128. **^** Dibble, Sandra. "New pedestrian crossing unveiled in Tijuana". _Sandiegouniontribune.com_. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    129. **^** "Why it's Mexico's turn to tighten the US border". Christian Science Monitor. August 20, 2015. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    130. **^** "New Rules Go Into Effect At Busy U.S.–Mexico Border Crossing". _Npr.org_. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    131. **^** Hsu, Spencer S. (March 16, 2010). "Work to cease on 'virtual fence' along U.S.–Mexico border". _The Washington Post_.
    132. **^** "Ports Designated for the Importation of Animals". Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). Archived from the original on February 2, 2007. Retrieved  October 5, 2011.
    133. **^** "Port Veterinarian List". Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). Archived from the original on December 9, 2006. Retrieved  October 5, 2011.
    134. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Equine Importation". Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). Archived from the original on October 17, 2010. Retrieved  October 5, 2011.
    135. **^** Miller, Tom (2000). _On the Border: Portraits of America's Southwestern Frontier_. iUniverse. pp. 72–73. ISBN 978-0-595-14334-4.
    136. **^** "Veterinary Science". _Ca.uky.edu_. Retrieved  April 9, 2018.
    137. **^** "Import health requirements of Mexico for horses (non slaughter) exported from the United States" (PDF). Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). December 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 19, 2009. Retrieved October 5, 2011.
    
    * Arbelaez, Harvey, and Claudio Milman. "The New Business Environment of Latin America and the Caribbean". International Journal of Public Administration (2007): 553
    * Arbelaez, Harvey; Milman, Claudio (2000). "The new business environment of latin america and the caribbean". _International Journal of Public Administration_. **23** (5–8): 553–562. doi:10.1080/01900690008525475. ISSN 0190-0692.
    * Kelly, Patricia, and Douglas Massey. "Borders for Whom? The Role of NAFTA in Mexico-U.S. Migration". The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political Science 610 (2007): 98–118.
    * Fernández-Kelly, Patricia; Massey, Douglas S. (2016). "Borders for Whom? The Role of NAFTA in Mexico-U.S. Migration". _The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science_. **610** (1): 98–118. doi:10.1177/0002716206297449. ISSN 0002-7162.
    * Miller, Tom. _On the Border: Portraits of America’s Southwestern Frontier_ , 1981.
    * Thompson, Olivia N. (2009). "Binational Water Management: Perspectives of Local Texas Officials in the U.S.–Mexico Border Region". Applied Research Projects. Texas State University. Paper 313.
    * Thompson, Olivia N. (2009). "Binational Water Management: Perspectives of Local Texas Officials in the U.S.–Mexico Border Region". _Applied Research Projects._ (Paper 313). hdl:10877/3758.
    * Andrew Becker and Agustin Armendariz. "California Border Crossing: San Ysidro Port Of Entry Is The Busiest Land Border In The World" [1] HuffPost social reading, article on California watch. (2012)
    * Prampolini, Gaetano, and Annamaria Pinazzi (eds). "The Shade of the Saguaro/La sombra del saguaro" Part IV 'About the Border'. Firenze University Press http://www.fupress.com/ (2013): 461–517.
    

## Further reading[edit]

    
        * Border Town— _Dallas Observer_
    * Jeremy Slack, Daniel E. Martínez, Scott Whiteford, eds. _The Shadow of the Wall: Violence and Migration on the U.S.-Mexico Border._ University of Arizona Press, 2018. ISBN 978-0-8165-3559-0.
    

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to
_**Mexico–United States border**_.  
\---|---  
* U.S.–Mexico Business Council * About binational health—United States–Mexico Public Health—CDC * Border Stories: a mosaic documentary on the U.S.–Mexico Border * Status of Mexican Trucks in the United States: Frequently Asked Questions Congressional Research Service * A Continent Divided: The U.S.–Mexico War, Center for Greater Southwestern Studies, the University of Texas at Arlington * Josh Begley, Best of Luck with the Wall—a short film constructed from satellite imagery that traces the length of the border * David Taylor, The Journey to Border Monument Number 140—photographs and description of the obelisks that mark the border * The Guardian, The Guardian—photographs and feature-length film that follows the infrastructure of the border from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean
    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Immigration to the United States and related topics

* * *

Relevant colonial era,  
United States and  
international laws

|

| Colonial era|

    
        * Nationality law in the American Colonies
    * Plantation Act 1740
    

\---|---  
18th century|

    
        * Naturalization Act 1790 / 1795 / 1798
    

19th century|

    
        * Naturalization Law 1802
    * Civil Rights Act of 1866
    * 14th Amendment (1868)
    * Naturalization Act 1870
    * Page Act (1875)
    * Immigration Act of 1882
    * Chinese Exclusion (1882)
    * Scott Act (1888)
    * Immigration Act of 1891
    * Geary Act (1892)
    

1900-1949|

    
        * Naturalization Act 1906
    * Gentlemen's Agreement (1907)
    * Immigration Act of 1907
    * Immigration Act 1917 (Asian Barred Zone)
    * Emergency Quota Act (1921)
    * Cable Act (1922)
    * Immigration Act 1924
    * Tydings–McDuffie Act (1934)
    * Filipino Repatriation Act (1935)
    * Nationality Act of 1940
    * Bracero Program (1942-1964)
    * Magnuson Act (1943)
    * War Brides Act (1945)
    * Luce–Celler Act (1946)
    

1950-1999|

    
        * UN Refugee Convention (1951)
    * Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 / 1965
    * Refugee Act (1980)
    * Immigration Reform and Control Act (1986)
    * American Homecoming Act (1989)
    * Immigration Act 1990
    * Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) (1996)
    * Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA) (1997)
    * American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act (ACWIA) (1998)
    

21st century|

    
        * American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act (AC21) (2000)
    * Legal Immigration Family Equity Act (LIFE Act) (2000)
    * H-1B Visa Reform Act (2004)
    * REAL ID Act (2005)
    * Secure Fence Act (2006)
    * DACA (2012)
    * Executive Order 13769 (2017)
    * Executive Order 13780 (2017)
    

Visas and policies|

    
        * Visa policy
      * Permanent residence
      * Visa Waiver Program
      * Temporary protected status
      * Asylum
      * Green Card Lottery
      * Central American Minors
    * US-VISIT
    * Security Advisory Opinion
    * E-Verify
    * Section 287(g)
    * National Origins Formula
    * Expedited removal
    * Detention
    * Trump administration family separation policy
    

Government  
organizations

|

    
        * Department of Homeland Security
    * Immigration and Customs Enforcement
    * U.S. Border Patrol
    * U.S. Customs and Border Protection
    * U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
    * Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
    * Executive Office for Immigration Review
    * Board of Immigration Appeals
    * Office of Refugee Resettlement
    

Supreme Court cases|

    
        * _United States v. Wong Kim Ark_ (1898)
    * _United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind_ (1923)
    * _United States v. Brignoni-Ponce_ (1975)
    * Zadvydas v. Davis (2001)
    * _Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting_ (2011)
    

Related issues  
and events

|

    
        * Economic impact
    * Eugenics in the United States
    * Guest worker program
    * Human trafficking
    * Human smuggling
      * Coyotaje
    * Immigration reform
    * Immigration reduction
    * Mexico–United States barrier
    * Labor shortage
    * March for America
    * Illegal immigrant population
    * Reverse immigration
    * 2006 protests
    * Unaccompanied minors from Central America
    * Central American migrant caravans
    * List of people deported from the United States
    

Geography|

    
        * Mexico–United States border
    * Canada–United States border
    * United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints
    

Proposed legislation|

    
        * DREAM Act (2001-2010)
    * H.R. 4437 (2005)
    * McCain-Kennedy (2005)
    * SKIL (2006)
    * Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2006
    * STRIVE Act (2007)
    * Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2007
    * Uniting American Families Act (2000–2013)
    * Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013
    * SAFE Act (2015)
    * RAISE Act (2017)
    

Immigration stations  
and points of entry|

    
        * Angel Island
    * Castle Garden
    * East Boston
    * Ellis Island
    * Sullivan's Island
    * Washington Avenue
    

Operations|

    
        * "Wetback" (1954)
    * "Peter Pan" (1960-1962)
    * "Babylift" (1975)
    * "Gatekeeper" (1994)
    * "Endgame" (2003-2012)
    * "Front Line" (2004-2005)
    * "Streamline" (2005-present)
    * "Return to Sender" (2006-2007)
    * "Jump Start" (2006-2008)
    * "Phalanx" (2010-2016)
    

State legislation|

    
        * California DREAM Act (2006-2010)
    * Arizona SB 1070 (2010)
    * Alabama HB 56 (2011)
    

Non-governmental  
organizations

|

    
        * Arizona Border Recon
    * Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles
    * Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform
    * National Immigration Forum
    * Center for Community Change
    * We Are America Alliance
    * CASA of Maryland
    * Mexica Movement
    * Mexicans Without Borders
    * Federation for American Immigration Reform
    * Minuteman Project
    * Minuteman Civil Defense Corps
    * California Coalition for Immigration Reform
    * Save Our State
    * Center for Immigration Studies
    * National Korean American Service & Education Consortium (NAKASEC)
    * NumbersUSA
    * Negative Population Growth
    * Migration Policy Institute
    * Utah Compact
    * Center for Migration Studies of New York
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Borders of Mexico

* * *
    
        * United States
    * Belize
    * Guatemala
    

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mexico–United_States_border&oldid=901291815"

Categories:

    
        * Geography of Arizona
    * Geography of California
    * Geography of New Mexico
    * Geography of Texas
    * Mexico–United States border
    * Southwestern United States
    * Borders of the United States
    * Borders of Mexico
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
    * CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)
    * Use mdy dates from November 2017
    * Articles which use infobox templates with no data rows
    * Articles containing Spanish-language text
    * All articles with vague or ambiguous time
    * Vague or ambiguous time from April 2017
    * Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2019
    * All articles containing potentially dated statements
    * Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2018
    * All articles with style issues
    * All articles with unsourced statements
    * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018
    * Articles needing additional references from March 2015
    * All articles needing additional references
    * Articles needing additional references from June 2018
    * Articles with multiple maintenance issues
    * Articles needing additional references from May 2019
    * Commons category link is on Wikidata
    * Pages using the Graph extension
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikimedia Commons
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * Bân-lâm-gú
    * Български
    * Català
    * Deutsch
    * Español
    * فارسی
    * Français
    * 한국어
    * Italiano
    * മലയാളം
    * Bahasa Melayu
    * Nederlands
    * 日本語
    * Norsk
    * Polski
    * Português
    * Русский
    * Shqip
    * Simple English
    * Slovenščina
    * Suomi
    * Svenska
    * Tiếng Việt
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 10 June 2019, at 22:40 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

