

Working for a better economy, better government and a better society

![](//i1.wp.com/www.grassrootinstitute.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/blue_green-logo.png?fit=1024%2C362&ssl=1)

    
        * ABOUT
      * Our Mission
      * Our Team
      * Grassroot Scholars
      * Board of Directors
      * Contact Us
      * Events
    * MEDIA
      * President's Column
      * Press Releases
      * Publications
      * Testimonies
    * POLICY
      * Budget & Taxes
      * Honolulu Rail
      * Housing Affordability
      * Jones Act
      * Pension Reform
      * Privatization
      * Other Issues
    * SUBSCRIBE
    * DONATE
    

__ Menu

    
        * ABOUT
      * Our Mission
      * Our Team
      * Grassroot Scholars
      * Board of Directors
      * Contact Us
      * Events
    * MEDIA
      * President's Column
      * Press Releases
      * Publications
      * Testimonies
    * POLICY
      * Budget & Taxes
      * Honolulu Rail
      * Housing Affordability
      * Jones Act
      * Pension Reform
      * Privatization
      * Other Issues
    * SUBSCRIBE
    * DONATE
    

__ Search

![](//i1.wp.com/www.grassrootinstitute.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/blue_green-logo.png?fit=1024%2C362&ssl=1)

    
        * ABOUT
      * Our Mission
      * Our Team
      * Grassroot Scholars
      * Board of Directors
      * Contact Us
      * Events
    * MEDIA
      * President's Column
      * Press Releases
      * Publications
      * Testimonies
    * POLICY
      * Budget & Taxes
      * Honolulu Rail
      * Housing Affordability
      * Jones Act
      * Pension Reform
      * Privatization
      * Other Issues
    * SUBSCRIBE
    * DONATE
    

__ Menu

    
        * ABOUT
      * Our Mission
      * Our Team
      * Grassroot Scholars
      * Board of Directors
      * Contact Us
      * Events
    * MEDIA
      * President's Column
      * Press Releases
      * Publications
      * Testimonies
    * POLICY
      * Budget & Taxes
      * Honolulu Rail
      * Housing Affordability
      * Jones Act
      * Pension Reform
      * Privatization
      * Other Issues
    * SUBSCRIBE
    * DONATE
    

__ Search

# Star-Advertiser Poll Indicates a Lack of Enthusiasm for a Native Hawaiian

Nation

by Malia Hill | Jun 3, 2014 | Media releases, Native Hawaiian Issues, Website

![Star-Advertiser Poll Indicates a Lack of Enthusiasm for a Native Hawaiian

Nation](//i2.wp.com/www.grassrootinstitute.org/wp-

content/uploads/2014/06/00302923.jpg?resize=600%2C428&ssl=1)

ShareSubscribeTweet

### Opposition to federal recognition has changed little in the past decade

HONOLULU, Hawaii—June 3, 2014—A recent poll by the _Honolulu Star-Advertiser_
found that despite the strong state push for the creation of a Native Hawaiian
governing entity, the majority of those responding oppose federal recognition
of a Hawaiian nation.

The poll, which appeared on the _Star-Advertiser_ website as a daily poll
question for June 2, 2014, asked, "What kind of future do you envision for
Native Hawaiians?" The most popular answer was "No entitlements at all," with
41% of the vote, while retaining the status quo received 22% of the vote. Only
31% favored federal recognition, while 6% chose "independence."

Though admittedly unscientific, the poll's finding that 63% of respondents
oppose the creation of a Native Hawaiian nation is familiar. In fact, it
echoes the results of a more rigorous survey released by the Grassroot
Institute in 2005 in which it was found that 67% of Hawaii residents opposed
the Akaka Bill.

"We are surrounded by evidence that the state's rush toward creating a Native
Hawaiian government lacks the support of Hawaii's citizens, including many
Native Hawaiians," stated Keli'i Akina, Ph.D., President of the Grassroot
Institute of Hawaii. "The Star-Advertiser poll only confirms what we already
knew from the anemic number of active sign-ups to the Native Hawaiian Roll:
there is an obvious lack of enthusiasm for the nation-building process."

Dr. Akina continued, "In more than a decade, despite millions of dollars spent
pushing for the creation of a Native Hawaiian government, OHA has failed to
persuade the people of Hawaii that this is a good thing for our state or for
Native Hawaiians. That represents millions of dollars that could have been
spent helping the Native Hawaiian community in more effective, less divisive
ways. Haven't they wasted enough time and money on a cause that is only
supported by an elite few? OHA and the state must get out of the nation-
building business and refocus their efforts on projects that can make a real,
tangible difference in the lives of our citizens."

![](//i1.wp.com/www.grassrootinstitute.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/newsletter-cartoon-3.jpg?fit=610%2C390&ssl=1)

# Subscribe to our newsletter!

Get updates on what we're doing to make Hawaii affordable for everyone.

SUBSCRIBE!

## You have successfully subscribed!

![](//i2.wp.com/www.grassrootinstitute.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/09/screenshot-

www.facebook.com-2016-09-26-11-45-38.png?fit=128%2C107&ssl=1)

**Malia Hill**  
is director of policy for the Grassroot Institute of Hawaii.

**1050 Bishop St. #508,** **Honolulu, HI 96813**  
**(808) 591-9193 |** **info@grassrootinstitute.org**

Facebook **Twitter** Instagram **Youtube** Envelope __

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

