

Skip to content

Donate JTA

    
        * US
    * Israel
    * Global
    * Politics
    * Culture
    * Opinion
    * Food
    * Sports
    * Lifestyle
    * Health
    * Obituaries
    * Archive
    * Video
    * Jewniverse
    * Quick Reads
    * More
    

Search ToggleSearch toggle

Search for:

Quick Reads

### Sections

    
        * US
    * Israel
    * Global
    * Politics
    * Culture
    * Opinion
    * Food
    * Sports
    * Lifestyle
    * Health
    * Obituaries
    * Archive
    * Video
    * Jewniverse
    * Quick Reads
    * More
    

Search for:

About Donate

About

# JTA

EST 1917

Politics

# Which terrorists are more of a threat, foreign or domestic? The ADL and the

Trump administration differ.

By Ron Kampeas January 18, 2018 5:31 pm

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/heyer.jpg)

A protestor in Chicago holds a sign commemorating Heather Heyer, who was
killed during the Charlottesville protests in August. (Scott Olson/Getty
Images)

Advertisement

WASHINGTON (JTA) -- Two reports on terrorism, 10 pages each and released
within a day of each other, reach markedly different conclusions.

Over a decade, the Anti-Defamation League reports, domestic right-wing
extremists carried out 71 percent of extremist-related murders. Over 15 years,
according to the Department of Homeland Security, foreign-born culprits
committed 73 percent of terrorism-related offenses.

What's behind the startlingly different conclusions in the reports released
this week? There's an apples and oranges factor of course -- starting with the
differing time spans -- but the Trump administration is also trying to shape
the conversation on terrorism to comport with its national security and
immigration objectives.  
**  
Apples and oranges**

The ADL report, "Murder and Extremism in the United States in 2017," covers a
decade's worth of extremist violence, from 2007 to 2017, and says that of the
387 deaths in that period, 71 percent came in attacks carried out by right-
wing extremists. Homeland Security's report, "Protecting the Nation From
Foreign Terrorist Entry Into the United States," encompasses from 2001 to 2016
and counts 549 individuals convicted of "international terrorism-related
charges" in U.S. federal courts between Sept. 11, 2001, and Dec. 31, 2016. Of
those, 402 were foreign-born.

Including the first six years after the 9/11 attacks would presumably weight
the count toward the foreign-born, as the Bush administration intensified
efforts to track down bad actors connected to al-Qaida, the terrorist group
behind the attacks. (We don't know for sure because Homeland Security does not
break down its numbers into incidents or nationalities.)

Also, the ADL is counting victims, while Homeland Security is counting
convicted perpetrators -- two different classes.

Most salient, however, is the terminology: The ADL report refers to "extremist
related killings." Homeland Security refers to "international terrorism-
related charges."  
**  
Why is the Trump administration making this about international terrorists and
not including domestic terrorists?**

There are two answers to this question, with a key divider: The election of
President Donald Trump.

_ **Before Trump:** _

Law enforcement has long resisted lumping together domestic and international
terrorism because of the different tools each phenomenon requires, so
confining a report to "international terrorists" would not be unprecedented.

Domestic terrorists are often right-wing lone wolves who operate outside the
structures of a terrorist organization. Tracking them requires community-based
policing, conveying to parties who might know a potential attacker -- family,
friends, colleagues -- what the warning signs may be.

International terrorists often answer to groups based overseas, requiring
coordination with the array of bodies that deal with foreign policy and
national security.

Law enforcement is mindful of the differing prosecution strategies in pursuing
domestic as opposed to international terrorists. Thomas Brzozowski, the
Justice Department's counsel for domestic terrorism, last week outlined for
the Huffington Post the difference in strategies in each case. A tweet
supporting a State Department-designated foreign terrorist group can count as
material support and trigger a prosecution. Backing a U.S.-based extremist
organization on social media likely falls under First Amendment free speech
protections.

**_Since Trump:_**

The Trump administration perceives the most immediate threat to Americans as
being from abroad.

The Homeland Security report fulfills a requirement in an executive order
issued by Trump on March 6. It was the second order by Trump seeking to ban
travelers from Muslim-majority countries and was issued to withstand the court
challenges that felled his original order, on Jan. 27. Deep in the March 6
order are instructions to Homeland Security to essentially back up with data,
after the fact, the rationale for barring travelers from six Muslim-majority
countries.

The instructions suggest a preordained conclusion that foreign nationals are
the principal terrorist threat. The report, according to the order, omits any
mention of a need to identify U.S.-born terrorists (although the report
ultimately included these). It requires "information regarding the number of
foreign nationals in the United States who have been charged with terrorism-
related offenses while in the United States; convicted of terrorism-related
offenses while in the United States; or removed from the United States based
on terrorism-related activity, affiliation with or provision of material
support to a terrorism-related organization, or any other national-security-
related reasons."

The order also appears to favor identifying not only actions but a motive
identified among some on the right with the Muslim world: honor killings. It
seeks "information regarding the number and types of acts of gender-based
violence against women, including so-called 'honor killings,' in the United
States by foreign nationals." Researchers see "honor killings" as a cultural,
not a religious phenomenon, and have identified non-Muslim cultures where it
is practiced. In any case, the final report noted that there is no data
breaking down gender-based violence according to whether perpetrators are
foreign born or not.

The Trump administration's emphasis on foreign acts of terrorism is consistent
with its de-emphasis of domestic terrorism. Under Trump, Homeland Security has
considered (but ultimately decided against) renaming its Countering Violent
Extremism program Countering Islamic Extremism. It defunded an Obama-era
program, Life After Hate, that helped right-wing extremists detach from
radical groups.

A former senior national security adviser to Trump, Sebastian Gorka, has said
repeatedly that there is "no such thing" as a lone wolf attacker, suggesting
it was an Obama administration construct designed to cover up the role of
organized Islamic extremism in advancing terrorism.

**Whose numbers add up?**

The ADL is painstaking about making sure that a murder was directly related to
extremism. It omits from its count the murder of a black student at the
University of Maryland in May, noting in the report that while the alleged
assailant, who was white, belonged to a Facebook group that attracted racists,
not all of its members are racists. It also provides an addendum detailing 34
extremist-related murders in 2017, explaining why in each case the attack was
deemed extremist-related. (Breakdowns of previous years appear in previous
annual reports.)

![](/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/adl-chart.jpg)

This chart from the Anti-Defamation League report shows that 71 percent of
extremist-related deaths from 2007 to 2017 were committed by far-rightists.
(ADL)

The Homeland Security report includes details of only eight of the 402
foreign-born cases. Officials briefing reporters on the report said more
information would be available in the future.

However, even among the eight there seemed to be anomalies, at least when
judged against Trump's original order. Included are individuals who planned to
travel abroad to join terrorist groups like the Islamic State. Nothing, at
least in the report, suggested that these individuals planned attacks on U.S.
soil.

Ed O'Callaghan, a deputy assistant attorney general, briefing reporters
Wednesday on the report, said that those individuals might eventually return
to the United States to carry out attacks.

"I think that that makes the American people safer and I know the Trump
administration does," he said.

Additionally, several of those individuals are not from the six Muslim-
majority countries designated on the Trump order. Instead, the selections
appear designed to bolster changes in immigration policy that Trump embraced
following the March executive order. Several arrived in the United States
through the visa lottery system, and several were here because they were
sponsored by family. Trump wants to put an end to the visa lottery system as
well as "chain migration."

A reporter at the briefing said he had heard that among the 402 were
terrorists who had been captured abroad and were brought to the United States
for trial -- in other words, whose "immigration" was entirely a function of
their being brought to justice.

Callaghan acknowledged as much.

"There is undoubtedly, because I've been involved in a lot of the cases, a
certain number of those foreign-born individuals who have been brought into
the United States by extradition or otherwise to face charges," he said.  
**  
What does this all mean for the Jews?**

Be alert. Michael Masters, the director of the Secure Community network, the
security arm for national Jewish groups, said community protections against
either phenomenon -- international or domestic terrorists -- were essentially
the same.

"Recent reports outline the dangers posed by violent extremists -- Islamists,
white supremacists and neo-Nazi groups, as well as individuals -- all of whom
continue to pose a threat to the United States," he told JTA. "The Jewish
community must remain vigilant. Our safety and security depends on our ability
to share information, undertake training, develop an acute awareness of our
surroundings at all times and to report any and all suspicious activity.

"These efforts, when undertaken, allow us to better prepare for and address
the threats that our community may encounter, regardless of the ideology that
drives those threats."

The ADL seemed to want to remind the Trump administration that containing
foreign terrorism should not come at the expense of combating extremists at
home and what its national director calls a "new willingness by racist groups
to put themselves front and center on the American public stage."

"In recent years, much of the public discussion and the federal government’s
focus have been on the violent threat posed by extremists inspired by ISIS,
while less attention has been paid to the reality of right-wing violence,"
Jonathan Greenblatt wrote in an op-ed for The Atlantic on Wednesday. "There’s
no doubt that Islamic extremism is a significant threat, but we shouldn’t
ignore any forms of extremism — we must tackle them all."

### Trending on JTA

Disturbed’s singer David Draiman slams Roger Waters and ‘his Nazi comrades’
for boycotting Israel

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/GettyImages-1146326612-540x300.jpg)

Sarah Jessica Parker arrives in Israel for private family visit

![Sarah Jessica Parker](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Screen-

Shot-2019-02-04-at-11.02.51-AM-540x300.png)

DC Dyke March bans Jewish Pride flags

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Jewish-Pride-Flag-

GettyImages-524663692-1-resize-540x300.jpg)

Advertisement

### Get JTA's Daily Briefing in your inbox

I accept the JTA Privacy Policy.

Please accept the JTA Privacy Policy

By submitting the above I agree to the privacy policy and terms of use of
JTA.org

## Recommended from JTA

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/06-11-2019-David-

Friedman-540x300.jpg)

Israel

## David Friedman gave Netanyahu half a nod for West Bank annexation. What

happens next?

By Ron Kampeas June 11, 2019 6:04 pm

![Mike Pompeo](https://www.jta.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/pompeo-540x300.jpg)

United States

## Pompeo tells Jewish leaders he will 'push back' against Britain's Corbyn

and anti-Semitism

By Marcy Oster June 10, 2019 12:11 pm

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/6-6-19-nita-

lowey-540x300.jpg)

Politics

## AIPAC and J Street support bipartisan effort to restore funds for Israeli-

Palestinian peace dialogue

By Ron Kampeas June 6, 2019 2:34 pm

![Amir Ohana](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/6-6-19-amir-

ohana-540x300.jpeg)

Israel

## Israel has its first gay government minister. He's loyal to Netanyahu.

By Marcy Oster June 6, 2019 1:43 pm

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/6-4-19-ajc-

jews-540x300.jpg)

Politics

## 13 Democratic candidates delivered videos to this Jewish conference. The

different messages hint at what's to come.

By Ron Kampeas June 4, 2019 5:42 pm

![](https://www.jta.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/04-12-2019-Trump-

Netanyahu-1-540x300.jpg)

Politics

## California progressives want the state Democratic Party to link Israeli

government to Pittsburgh massacre

By JTA Staff May 31, 2019 3:53 pm

### Quick Reads

    
        * 4h ago
    

Ryan Braun breaks Hank Greenberg's record for most home runs by a Jewish
player

    
        * 4h ago
    

DC suburb cancels screening of anti-Israel film

    
        * 5h ago
    

Buttigieg: Netanyahu is 'turning away from peace'

    
        * 6h ago
    

Jews went like 'meek lambs to gas chambers,' new Dutch senator says

    
        * 6h ago
    

Incendiary balloons from Gaza ignite fires in southern Israel

    
        * 6h ago
    

Israel says it has closed 30 fundraising accounts of boycott-backing
nonprofits with links to terrorism

    
        * 6h ago
    

Far-right cell planned to target annual Jewish event in Paris, report says

Advertisement

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * YouTube
    
    * US
    * Israel
    * Global
    * Politics
    * Culture
    
    * Lifestyle
    * Opinion
    * Food
    * Sports
    * Jewniverse
    
    * Advertise
    * Donate
    * Syndication
    * Archive
    
    * Newsletters
    * News Tips
    * About JTA
    * Contact Us
    
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use and Re-Using content
    

(C) 2019 jewish telegraphic agency all rights reserved.

    
        * My Jewish Learning
    * Kveller
    * Alma
    * The Nosher
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

