

The Brutal Truth About Being a Pregnant Worker in 2016: It's Pretty Awful

    
        * Subscribe
    
    * Home
    * Subscribe
    

![Subscribe](http://subscription-

assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

Close

    
        * 40 Under 40 
    * 100 Best Companies to Work For 
    * Fortune 500 
    * Global 500 
    * Most Powerful Women 
    * World's 50 Greatest Leaders 
    * World's Most Admired Companies 
    * All Rankings 
    * Automotive 
    * Careers 
    * Commentary 
    * Design 
    * Energy 
    * Entertainment 
    * Finance 
    * Health 
    * Humor 
    * International 
    * Leadership 
    * Luxury 
    * Most Powerful Women 
    * Real Estate 
    * Retail 
    * Sports 
    * Technology 
    * The Ledger 
    * Travel 
    * Venture 
    * FORTUNE Communications 
    * Fortune Knowledge Group 
    * FORTUNE Membership 
    * Conferences 
    * Data Store 
    * Infographics 
    * Magazine 
    * Newsletters 
    * Photography 
    * Radio 
    * The 21st Century Corporation 
    * Brainstorm Reinvent 
    * Digital Health 
    * Discovering Luxury 
    * Innovation By Design 
    * Looking Forward 
    * Mastering the Market 
    * MPW Mentorship 
    * MPW Next Gen 
    * State of the Market 
    * About Us 
    * Subscribe 
    * Give a Gift 
    * Customer Service 
    * EU Customer Service 
    * Work at Fortune
    

Stay Connected

    
        1. The 21st Century Corporation
    2. Commentary
    

# The Brutal Truth About Being a Pregnant Worker in 2016: It's Pretty Awful

![The author, Avra

Siegel](https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2016/07/image2.jpeg)

The author, Avra Siegel

Courtesy of Avra Siegel

By Avra Siegel

July 11, 2016

A trimester or two ago (I’m now 38 weeks pregnant), I was texting with a
friend of mine, also pregnant, lamenting how terrible I was feeling. I had
been up all night, stricken with nausea, frantically Googling “heartburn or
heart attack?” because my epic chest pains were so bad that they were making
me feel faint.

I’d been Deputy Director of the White House Council on Women and Girls, and
now work as Director of Public Policy for Care.com. Yet, I was totally
unprepared for how challenging pregnancy would be-and felt uncomfortable
voicing this to anyone but someone else who was also pregnant.

I didn’t want to be seen as complaining or ungrateful -- or even worse, not
committed to my career. And I know I’m not alone. For the millions of American
women who work outside the home, the career consequences that frequently
accompany starting a family can begin during pregnancy, well before the baby
arrives. The truth is, pretending pregnancy doesn’t sometimes suck isn’t doing
anyone any good.

_For more on female empowerment, watch this video:_

Yes, America, finally, is having the very overdue and well-deserved
conversation about paid parental leave. But can we also talk about pregnancy
for a second -- a life event that three-quarters of working women will
experience at some point?

It interrupts your physical and emotional body in ways that – unless you have
been pregnant before – are pretty hard to fully appreciate.

Let’s take, for example, this whole “morning sickness” thing. Almost 90
percent of women experience some symptoms of nausea during pregnancy. Ninety.
That’s not the exception, it’s the rule. Of course, it’s not necessarily
“morning sickness” at all – for millions of women, it’s more like “all-day”
sickness, an ailment that can make you feel nauseous 24/7 for months on end.
Some of us are even lucky enough to experience this for the entire duration of
our pregnancy.

I have spent countless days triaging. I’d time my meetings and work for the
first half of the day when my nausea was less severe and building in afternoon
breaks to account for the freight train of nausea and exhaustion that I knew
would come. In between I’d forage for something with any semblance of
nutrition to eat, even though just a waft of fresh-cooked vegetables made me
gag.

That’s been my life for 9 months – and it doesn’t leave a lot of room for
being productive at work.

_**Read:Female company president: ‘I’m sorry to all the mothers I worked
with’**_

_**Confessions of a pregnant CEO: 3 ways I’m working differently**_

_**Yes, pregnancy discrimination at work is still a huge problem**_

It’s time for employers and politicians to recognize that pregnancy is hard,
birth is messy, and being post-partum is an actual medical event that requires
recovery.

**Paid sick days should be a right**

At Care.com, I am extremely fortunate to have unlimited paid sick days, but
many workers don’t have even one. In fact, only 60% of workers have access to
paid sick days, and those who are left out are at the bottom end of the income
scale. More than 82% of low-wage workers don’t have access to paid sick days,
and the majority of low-wage workers are women, many of whom are women of
color. Additionally, 43% percent of women working in the private sector are
not able to take a single paid sick day.

My heart breaks for the waitress who has to be on her feet all day, smelling
the fumes from the kitchen, trying to hold herself together as a cranky
customer gives her a hard time, and she grits her teeth, swallows her nausea
(literally) and musters all the strength she has to just to get through her
shift. Now there’s a woman who needs a paid, job-protected sick day.

Or how about the array of doctor’s visits to attend, especially women
experiencing high-risk pregnancies who may need three or four times the number
of typical pre-natal appointments? The fact is that for a variety of reasons,
low-income women face a greater number of risk-factors during pregnancy, and
those are the very same women who are far less likely to have access to paid
sick days.

**Easy workplace fixes**

From my work at the White House and at Care.com, I know there are simple, low-
cost fixes that could help keep women healthier and encourage safer
pregnancies, all the while reducing absenteeism and increasing productivity.

The array of flexible work arrangements such as teleworking, flexible start-
stop times, and even the new rage of nap-rooms (yes, nap rooms!) could
alleviate so much stress for pregnant workers. (At Care.com we are lucky
enough to have four of them.)

For hourly workers, companies could use technology that allows for ease of
shift-swapping, so that when a pregnant woman needs to adjust her schedule,
she has the ability to do so more easily. These types of solutions allow for
all workers and employers to benefit, with the added bonus of making work more
flexible and manageable for pregnant workers in particular.

Even more important than enabling these women to be more productive at work,
ideas like these help foster a culture of trust proven to help companies and
organizations retain their valuable talent and participation in the workforce
the long run – a benefit to families, companies, and the broader economy writ
large.

**Do your part**

I told my bosses the reality of my condition during pregnancy and am so lucky
to have received full support and encouragement from the CEO down. All of us
pregnant women who are in a position to do so can do our part to speak up at
work. Because each and every time you tell your manager how you are feeling,
you empower other women to do the same. This single action gives confidence
and credence to those around you and helps to change the workplace culture
from the ground up.

Let’s be real: it’s not like women got pregnant on their own – there was
another person 50% responsible for that pregnancy. But men just happen not to
be the biological sex that bears the child, and so all the consequences of the
pregnancy fall on women because of our physical role in childbearing and
rearing. When our laws and workplace policies do not account for the reality
of pregnancy and childbirth, it is the height of gender inequality. We must do
better, not because pregnancy is a disability, but because it is actually a
condition that should be honored, revered and celebrated.

We are perpetuating the human race after all.

_Avra Siegel is the Director of Public Policy and Strategic Partnerships at
Care.com. She was formerly the Deputy Director of the White House Council on
Women and Girls and also held positions at the White House National Economic
Council, where she led the women’s economic security portfolio._

### SPONSORED FINANCIAL CONTENT

![](http://assets.time.com/images/dianomi-logo.png)

### You May Like

### Read More

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much more.

SUBSCRIBE

EDIT POST

![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top2_205_thumb.jpg)

![](http://subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/510_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

### Subscribe & Save

Subscribe today and save 79% off the cover price.

SUBSCRIBE NOW

![](https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2017/10/fortune-newsletter-tout-

footer.png)

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up now to receive FORTUNE's best content, special offers, and much more.

SUBSCRIBE

    
        * 40 Under 40
    * 100 Best Companies to Work For
    * Fortune 500
    * Global 500
    * Most Powerful Women in Business
    * World's 50 Greatest Leaders
    * World's Most Admired Companies
    * Brainstorm Reinvent
    * All Rankings
    * Home
    * Automotive
    * Careers
    * Design
    * Energy & Environment
    * Executive Travel
    * Finance
    * Commentary
    * Health
    * International
    * Leadership
    * Luxury
    * Markets
    * Most Powerful Women
    * Retail
    * Sports
    * Technology
    * The Ledger
    * Venture
    * Photography
    * Podcasts
    * Videos
    * Newsletters
    * Magazine
    * Fortune Knowledge Group
    * Fortune Data Store
    * Fortune Conferences
    * Customer Service
    * EU Customer Service
    * Site Map
    * Privacy Policy
    * Advertising
    * About Us
    * Subscribe
    * Give a Gift
    * Ad Choices
    * Terms of Use
    * Your California Privacy Rights
    

(C) 2018 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site
constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy (Your California
Privacy Rights).  
Fortune may receive compensation for some links to products and services on
this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.  
Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Interactive Data.
ETF and Mutual Fund data provided by Morningstar, Inc. Dow Jones Terms &
Conditions: http://www.djindexes.com/mdsidx/html/tandc/indexestandcs.html.  
S&P; Index data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its
licensors. All rights reserved. Terms & Conditions. Powered and implemented by
Interactive Data Managed Solutions. | EU Data Subject Requests

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

