

Skip to main content

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/all/themes/MPI/logo.png)

    
        * Newsroom
    * Multimedia
    * Donate
    * Contact
    * Sign Up
    

All MPIResearch PublicationsArticlesMultimediaEventsNews

Refine by Date

Date

E.g., 06/11/2019

Date

E.g., 06/11/2019

    
        * Menu
    
      * Research & Initiatives
        * Topics
        * Regions
        * Data
        * Programs
      * Publications
        * All Publications
        * Reports
        * Fact Sheets
        * Policy Briefs
        * Books
        * Articles
        * Commentaries
        * Explainers
      * Events
      * News
        * Newsroom
        * Press Releases
      * About Us
        * Mission
        * Staff
        * Trustees
        * Funders
        * Work at MPI
        * Intern at MPI
        * Contact MPI
      * MPI Europe
        * Mission
        * Staff
        * Internships
        * Contact
    

Stay

    
        * Research & Initiatives
    

### Programs

    
          * Programs
        * International Program
        * Migrants, Migration, and Development
        * National Center on Immigrant Integration Policy
        * U.S. Immigration Policy Program
      * Initiatives
        * Migration Data Hub
        * E Pluribus Unum Prizes
        * Labor Markets Initiative
        * Language Access: Translation and Interpretation Policies and Practices
        * Migration Information Source
        * Regional Migration Study Group
        * Transatlantic Council on Migration
      * Projects
        * Moving Europe Beyond Crisis
        * ELL Information Center
        * Labor Market Integration in Europe
      * MPI Europe
    

### Topics see all >

    
          * Border Security
      * Education
      * Employment & the Economy
      * Illegal Immigration & Interior Enforcement
      * Immigrant Integration
      * Immigrant Profiles & Demographics
      * Immigration Policy & Law
      * International Governance
      * Migration & Development
      * Refugee & Asylum Policy
    

### Regions see all >

    
          * Africa (sub-Saharan)
      * Asia and the Pacific
      * Central America & the Caribbean
      * Europe
      * Middle East & North Africa
      * North America
      * South America
    

### Data

    
          * International Data
      * U.S. Data
      * Maps
    

Stay

    
        * Publications
    
      * Reports
      * Fact Sheets
      * Policy Briefs
      * Books
      * Articles
      * Commentaries
      * Explainers
    

### Featured Publication

![How Many Unauthorized Immigrants Graduate from U.S. High Schools

Annually?](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/publication_thumbnail/public/pub_covers/Coverthumb-

UnauthorizedImmigrant-HS-Graduates-FactSheet.png?itok=GIQNLHOx)

Fact Sheets

April 2019

##### How Many Unauthorized Immigrants Graduate from U.S. High Schools

Annually?

By Jie Zong and Jeanne Batalova

Stay

    
        * Events
    * About Us
    

### Programs

    
          * International Migration
      * Migrants, Migration, and Development
      * National Center on Immigrant Integration Policy
      * U.S. Immigration
    
      * Mission
      * Staff
      * Trustees
      * Funders
      * Work at MPI
      * Intern at MPI
      * Contact MPI
    

Stay

    
        * MPI Europe
    
      * Mission
      * Staff
      * Jobs
      * Internships
      * Contact
    

Stay

# U.S. Immigration Policy and Mexican/Central American Migration Flows: Then

and Now

## You are here

Home » Research

Reports

August 2011

# U.S. Immigration Policy and Mexican/Central American Migration Flows: Then

and Now

By Marc R. Rosenblum and Kate Brick

Border Security

Border Enforcement

Employment & the Economy

Labor Market Impacts

Illegal Immigration & Interior Enforcement

Deportations/Removals

State & Local Enforcement

Worksite Enforcement

Immigrant Profiles & Demographics

U.S. Data

Immigration Policy & Law

Employment-Based Immigration

Legalization/Regularization

Visa Policy

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/leftsidebox_image/public/pub_covers/cover-

rmsg-primer.JPG?itok=jkKjdWnm)

Download Report

Migration rates to the United States from Mexico and Central America’s
Northern Triangle (El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras) have accelerated in
the last four decades, from less than 1 million immigrants in the 1970s to 14
million today. This significant increase has been driven by economic
opportunities and facilitated by social networks of friends and family already
in the United States. While migration flows were historically dominated by
migrants from central Mexico who performed agricultural jobs in the U.S.
Southwest, during the last two decades, the regional migration system has
diversified to encompass new communities of origin, new destinations
throughout the United States, and a broader occupational profile. Despite
these changes, immigrants from Mexico and Central America continue to have
less education and lower incomes than U.S. natives and other immigrants, and
most immigrants from the region are unauthorized.

These recent dynamics play a critical role in shaping the politics of
immigration policy within the United States. Young, low-skilled immigrants
perform essential work, but the rapid growth of low-wage, limited English
proficient, unauthorized populations in states with limited migration
experience has contributed to increased anti-immigrant sentiment.

This history defines and limits the policy alternatives available, and
highlights the challenges of managing regional flows.

Table of Contents

**I. Introduction: Understanding International Migration Flows**

**II. History of Regional Migration Flows and U.S. Immigration Policy**

A. Pre-World War II: Limited Migration and Early Migration Controls

B. The Bracero Program: Wartime and Post-War Migration

C. 1965-1986: The Construction of an Illegal Regime

**III. U.S. Immigration Policy since 1986**

A. Increased Admissions

B. Border Enforcement

C. Worksite Enforcement

D. Other Interior Enforcement

E. Analysis: The Limits of U.S. Immigration Policy

**IV. A Portrait of Mexican and Central American Immigrants in the United
States**

A. Recent Immigration from Mexico and Central America

B. Geographic Distribution

C. Immigration Status

D. Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics

E. Employment and Income

**V. Conclusions**

### Media Resources

Contact

Michelle Mittelstadt  
202-266-1910  
mmittelstadt@migrationpolicy.org

Experts

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/author_thumbnail/public/bio_photos/DP-

Preferred-Portrait-2015-cropped.jpg?itok=L4dIdTY2)

Demetrios G. Papademetriou, who co-founded MPI and founded MPI Europe, is a
Distinguished Transatlantic Fellow at MPI. Full Bio >

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/author_thumbnail/public/bio_photos/Doris2019_WEB.jpg?itok=yDuxYrpg)

Doris Meissner, former Commissioner of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization
Service, directs MPI's U.S. immigration policy work. Full Bio >

    
        * ![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/printbox-icon-AA.png)Adjust Font
    

(+) Increase Font  
(-) Decrease Font  
Reset Font

    
        * ![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/printbox-icon-print.png)Print
    * ![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/printbox-icon-rss.png)RSS
    * ![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/printbox-icon-reprint.png)Copyright & Reuse
    

Subscribe for Updates

## Authors

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/author_thumbnail/public/bio_photos/MarcRosenblum_WEB.jpg?itok=Spuf0DBS)

Marc R. Rosenblum was Deputy Director of MPI's U.S. Immigration Policy
Program. Full Bio >

Kate Brick is a former Associate Policy Analyst with MPI's International
Program. Full Bio >

## Related Research

    
        * Evolving Demographic and Human-Capital Trends in Mexico and Central America and Their Implications for Regional Migration
    
    * Mexican and Central American Immigrants in the United States
    
    * Mexican Migration to the United States: Underlying Economic Factors and Possible Scenarios for Future Flows
    
    * Central American Development: Two Decades of Progress and Challenges for the Future
    
    * Demographic Trends in Mexico: The Implications for Skilled Migration
    
    * Thinking Regionally to Compete Globally: Leveraging Migration & Human Capital in the U.S., Mexico, and Central America
    

## In the Spotlight

**Source Special Issue on Central America, Mexico, & the U.S.**

![](/sites/default/files/resize/source_images/mexico_zocalo-220x165.jpg)

This special issue from MPI's online journal, the Migration Information
Source, delves into a wide range of migration developments in this dynamic,
interconnected region that includes the United States, Mexico, and the
Northern Triangle of Central America (El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras).

Learn More

## Multimedia

![](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_fullwidth/public/media_images/MI_ChangingDynamics_4513.png?itok=I16c-AGV)

#### Changing Dynamics: Immigration, Mexico, and the United States

April 5, 2013

Migration Policy Institute

## International Program

MPI’s International Program acts as a policy laboratory for developing
innovative, evidence-based, and politically feasible solutions to worldwide
migration policy challenges.

More Info >

## Regional Migration Study Group

The Regional Migration Study Group was formed to develop and promote a longer-
term vision of how to build a stronger social and economic foundation for the
United States, Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras through more
effective and collaborative approaches to migration and human-capital
development.

More Info >

## Contact Us

202-266-1940  
info@migrationpolicy.org

    
        * Research & Initiatives
    * Publications
    * Events
    * News
    * About Us
    
    * Contact Us
    * Site Map
    * Privacy Policy
    * Experts
    * Email Sign Up
    

1400 16th St NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20036 | ph. 202-266-1940 | fax.
202-266-1900

![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-twitter.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-facebook.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-linkedin.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-podcasts.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-vimeo.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-rss.png)

Copyright © 2001-2019 Migration Policy Institute. All rights reserved.

1400 16th St NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20036  
ph. 202-266-1940 | fax. 202-266-1900

![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-twitter-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-facebook-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-linkedin-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-podcasts-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-vimeo-41.png)
![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/icon-rss-41.png)

Copyright © 2001-2019 Migration Policy Institute. All rights reserved.

    
        * Contact
    * Site Map
    * Experts
    * Sign Up
    * Donate
    

![](/sites/all/themes/MPI/images/logo-footer.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa _[ON]: Ontario_ [FT]:
Financial Times _[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication_ [ MD]: Maryland _[.]: dot_
[@]: at

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ON]: Ontario
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[ MD]: Maryland
  *[.]:  dot 
  *[@]:  at 

