

__NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please
upgrade your browser. LEARN MORE »

**Sections** Home __Search Skip to content Skip to navigation View mobile
version

## The New York Times

###### Archives|The Woman Behind the Fetus

__Search

Subscribe Now Log In __0 __Settings

__Close search

## Site Search Navigation

Search NYTimes.com

__Clear this text input

Go

https://nyti.ms/29yk36T

    
        1. Loading...
    

See next articles

See previous articles

## Site Navigation

## Site Mobile Navigation

Advertisement

### Archives | 1989

# The Woman Behind the Fetus

By BARBARA EHRENREICHAPRIL 28, 1989

Continue reading the main story Share This Page

Continue reading the main story

About the Archive

This is a digitized version of an article from The Times’s print archive,
before the start of online publication in 1996. To preserve these articles as
they originally appeared, The Times does not alter, edit or update them.

Occasionally the digitization process introduces transcription errors or other
problems. Please send reports of such problems to
archive_feedback@nytimes.com.

![The article as it originally

appeared.](https://s1.nyt.com/timesmachine/pages/1/1989/04/28/600389_360W.png)

__

##### View page in TimesMachine

April 28, 1989, Page 00039Buy Reprints The New York Times Archives

In the case of Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, the Supreme Court this
week heard arguments about protection of the fetus and its relation to the
right of privacy in using contraceptives. Almost lost in the legal tangle is
that the high court is making a decision about women: their health, dignity,
sexuality - even their economic well-being.

Sixteen years ago, at the time of the Roe v. Wade decision, that much was
obvious. The pro-choice side was united in seeing abortion as a life-and-death
issue, with both the lives and deaths at stake being women's.

The rise of the fetus as an independent figure in our national consciousness
has transformed the debate -upstaging, and sometimes eclipsing, women and
their stake in the legality of abortion. Today, even liberals and ostensible
supporters of choice often talk as if abortion were on a moral par with
shooting an intruder who enters one's home: a desperate action, to be
undertaken only in extreme circumstances, and then duly regretted.

At the root of this new pro-choice, but anti-abortion position is an issue
which never arose in the abortion debates of the past: the question of the
legal status and possible personhood of the fetus. Contrary to the common
anti-choice claim that abortion violates America's ''traditional values,''
abortion was legal from the birth of the republic until the 1880s.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

The arguments that led to its being outlawed focused almost entirely on women:
the dangers of abortion to women. Nor did the omission of the fetus reflect
biological ignorance. The medical profession, which led the 19th century fight
against abortion, was reasonably well-informed about fetal development.

Continue reading the main story

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Today the fetus is viewed almost as a freestanding individual, while women
have all but disappeared. Consider the misleading way we have come to
visualize a fetus: as a sort of larval angel, suspended against a neutral
background. But no fetus -no living fetus - is suspended anywhere, but
anchored to the placenta, housed in the womb, and wrapped in the flesh of a
living woman.

Or consider the anti-choice film, ''The Silent Scream,'' which purported to
show a fetus struggling to resist being aborted. Undoubtedly the abortion in
the film took place somewhere, i.e., in the uterus of an actual woman, but the
narration never referred to the setting in human terms - only as ''the
sanctuary.''

## Newsletter Sign Up

Continue reading the main story

###

Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

Sign Up

You will receive emails containing news content, updates and promotions from
The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time.

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York
Times's products and services.

### Thank you for subscribing.

### An error has occurred. Please try again later.

### You are already subscribed to this email.

View all New York Times newsletters.

    
        * See Sample
    * Manage Email Preferences
    * Not you?
    * Privacy Policy
    * Opt out or contact us anytime
    * Opt out or contact us anytime
    

Still, the anguished and ambivalent ask how do we know that the fetus is not a
person? Might not science eventually be able to pinpoint the moment when a
fetus achieves personhood?

But science has nothing to say on the question of personhood. A fetus is
certainly a potential person. But it is also, scientifically speaking, a
collection of cells - a part of a woman's body. A woman may think of her fetus
as a person or as just cells depending on whether the pregnancy is wanted or
not. This does not reflect moral confusion, but choice in action.

The recent belief that the fetus can be considered as separate from a woman's
body, health and life may become the basis for a compromise in which abortion
will be ringed with restrictions designed to make a woman ''think twice.''
Waiting periods might be imposed. Lectures - on anything from fetal
development to the chances of winning child support from a boyfriend - might
be required.

The intent will be to acknowledge our national ambivalence, but the effect
will be to punish women. For example, medical ethicist Daniel Callahan
believes the choice of abortion should be accompanied by ''genuine moral agony
and anguish and difficulty'' on the woman's part.

The nearly half-million people who demonstrated in Washington on April 9th
represented a range of views on abortion, from those who see it as part of a
spectrum of birth control options to those who see it as a last resort. But
they were all there to remind us that when we talk abortion, we are talking
about women, and when we talk about women, we are talking about thinking,
morally conscious, human beings.

The question America needs to return to is: When will women achieve their full
personhood? We already know the answer to this one: Not until abortion - and
contraception - are freely available to all women, without insulting
restrictions and caveats. Anything less is a violation of something that goes
far deeper, and cuts closer to the very meaning of ''personhood,'' than mere
privacy.

Barbara Ehrenreich is the author of ''The Hearts of Men.''

A version of this op-ed appears in print on April 28, 1989, on Page A00039 of
the National edition with the headline: The Woman Behind the Fetus. Today's
Paper|Subscribe

Continue reading the main story

##

    
        *     *     *     * ## What's Next
    

Loading...

Go to Home Page »

## Site Index The New York Times

## Site Index Navigation

### News

    
        * World
    * U.S.
    * Politics
    * N.Y.
    * Business
    * Tech
    * Science
    * Health
    * Sports
    * Education
    * Obituaries
    * Today's Paper
    * Corrections
    

### Opinion

    
        * Today's Opinion
    * Op-Ed Columnists
    * Editorials
    * Op-Ed Contributors
    * Letters
    * Sunday Review
    * Video: Opinion
    

### Arts

    
        * Today's Arts
    * Art & Design
    * Books
    * Dance
    * Movies
    * Music
    * N.Y.C. Events Guide
    * Television
    * Theater
    * Video: Arts
    

### Living

    
        * Automobiles
    * Crossword
    * Food
    * Education
    * Fashion & Style
    * Health
    * Jobs
    * Magazine
    * N.Y.C. Events Guide
    * Real Estate
    * T Magazine
    * Travel
    * Weddings & Celebrations
    

### Listings & More

    
        * Reader Center
    * Classifieds
    * Tools & Services
    * N.Y.C. Events Guide
    * Multimedia
    * Photography
    * Video
    * NYT Store
    * Times Journeys
    * Subscribe
    * Manage My Account
    * NYTCo
    

### Subscribe

    
        * Subscribe
    * __Home Delivery
    * __Digital Subscriptions
    * __Crossword
    * Email Newsletters
    * Gift Subscriptions
    * Group Subscriptions
    * Education Rate
    * Mobile Applications
    * Replica Edition
    

## Site Information Navigation

    
        * (C) 2019 The New York Times Company
    * Home
    * Search
    * Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
    * Contact Us
    * Work With Us
    * Advertise
    * Your Ad Choices
    * Privacy
    * Terms of Service
    * Terms of Sale
    

## Site Information Navigation

    
        * Site Map
    * Help
    * Site Feedback
    * Subscriptions
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

