

# Agnostic theism

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

## Part of a series on

Irreligion

Irreligion

    
        * Secular humanism
    * Freethought
    *
    

Post-theism

    
        * Nontheism
    * Anti-clericalism
    * Antireligion
    * Criticism of religion
    * Parody religion
    

Atheism

|

    
        * History
    * Demographics
    * Discrimination/Persecution
    * Criticism
    * Lists of atheists
    

* * *

Forms and variations

    
        * Implicit and explicit
    * Negative and positive
    * New
    * State
    * Christian
    * Hindu
    * Jewish
    

Aspects

    
        * Anti-clericalism
    * Antireligion
    * Antitheism
    
    * Relationship between atheism and religion
    * Existence of God
    

Agnosticism

    
        * Strong
    * Weak
    * Atheistic
    * Theistic (Christian)
    * Apatheism
    * Secular Buddhism
    
    * List of agnostics
    

Nontheism

    
        * Criticism of religion
    * Secular humanism
    * Freethought
    * Flying Spaghetti Monster
    * Ignosticism
    * Inconsistent revelations
    * Invisible Pink Unicorn
    * Nontheistic religions
    * Pantheism
    * Parody religion
    * Post-theism
    *
    

Russell's teapot

    
        * Theological noncognitivism
    * Transtheism
    

Naturalism

    
        * Humanistic
    * Metaphysical
    *
    

Methodological

    
        * Religious
    

People

    
        * Lists of agnostics
    * atheists
    * deists
    * humanists
    * pantheists
    

Books

    
        * Breaking the Spell
    * Ethics
    * The End of Faith
    * The God Delusion
    * God Is Not Great
    * The System of Nature
    * Letter to a Christian Nation
    * Why I Am Not a Christian
    * Why I Am Not a Muslim
    

Secularist organizations

    
        * Atheist Alliance International
    * Freedom From Religion Foundation
    
    * Reason Rally
    * World Pantheist Movement
    

Related topics

    
        * Secularism
    * _Laïcité_
    
    * Parody or mock religions
    
    * Irreligion by country
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

**Agnostic theism** , **agnostotheism** or **agnostitheism** is the
philosophical view that encompasses both theism and agnosticism. An agnostic
theist believes in the existence of a god or gods, but regards the basis of
this proposition as _unknown or inherently unknowable_. The agnostic theist
may also or alternatively be agnostic regarding the properties of the god or
gods that they believe in.

## Contents

    
        * 1 Views of agnostic theism
    * 2 See also
    * 3 References
    * 4 External links
    

## Views of agnostic theism[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/83/Classical_definition_of_Kno.svg/220px-

Classical_definition_of_Kno.svg.png)

Agnostic theism is belief but without knowledge, as shown in purple and blue
(see Epistemology).

There are numerous beliefs that can be included in agnostic theism, such as
fideism, the doctrine that knowledge depends on faith or revelation; not all
agnostic theists are fideists. Since agnosticism is in the philosophical
rather than religious sense a position on knowledge and does not forbid belief
in a deity, it is compatible with most theistic positions.

The classical philosophical understanding of knowledge is that knowledge is
justified true belief. The founder of logotherapy, Viktor Frankl, may have
well exemplified this definition. Seidner expands upon this example and
stresses Frankl's characterization of _unconscious_.[1] Agnostic theism could
be interpreted as an admission that it is not possible to justify one's belief
in a god sufficiently for it to be considered known. This may be because they
consider faith a requirement of their religion, or because of the influence of
plausible-seeming scientific or philosophical criticism.

Christian Agnostics practice a distinct form of agnosticism that applies only
to the _properties_ of God. They hold that it is difficult or impossible to be
sure of anything beyond the basic tenets of the Christian faith. They believe
that God exists, that Jesus has a special relationship with him and is in some
way divine, and that God should be worshipped. This belief system has deep
roots in Judaism and the early days of the Church.[2]

## See also[edit]

    
        * Agnostic atheism
    * Christian agnosticism
    * Cosmological argument
    * Deism
    * Doubt: Philosophy and ethics
    * Epistemology: Belief
    * Faith
    * Fideism
    * Ietsism
    * Ignosticism
    * Negative theology
    * Numinous
    * Secular theology
    * Sola fide
    * Truth
    * Unitarian Universalism
    * Unknown God
    

## References[edit]

    
        1. **^** Seidner, Stanley S. (June 10, 2009) "A Trojan Horse: Logotherapeutic Transcendence and its Secular Implications for Theology" Archived 2011-05-01 at the Wayback Machine. _Mater Dei Institute_.
    2. **^** Weatherhead, Leslie (1972). _The Christian Agnostic_. Abingdon Press. ISBN 978-0-687-06977-4.
    

## External links[edit]

    
        * Epistemology - from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
    * AGNOSTICISM - from Dictionary of the History of Ideas
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Irreligion

* * *

Irreligion|

    
        * Nontheism
    * Antireligion
    * Post-theism
    * Anti-clericalism
    * Criticism of religion
    * Parody religion
    * Secular humanism
    * Freethought
    

Atheism|

    
        * Lists of atheists
    * Demographics
    * Religion
    * History
    * Anti-clericalism
    * State
    * New
    * Criticism
    * Discrimination/Persecution
    * Implicit and explicit
    * Negative and positive
    * Existence of God
    * Antitheism
    * Christian atheism
    * Atheism in Hinduism
    * Jewish atheism
    

Agnosticism|

    
        * List of agnostics
    * Strong
    * Weak
    * Agnostic atheism
    * Agnostic theism
      * Christian
    * Apatheism
    * Ignosticism
    * Secular Buddhism
    

Nontheism|

    
        * Criticism of religion
    * Secular humanism
    * Freethought
    * Flying Spaghetti Monster
    * Inconsistent revelations
    * Invisible Pink Unicorn
    * Nontheistic religions
    * Parody religion
    * Post-theism
    * Russell's teapot
    * Theological noncognitivism
    * Transtheism
    

Naturalism|

    
        * Humanistic
    * Metaphysical
    * Methodological
    * Religious
    

People|

    
        * Atheists
    * Agnostics
    * Humanists
    * Pantheists
    * Deists
    

Books|

    
        * _Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon_
    * _The End of Faith_
    * _The God Delusion_
    * _God Is Not Great_
    * _Letter to a Christian Nation_
    * _The System of Nature_
    * _Why I Am Not a Christian_
    * _Why I Am Not a Muslim_
    

Organizations|

    
        * American Atheists
    * American Humanist Association
    * Atheist Alliance International
    * British Humanist Association
    * Center for Inquiry
    * Freedom From Religion Foundation
    * International Humanist and Ethical Union
    * Reason Rally
    * Recovering from Religion
    * World Pantheist Movement
    * Brazilian Association of Atheists and Agnostics
    

Related topics|

    
        * Countries by irreligion
    * Secularism
    * _Laïcité_
    * Parody or mock religions
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Theism

* * *
    
        * Deity
      * Divinity
      * Male
      * Female
      * List
    * God
      * Existence
      * Gender
    * Agnostic theism
    * Alatrism
    * Animism
    * Antitheism
    * Apatheism
    * Atheism
      * Agnostic
      * Christian
      * Evangelical
      * Implicit/Explicit
      * Jewish
      * Negative/Positive
      * Scientific or New atheism
      * State atheism
    * Binitarianism
    * Classical theism
    * Deism
      * Ceremonial
      * Christian
      * Pandeism
      * Polydeism
    * Dipolar theism
    * Dystheism
    * Egotheism
    * Misotheism
    * Henotheism
    * Ietsism
    * Kathenotheism
    * Liberal theism
    * Monolatry
    * Monotheism
      * Ethical
      * Post-monotheism
    * Mysticism
    * Nontheism
      * Post-theism
    * Open theism
    * Panentheism
    * Pantheism
      * Classical
      * Hylotheism
      * Naturalistic
    * Philosophical theism
    * Physitheism
      * Euhemerism/Anthropotheism
    * Polytheism
    * Skeptical theism
    * Spiritualism
    * Transtheism
    * Trinitarianism
    * Tritheism
    * Unitarianism
    

![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-

puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Religion portal

![Stub

icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Adi_Holzer_Werksverzeichnis_835_Abrahams_Opfer.jpg/35px-

Adi_Holzer_Werksverzeichnis_835_Abrahams_Opfer.jpg)| _Thisphilosophy of
religion-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it._

    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agnostic_theism&oldid=891771121"

Categories:

    
        * Agnosticism
    * Theism
    * Philosophy of religion
    * Philosophy of religion stubs
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Webarchive template wayback links
    * All stub articles
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * Español
    * فارسی
    * Bahasa Indonesia
    * Italiano
    * Lietuvių
    * Magyar
    * Norsk
    * Polski
    * Português
    * Русский
    * Simple English
    * Türkçe
    * Zazaki
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 10 April 2019, at 02:16 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

