

#

  * News

    *       * US
    * World
    * Politics
    * Entertainment
    * Health
    * MoneyWatch
    * Technology
    * Science
    * Crime
    * Sports
    *       *         * Widow fights for husband's recognition as a D-Day hero
      * West Point cadet killed, 22 injured in rollover crash
      * Legendary New Orleans musician Dr. John dies
      * Mueller witness Nader remains in custody after child porn charge
      * Memorial services begin for victims of Virginia Beach shooting
      * Trump signs long-delayed $19 billion disaster bill into law
      * Former Parkland deputy Scot Peterson released on bail
      * Rape conviction overturned, West Point cadet returns to campus
      * Valedictorian says mic was cut when speaking on police brutality
  *     * Shows
    * CBS This Morning
    * CBS Evening News
    * 60 Minutes
    * Face The Nation
    * Sunday Morning
    * 48 Hours
    * CBSN Originals
    * NCIS: The Cases They Can't Forget
    *       * Live
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/e5ea545f-1d44-4861-b690-2be5d70ae6b8/thumbnail/100x100/7f2c46dcbab5c202ce56948bed3bf4be/logo-cbsn-1920x1080.jpg#)

### Latest headlines

Latest headlines

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/63e23b10-be08-4388-8447-08dba7ea7c13/thumbnail/100x100/ca7e749793cc0e3060ee0c21e45e7988/logo-cbsn-ny-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### CBSN New York

CBSN New York

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/dad0b33e-13cb-4470-8c12-4c1fc69a0106/thumbnail/100x100/609c00acd1c1c941b5cf163dd72f9a50/logo-sports-alt-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### CBS Sports HQ

CBS Sports HQ

    
    
    * ![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/01/03214531-586b-4683-813e-a3252999e063/thumbnail/100x100/979bdc5ee0c75e8f700fe63beffc3e96/et-live-logo-1920x1080.jpg#)
    

### ET Live

ET Live

  * LIVE
  * More
    *       * Latest
    * Video
    * Photos
    * Podcasts
    * In Depth
    * Local
    *       * Log In
    * Alerts
    * Mobile
    * RSS
    * Shop
  * 

Live

Watch CBSN Live

![](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/2015/05/09/6c0b1513-17e6-400b-a77e-32b12d700053/istock000025126342double.jpg)

# Does more sex make couples happier?

  *     *       * 

By Randy Dotinga

November 18, 2015 / 12:20 PM / HealthDay

An active sex life is important to couples' happiness, but they don't have to
go at it like rabbits -- those who make love once a week are happiest, a new
study suggests.

More frequent sex isn't a buzzkill for a relationship. It just doesn't pack
the same punch, Canadian researchers report Nov. 18 in the journal Social
Psychological and Personality Science.

"Our research suggests that couples do not need to aim to engage in sex as
frequently as possible but instead aim to maintain a connection with their
partner," said study lead author Amy Muise, a postdoctoral fellow at the
University of Toronto Mississauga.

#### Trending News

  * 75th D-Day Anniversary
  * West Point Crash
  * Doctor Charged with Murder
  * Smollett 911 Call

The findings are based on three studies involving more than 30,000 people in
all.

At issue: How does sexual frequency affect well-being?

Not surprisingly, the research showed that sex is good, and more sex is
better, Muise said. Regularly having sex emerged as even more important to a
happy relationship than money was.

But researchers haven't understood whether there's a point where more sex
stops translating to more happiness, she said.

To gain insight, Muise and her colleagues first looked at results from a
survey conducted in the United States every other year between 1989 and 2012.
They focused on responses from more than 25,000 people, aged 18 to 89.

Among other things, participants answered questions about sexual frequency
(from not at all to four or more times a week) and their perceptions of their
happiness.

In a second study, researchers surveyed 335 people online, most of whom were
heterosexual. Finally, they analyzed findings from a third study, a 14-year
survey of U.S. married heterosexual couples.

Among couples, those who had more sex were happier to a point. The boosts in
well-being "leveled off once couples reached a frequency of about once a
week," Muise said. "It wasn't bad to engage in sex more frequently than once a
week. It just wasn't associated with greater well-being on average."

The researchers saw no differences in the findings based on gender, age or
length of relationship.

However, the findings didn't prove that frequency of sex affects happiness,
since the research wasn't designed to prove cause-and-effect.

For single people outside committed relationships, however, the results were
very different. For them, Muise said, more frequent sex didn't significantly
translate to more happiness.

Perhaps any link between sex and happiness for singles depends on the
relationship context or how comfortable people are with sex outside of a
relationship, the researchers said.

The study also found that lovemaking once a week was the average frequency
among couples.

"Perhaps this is the average since it seems to maximize the benefits for well-
being," Muise said. "It is likely that weekly sex is enough for the average
couple to maintain their intimate connection and to feel like they have an
active sex life, and this is why we see this as the leveling-off point."

Russell Smyth, a professor of economics at Australia's Monash University who
studies sexuality, said frequency of sex isn't the only factor that affects
well-being.

His own research has provided evidence to support assumptions that may seem
obvious: Couples are happier when sex is better, he said, and "men are more
likely to get happiness from the more physical aspects of sex, while women's
happiness is more attached to the emotional aspects."

Even if that's all true, why wouldn't more be better?

"It is like having an ice cream," Smyth said. "You enjoy your first ice cream.
You also enjoy your second ice cream, but by not as much. You might also get
some enjoyment from your third one, but even less because you are fuller,
concerned about calories and so on."

First published on November 18, 2015 / 12:20 PM

(C) 2015 HealthDay. All rights reserved. This material may not be published,
broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.

### U.S.

More U.S.

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/b53ead7d-8fdc-4349-8220-496e8bb9196c/thumbnail/640x360g1/95f9c0f3cbb7ea96a56adf7977f7fe4f/sara-

bareilles-josh-groban-tonys-971309370.jpg#)

#### How to watch the Tony Awards

James Corden of "The Late Late Show" will host the Tony Awards for a second
time on CBS this Sunday

18M ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/01/3d1e2a55-34d1-4a88-8631-49935d968484/thumbnail/640x360/24ca1a8ca52b7b093b52a17f3393b1a9/ap-19152579595912.jpg#)

#### Memorial services begin for victims of Virginia Beach shooting

Thursday night's funeral massâ€‹ for Katherine "Kate" Nixon in Virginia Beach
was among the first memorial services for the 12 people who died in Friday's
massacre

7M ago

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/f63379de-

fbfe-4395-bc94-c89534a26101/thumbnail/640x360/aa927d57f1d47934104100ea75e351a3/2019-06-06t230529z-786760903-rc16faec42e0-rtrmadp-3-people-

drjohn.jpg#)

#### Legendary New Orleans musician Dr. John dies

In a statement released through his publicist, the family said Dr. John died
"toward the break of day" of a heart attack

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/c9e44d76-9e91-436c-8c39-9f7b6ba288d4/thumbnail/640x360/5c19b74b80d2d4e2f3d67bd88ab15577/gettyimages-1141627731.jpg#)

#### D-Day veteran returns to Normandy to be close to his fallen brothers

Charles Norman Shay led a commemoration this week for the 29 Native Americans
killed

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2016/01/08/6e65ca5c-ac22-44b6-9b46-669e74dde010/thumbnail/640x360/df7fa30f7307798843504208ce40c8e6/west-

point-cadets-456559023.jpg#)

#### Rape conviction overturned, West Point cadet returns to campus

Judges' decision "is victim-blaming," said a former military chief prosecutor.
"It reads like something from decades ago."

2H ago

More in U.S.

### Politics

More Politics

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/03/07/89677eda-11d2-4652-b694-76d7b155d6f3/thumbnail/640x360g2/ae4344d8ebfab28bf62805028308c979/screen-

shot-2018-03-06-at-9-18-51-pm.png#)

#### Mueller witness Nader remains in custody after child porn charge

George Nader, a witness during the Mueller investigation, was charged with one
count of child pornography

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/02/f23124db-09ad-4cb9-8fcc-7f3ff694c444/thumbnail/640x360/41d7b77ecdcd175eb18e50a304ca5c7b/ap-19017777383280.jpg#)

#### U.S. tariffs "still moving forward" as Mexico makes offer on migrant

crisis

President Trump has vowed to impose tariffs on Mexican goods starting Monday
unless the country's government curbs migration from Central America

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/3dd85bc5-77c1-49b0-ac7e-34352df02efb/thumbnail/640x360g2/93c7d007f183c812b06bb03d51810c70/barr-

mcgahn.png#)

#### House to vote on holding Barr and McGahn in contempt

House Democrats are accusing Barr and McGahn of failing to comply with
congressional subpoenas

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/03/72cb27cc-9cc2-4bc6-a48d-2a26e22d5e94/thumbnail/640x360/731f2b7ea91b51b46f1349068954e960/gettyimages-1153159940.jpg#)

#### Trump signs long-delayed $19 billion disaster bill into law

Billions of dollars destined for disaster-hit communities across the U.S. had
been delayed for months by gridlock in Congress

1H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/9ee7f946-321a-47cf-

ac64-6f4f3b20b5c0/thumbnail/640x360g2/7d69fda3e2f7c817cc37e36bf0877ee8/2019-06-06t170602z-933119290-rc125f5435c0-rtrmadp-3-usa-

trade-mexico.jpg#)

#### Talks with Mexico continue without clear targets for avoiding tariffs

The U.S. wants Mexico to reduce the number of illegal border crossings, but
hasn't publicly laid out targets

8H ago

More in Politics

### World

More World

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/5e69e00c-ff61-4355-b595-65cd996dcee5/thumbnail/640x360/66d758351eb54b75e8d2d1bb052c7e8a/ap-19147409504267.jpg#)

#### 24,000 pounds of garbage removed from Mount Everest

Among the 11 tons of recovered trash from the 45-day project are food
wrappers, cans, bottles and empty oxygen cylinders.

58M ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/04/02/f23124db-09ad-4cb9-8fcc-7f3ff694c444/thumbnail/640x360/41d7b77ecdcd175eb18e50a304ca5c7b/ap-19017777383280.jpg#)

#### U.S. tariffs "still moving forward" as Mexico makes offer on migrant

crisis

President Trump has vowed to impose tariffs on Mexican goods starting Monday
unless the country's government curbs migration from Central America

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/29/34057d92-407e-4815-97dd-5265b3e3eb71/thumbnail/640x360/64bfe6aa0bf7f908a90bb5d352d1bdd3/ap-19146672964031.jpg#)

#### U.S. Women favored to win the World Cup

Can the U.S. women take home their fourth World Cup this year?

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/1ef0f772-97df-4124-88fe-6da3c4b266e6/thumbnail/640x360/3b61f2ab211af4102177fdc347a04b51/0606-ctm-

americanvetsreturn-phillips-1868533-640x360.jpg#)

#### D-Day veteran brings wife to Normandy to share memories

Vern Ollar, now 97, was 22 when he landed at Omaha Beach, the site of the
worst American carnage of the Normandy landings

8H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/330ab4a6-3426-449b-993a-96838e12fb84/thumbnail/640x360/ada27fd6e2b5120db8c44353ff74c2c4/0606-ctm-

ddayhistorian-citino-1868511-640x360.jpg#)

#### D-Day historian: "Everything was at stake" in iconic operation

"Every month [World War II] extended it was more death, more mass murder,
starvation. The situation couldn't have been more dire"

9H ago

More in World

### Entertainment

More Entertainment

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/b53ead7d-8fdc-4349-8220-496e8bb9196c/thumbnail/640x360g1/95f9c0f3cbb7ea96a56adf7977f7fe4f/sara-

bareilles-josh-groban-tonys-971309370.jpg#)

#### How to watch the Tony Awards

James Corden of "The Late Late Show" will host the Tony Awards for a second
time on CBS this Sunday

18M ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/01/17/2599127e-7d5f-46bf-

abc2-d7c04b36e4ba/thumbnail/640x360/884cdbe6ce560968b03f73bad7faa8ae/star-

wars-the-force-awakens-depsvi-1.jpg#)

#### Highest-grossing movies of all time, ranked

What's the highest-grossing movie of all time? It might be one of your
favorites

Jun 4 27 photos

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/f63379de-

fbfe-4395-bc94-c89534a26101/thumbnail/640x360/aa927d57f1d47934104100ea75e351a3/2019-06-06t230529z-786760903-rc16faec42e0-rtrmadp-3-people-

drjohn.jpg#)

#### Legendary New Orleans musician Dr. John dies

In a statement released through his publicist, the family said Dr. John died
"toward the break of day" of a heart attack

1H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/2355fbde-1c18-4fec-a6ba-1770bfc17350/thumbnail/640x360/ba1da88a52169c621d09262d69e05212/ap-19157546339857.jpg#)

#### R. Kelly pleads not guilty to 11 new sexual assault charges

The award-winning R&B singer has denied the allegations against him

6H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/a81c8ffd-

cc02-4c27-99d5-502bddafc993/thumbnail/640x360/6043e067fe18943eacab7c78dbc2068d/0606-cbsn-

ghostfleet-1868805-640x360.jpg#)

#### Human trafficking in fishing industry

Shannon Service and Julia Ormond, the director and executive producer of the
documentary "Ghost Fleet," joined CBSN AM to explain how thousands of people a
year are forced into slavery on fishing vessels. They discuss how overfishing
led to the problem and what you can do to help.

3H ago 10:51

More in Entertainment

### Technology

More Technology

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/15/837d7af6-7703-4cc9-bc19-9bd6614fa99a/thumbnail/640x360/a2d75ee8498f34cc69a6e68a13a962c5/gettyimages-1140767407.jpg#)

#### Beyond Meat stock price soars ever higher after first earnings as public

company

Market experts warn the vegan meat company's sky-high stock price -- up 350%
since its IPO last month -- is hard to justify

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/a8c3401a-ef69-4ac7-aad9-e0f6268c5ae6/thumbnail/640x360/fa9bf0aaa4f5500c65f5e4b2f1f1af2b/ubercopter-

boarding.jpg#)

#### Uber to offer helicopter taxi service in NYC

Uber Copter will take select "members" on an 8-minute flight to or from Wall
St. and JFK Airport -- for a $200-to-$225 price

updated 13M ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/1d971e62-8ecb-43a8-972c-13a4a25fb8c0/thumbnail/640x360/308e510931c0fca38b03b7beba54bf51/pai-

gettyimages-1147617670.jpg#)

#### FCC allows automatic blocking of robocalls

Phone companies can now block robocalls by default, but they are permitted to
charge you for the service

9H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/210c28cd-86a3-432c-8266-1d8dff39cc0f/thumbnail/640x360/441c1062dfc09f187531c50d6485951b/0606-ctm-

dietfitnessapps-jacobson-1868521-640x360.jpg#)

#### Diet and fitness apps dominate the market -- but is your health data

safe?

More than 80 percent of dieters are turning to do-it-yourself options like
diet and fitness apps

12H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/04/2b56e2a5-800e-4f72-a271-2f80cb5ca8dc/thumbnail/640x360/6e16227c36f17dad7b2d39daae6cf705/tamagotchi-

gettyimages-452310901.jpg#)

#### Tamagotchis are back, and they're $60

Fans rejoice as the original "cyberpet" of the 1990s gets an update with
Bluetooth and other 2019 technology

9H ago

More in Technology

### Science

More Science

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/6fab93c5-b693-441a-8263-b59c707dd5fe/thumbnail/640x360/7d88f26cd71a3a1249b6f71d36a64522/gettyimages-939864024.jpg#)

#### Dog owners may be stressing out their pets, study suggests

Researchers on border collies and Shetland sheepdogs, and examined coritsol
levels in the hair follicles of both the pet and its owner

4H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/05/9c949c10-05ee-4c26-a649-a763cce6035a/thumbnail/640x360/d54257db23288f343eb62f3be559cc4a/tess-

hunting-giraffes-edit-v17-00-01-52-21-still002.jpg#)

#### Trump administration plans to expand hunting and fishing access

The plan seeks to increase access hunting and fishing access across 1.4
million acres of protected federal lands.

20H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/9c01558a-afe3-4027-a894-40c48799854e/thumbnail/640x360/b213680d186e82045d0270af4ef73e11/ladybug-

swarm-nws-radar.png#)

#### Ladybug swarm so large it registers on radar in Southern California

"The large echo showing up on SoCal radar ... is not precipitation, but
actually a cloud of lady bugs ..." a tweet from the National Weather Service
in San Diego read

23H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/16/1612c079-9039-4fb1-8280-54bd82dc8bfc/thumbnail/640x360/4c38736dc5956c415212a13a38669e9a/parking.jpg#)

#### Corporations say climate change will cost them $1 trillion

Businesses are starting to put numbers on their exposure to climate-change
disruptions -- and they're very high

Jun 5

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2017/12/06/9257d08b-bd24-41e9-a494-fbf9b992ab35/thumbnail/640x360/466444ab23c575ec87837b199034abc3/gettyimages-871492212.jpg#)

#### Air pollution kills 100,000 Indian children every year, study says

Report by New Delhi-based NGO blasts government inaction on pollution and
renewable energy, blames air pollution for 12.5 percent of all deaths

Jun 5

More in Science

### Health

More Health

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2015/12/29/985439f1-326e-4a9c-82c2-324b8bd30bc8/thumbnail/640x360/f9aee551a0d9e71ab50c16727cdadd5f/gettyimages-73393175.jpg#)

#### Whole Foods recalls pesto in 5 states due to undeclared nuts

Grocery chain sold two products that could pose risk of serious or life-
threatening allergic reactions, FDA says

10H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/210c28cd-86a3-432c-8266-1d8dff39cc0f/thumbnail/640x360/441c1062dfc09f187531c50d6485951b/0606-ctm-

dietfitnessapps-jacobson-1868521-640x360.jpg#)

#### Diet and fitness apps dominate the market -- but is your health data

safe?

More than 80 percent of dieters are turning to do-it-yourself options like
diet and fitness apps

12H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/638e9cd0-df77-4604-b446-23bc3f9f7e43/thumbnail/640x360/45578708cfbb162a0ab9000e9cda9417/nfa-

werner-columbus-dr-needs-trx-n-gfx-frame-860.jpg#)

#### Doctor charged with 25 deaths ordered doses up to 40 times too strong

The charges form one of the biggest murder cases ever brought against a U.S.
health care professional

13H ago

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/e36c9c2a-fc87-4a2f-9fa4-dbde11783386/thumbnail/640x360/1f543e6018f690a5349c2ae23a6c462d/my-

post-14.png#)

#### 11 photos of former NICU babies show how far they've come

These babies proudly hold photos of their former selves to celebrate their
amazing progress since graduating from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit

Jun 5 11 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/05/9a7b9825-394d-418c-abc8-0de001f067c4/thumbnail/640x360/6924f8a7afa7a1db344a89f58ec4361c/0605-ctm-

caseforkidsqa-ali-1867807-640x360.jpg#)

#### Wajahat Ali makes the case for having kids -- even in his darkest hour

Just hours before Wajahat Ali was to give a TED Talk about why more people
should be having children, he got the kind of news every parent dreads

Jun 5

More in Health

### MoneyWatch

More MoneyWatch

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/15/837d7af6-7703-4cc9-bc19-9bd6614fa99a/thumbnail/640x360/a2d75ee8498f34cc69a6e68a13a962c5/gettyimages-1140767407.jpg#)

#### Beyond Meat stock price soars ever higher after first earnings as public

company

Market experts warn the vegan meat company's sky-high stock price -- up 350%
since its IPO last month -- is hard to justify

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2015/11/18/63a0243d-43c8-435a-a3a8-542796012dd7/thumbnail/640x360/2219e8ae2d7eadc7f6b10fcc3274a183/rts7t8u.jpg#)

#### Ford: U.S. tariffs on Mexico would do "significant" damage

As U.S. and Mexican officials wrangle over a deal, a top auto exec says trade
sanctions would dent the industry

3H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/4bb3c67e-437f-48e1-851b-6529a7b50a4f/thumbnail/640x360/debe004b96027cc3c2319f7fe3d27f3c/istock-000041573826-large.jpg#)

#### Automation could throw millions of women out of work

Advances in labor-saving technology will result in women losing nearly as many
jobs as men, hitting nearly 25% in the U.S.

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/5800731d-84b4-4536-a035-31abb59a1e2b/thumbnail/640x360/04781f2d43c6eca38b012743f9a2d238/2019-05-31t164127z-1104950028-rc138b754420-rtrmadp-3-usa-

economy.jpg#)

#### How Trump's tariffs on China and Mexico could hurt the U.S.

With the White House poised to ramp up its trade fights, experts worry about
the toll on consumers and businesses

5H ago

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/a8c3401a-ef69-4ac7-aad9-e0f6268c5ae6/thumbnail/640x360/fa9bf0aaa4f5500c65f5e4b2f1f1af2b/ubercopter-

boarding.jpg#)

#### Uber to offer helicopter taxi service in NYC

Uber Copter will take select "members" on an 8-minute flight to or from Wall
St. and JFK Airport -- for a $200-to-$225 price

updated 13M ago

More in MoneyWatch

### Crime

More Crime

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/01/3d1e2a55-34d1-4a88-8631-49935d968484/thumbnail/640x360/24ca1a8ca52b7b093b52a17f3393b1a9/ap-19152579595912.jpg#)

#### Memorial services begin for victims of Virginia Beach shooting

Thursday night's funeral massâ€‹ for Katherine "Kate" Nixon in Virginia Beach
was among the first memorial services for the 12 people who died in Friday's
massacre

7M ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/ad7512f3-eaeb-4a99-8d20-6461b399a713/thumbnail/640x360/569338470c852b851c1f754c331d6b97/0606-en-

resortdeaths-shamlian-1868969-640x360.jpg#)

#### 3 Americans died at Dominican resort

A Maryland couple was found dead in their room at a resort in the Dominican
Republic just days after a Pennsylvania woman died at the same resort. Now the
FBI is investigating their deaths. Janet Shamlian reports.

1H ago 01:29

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2016/01/08/6e65ca5c-ac22-44b6-9b46-669e74dde010/thumbnail/640x360/df7fa30f7307798843504208ce40c8e6/west-

point-cadets-456559023.jpg#)

#### Rape conviction overturned, West Point cadet returns to campus

Judges' decision "is victim-blaming," said a former military chief prosecutor.
"It reads like something from decades ago."

2H ago

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/03ebace0-abfd-4995-b805-4bd7c4995deb/thumbnail/640x360/0a16898c1b9893f1de5c28be0bbecf5a/ap-19157577301058.jpg#)

#### Former Parkland deputy Scot Peterson released on bail

Peterson was the deputy on duty at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School when
17 people were killed

4H ago

![ ](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/7120c5ae-

cf39-409a-a8d7-632df6b3a7bb/thumbnail/640x360/5ca6d5981a82c7cbc1f01a616683f3c0/190606-cbsny-

james-oneill.png#)

#### NYPD apologizes for raid that led to Stonewall riots

"The actions and the laws were discriminatory and oppressive and for that I
apologize," James O'Neill said Thursday

updated 3M ago

More in Crime

### Space

More Space

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/07/17/2168b564-9b66-426d-af23-038e963562d1/thumbnail/640x360/57e8d5318ce9acddcf6075a2e12f431f/071718-jupiter.jpg#)

#### Jupiter's largest moons will be visible this month

NASA has a message for space lovers this month: Look up

Jun 5

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/31/2c778eae-2aea-482c-9fca-7e24149b3a9d/thumbnail/640x360g2/6f322bf7d2e71ba317a5e2fa4614f473/053119-astrobotic.jpg#)

#### NASA taps 3 companies for moon missions

If all goes well, the landers will touch down on the moon in 2020 and 2021

May 31

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/29/0132b6d4-ffe7-4837-bde9-7e0dbfbed2c1/thumbnail/640x360/311d9dff178cb35cfeb9e1f6fc31d239/052919-eva4.jpg#)

#### Cosmonauts honor spacewalk pioneer on eve of 85th birthday

Cosmonauts dedicate spacewalk to Alexey Leonov, who carried out the first
spacewalk in 1965

May 29

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/28/cfd58feb-7145-4ff1-ae2d-9b889f36b6ec/thumbnail/640x360/f53851c6086fdfc0d665cd66bf0450d8/030319-dock1.jpg#)

#### SpaceX readying crew ship for flight by end of year

SpaceX, working through a Crew Dragon failure probe, is protecting possible
end-of-year flight

May 28

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/23/81221a60-b8c5-4602-9d24-ee950d7bb5d3/thumbnail/640x360/848f187b6952a6f10639f6f4d90c0ce6/052319-ppe.jpg#)

#### NASA awards contract for future moon station

NASA is moving ahead with plans to send astronauts back to the moon by 2024

May 23

More in Space

### Latest Galleries

More Latest Galleries

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/e36c9c2a-fc87-4a2f-9fa4-dbde11783386/thumbnail/640x360/1f543e6018f690a5349c2ae23a6c462d/my-

post-14.png#)

#### 11 photos of former NICU babies show how far they've come

These babies proudly hold photos of their former selves to celebrate their
amazing progress since graduating from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit

Jun 5 11 photos

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2018/12/12/153393e7-6b65-4524-b6ca-04849c595c03/thumbnail/640x360/1f9df4f8ccdc2e8d9c174fcd344415b5/huisentruit5.jpg#)

#### Evidence photos in the disappearance of Jodi Huisentruit

Jodi Huisentruit, the morning news anchor at Iowa's KIMT-TV was reported
missing on June 27, 1995. Mason City Police are still at work trying to solve
this case 23 years later.

Jun 1 26 photos

![

](https://cbsnews3.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/30/29d18cb2-e901-4c09-bf48-e4b30781fbd1/thumbnail/640x360/6d6a68782828fcd3c1fccdf336d83ac0/gettyimages-51420780.jpg#)

#### Horrifying photos of Chernobyl and its aftermath

HBO's drama provided a devastating look at the worst nuclear accident of the
20th century. Now see what really happened.

May 31 39 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/05/27/50fd6000-c673-4ed8-95df-72048fa964e7/thumbnail/640x360/4e487e072121932b0963d26d6581299c/memorial-

day-gallery-gettyimages-1145826128.jpg#)

#### Memorial Day 2019: America honors the fallen

Remembering the sacrifices made by service members in our nation's wars

May 27 37 photos

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2011/11/02/a117caed-4505-11e3-a5af-047d7b15b92e/thumbnail/640x360/3290468fd2beeb6fa3e47946f28613b8/needham_jacque.jpg#)

#### John & Jacque: A tale of love and war

A look at John Needham, Jacque Villagomez and the events that led to her death

May 25 14 photos

More in Latest Galleries

### Popular

More Popular

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/89386500-7e2c-4070-be81-10e2be1c6896/thumbnail/640x360/12f130f33819883720b50d839cd668b7/0530-rnb-

full-1868997-640x360.jpg#)

#### Popular

#### 6/6/19: Red and Blue

Negotiating with Mexico to avoid Trump's tariffs; Trump honoring D Day vets on
75th anniversary

updated 46M ago 45:19

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/47178dc2-c90d-430c-a420-58b35da370b1/thumbnail/640x360/9a440b66cf03ee6ba20e8b09938fc3d6/0606-cbsn-

nypdstonewall-1869036-640x360.jpg#)

#### NYC council speaker on NYPD apology

New York City Council Speaker Corey Johnson, who is gay, joins CBSN to discuss
NYPD Commissioner James O'Neill's apology for the department's reaction to the
1969 Stonewall Inn riots. Johnson also discussed current Mayor Bill de Blasio
and his plans for New York City's 2021 mayoral race.

updated 22M ago 05:05

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/07/223e3d1a-078e-4044-8320-1d085abe59c0/thumbnail/640x360/1d05afaccd0c1fe6923f3504168e7178/cbsn-

fusion-uber-to-offer-helicopter-rides-in-new-york-city-

thumbnail-1869021-640x360.jpg#)

#### Uber to offer helicopter rides in NYC

Ride-hail service Uber is about to go airborne: The company said Thursday it's
readying its first helicopters for takeoff in New York City starting July 9.
Uber is rolling out Uber Copter service for its Uber Reward Platinum and
Diamond cardholders, offering the top-tier members an 8-minute helicopter ride
to or from the Downtown Manhattan Heliport near Wall Street and John F.
Kennedy International Airport.

updated 19M ago 00:32

![

](https://cbsnews2.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/2c3e94e6-2f20-48eb-8f75-f557e0618f23/thumbnail/640x360/4beb8b32aee3beb86484aa083d61e110/cbsn-

fusion-trump-signs-disaster-aid-package-into-law-

today-2019-06-06-thumbnail-1868991-640x360.jpg#)

#### Trump signs $19.1B disaster bill into law

President Trump signed a long-delayed disaster aid bill into law Thursday,
authorizing billions of dollars of assistance to communities in the mainland
U.S. and Puerto Rico recovering from devastating storms, floods and wildfires.

1H ago 00:29

![

](https://cbsnews1.cbsistatic.com/hub/i/r/2019/06/06/4ba30646-ab28-41f0-bf2d-ad3059a1259b/thumbnail/640x360/66a88de9df3bbe14cdd9c857db7c6d96/0606-en-

wwiimedic-phillips-1868976-640x360.jpg#)

#### D-Day veteran moves to Normandy

Hundreds of D-Day veterans traveled thosands of miles to Normandy to be there
for the 75th anniversary of the historic attack. But the trip was much shorter
for one American. Mark Phillips has his story.

1H ago 02:42

More in Popular

Copyright (C) 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved.

  * Privacy Policy
  * Ad Choice
  * Terms of Use
  * Mobile User Agreement
  * About
  * Advertise
  * Closed Captioning
  * CBS News Store
  * Site Map
  * Contact Us
  * Help

  *     *       *         * 

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

