
    
        * __
    * Sections __
    * __
    * Home
    

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

    
        * Try 1 month for $1
    * Username
    * Sign In
    

* * *
    
          * My Post __
      * My Reading List __
      * Account Settings __
      * Newsletters & alerts __
      * Gift subscriptions __
      * Contact us __
      * Help desk __
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    
    * Accessibility for screenreader
    

local • Live coverage of Trump's inauguration • LIVE

Most Recent

4:03 PM

Latest updates: Women's March on Washington liveblog

3:38 PM

Anti-abortion feminists protest in front of Supreme Court

3:33 PM

Crowds now walking on highway to march

__ Video

3:27 PM

Hillary Clinton tweets 'thanks' to marchers

3:21 PM

America Ferrera: 'Our new president is waging a war'

__ Loading...

10:15 AM

Live coverage of Trump's inauguration

__  
Back to  
Top

Live coverage: See new updates

Live coverage: See new updates

3:38 PM

January 21 by Kayla Epstein

Anti-abortion feminists protest in front of Supreme Court

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/AmrP0SesbKNdmMADnQdri2F01kc=/960x0/s3.amazonaws.com/arc-

washpost-wordpress-uploads/primetime/wp-

content/uploads/sites/11/2017/01/21103636/prolife-1024x768.jpg)

A little over two dozen people – mostly women – with the anti-abortion group
Students for Life gathered outside the Supreme Court with the aim of opposing
abortion while also supporting women’s rights.

Some women’s marchers gawked at they group as they marched towards the
Capitol, while others staged nonviolent counter protests.

Michele Hendrickson, 31, leads the group’s Eastern Regional Director. “It’s a
woman’s march, we are pro-women and pro-life. Pro-life women have been left
out today,” she said. She said her group believes that a woman’s rights start
at the moment of conception.

She said she the group disagreed with the Women’s March having abortion access
listed as one of their planks.

Hendrickson said the group is nonpartisan. “We’re not here on a political
stance, or Trump.” Though she noted that they planned to hold him to account
on his promise to defund Planned Parenthood and roll back Roe v Wade.

“Abortion is the ultimate exploitation of women, abortion is used as a tool to
oppress women,” said Lisa Twigg, 28, from Spotsylvania, VA. She said she
considers herself a feminist and believes women are equal to men, but said
that women had been “tricked” into thinking that they had to choose between
having a baby and a career.

Twigg said she did not vote for Trump but planned to “hold him accountable”
when it came to respecting women.

Beth Rahal, 26, from Lancaster PA is the on campus director for Students for
Life. She said that giving pregnant women assistance with housing, schooling,
and money was a better alternative to abortion. She said abortion was a
“violence” against women.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share via Email

10:15 AM

January 20 by Washington Post staff

Live coverage of Trump's inauguration

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/AkKCkOpMx7IDeJw2goOVfTADBn8=/960x0/s3.amazonaws.com/arc-

washpost-wordpress-uploads/primetime/wp-

content/uploads/sites/11/2017/01/19092755/guration_Trump_House_Democrats_05042.jpg-e694c-1024x683.jpg)The
U.S. Capitol frames the backdrop over the stage during a rehearsal of
President-elect Donald Trump's swearing-in ceremony this week in Washington.
(AP Photo/Patrick Semansky)

Donald Trump will be sworn in Friday during an inauguration that’s expected to
draw between 700,000 and 900,000 people. Security officials said there are 63
demonstration groups, pro and con, also expected Friday. Follow our liveblog
for updates through this afternoon’s inaugural parade.

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share via Email

__ Loading...

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

