

Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to
A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving
Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People

Search ____

×

Submit __

For a full list of topics: A-Z Index

Gateway to Health Communication & Social Marketing Practice

Section Navigation

TP Docs Home

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Email
    * Syndicate
    

# Pregnancy Complications and Death

Minus

Related Pages

On This Page

    
        * What's the Problem?
    * Who's at Risk?
    * Can It Be Prevented?
    * Tips for Scripts
    * Case Example
    

### What's the Problem?

When a woman dies during pregnancy or within a year of pregnancy and the
problem can be traced to the pregnancy, the death is said to be pregnancy-
related. The problem may be a direct result of the pregnancy complications or
an unrelated condition that was made worse by the pregnancy.

The woman may hemorrhage, have seizures or have a pulmonary embolism, which
may lead to hospitalization or death. The baby may or may not live.

The major causes of pregnancy-related deaths are excessive bleeding, pre-
eclampsia and eclampsia (high blood pressure unique to pregnancy), and clots
to the lungs. For every woman who dies from pregnancy, several thousand more
experience complications. About one-fifth of the four million women who
deliver in the U.S. each year have a serious problem before they start labor
and one-quarter will have a serious complication during labor or delivery.

Are you a writer or producer working on a current TV or film project? Contact
the program for technical assistance.

### Who's at Risk?

Women at greatest risk of dying from pregnancy are those who do not receive
medical care during their pregnancy. Some women do not have access to medical
care due to lack of insurance or transportation.

At-risk women can be of any socioeconomic background or race; however, African
American women are four times more likely to die from pregnancy-related causes
than white women, and the disparity in risk between black women and white
women has increased from 3.4 times greater in 1987 to 4.1 in 1990.

Also at greater risk are women 35 years of age and older, women who have had
three or more children, and women who may lack resources, support, or prenatal
care.

In the U.S., 49% of all pregnancies are unintended. Half of unintended
pregnancies are among women not using any birth control. The other half is
among women using birth control but whose method failed due to inappropriate
use or failure of the method itself.

### Can It Be Prevented?

Pregnancy-related deaths are not always preventable. However, it is estimated
that up to half of all pregnancy-related deaths could be prevented through
regular check-ups during pregnancy and appropriate management of health
problems.

### Tips for Scripts

    
        * **REMIND** viewers to seek medical care during pregnancy.
    * **ENCOURAGE** viewers not to smoke or drink alcohol during pregnancy.
    * **ENCOURAGE** viewers to plan their families and see a doctor before getting pregnant.
    * **INFORM** viewers to never take medications unless prescribed by a physician familiar with their case.
    * **REMIND** women to follow their doctor 's advice for vitamins and care during pregnancy and to take folic acid before conception to prevent birth defects.
    

### Case Example

A 36-year-old woman has three children and doesn't want to get pregnant. But
her partner doesn't want her to use contraception. She becomes pregnant and
because the pregnancy is not wanted, she does not seek prenatal care or take
good care of herself. She develops swelling in her feet and hands, gains
weight rapidly, and experiences headaches and blurred vision. At delivery, her
blood pressure increases dramatically, and she develops convulsions and dies.
The baby also dies.

Note: The high blood pressure during pregnancy could have been detected,
monitored, and controlled before delivery had she received prenatal care.

Related Links

    
        * Reproductive Health, CDC
    * American College of Nurse MidwivesExternal
    * American College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsExternal
    

Page last reviewed: September 15, 2017

Content source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

home Gateway Home

    
        * Audience
    * Campaigns
    * Channels
    * Entertainment Education expand
      * Research Agenda
      * Healthstyles Survey expand
        * 1999
        * 2000
        * 2001
        * 2002
      * Tip Sheets A-C expand
        * AIDS and STDs
        * Alcohol Use and Pregnancy
        * Harmful Algal Blooms
        * Allergies
        * Anhydrous Ammonia
        * Animal Exhibits and Petting Zoos
        * Anthrax
        * Antibiotic Resistance
        * Antibiotic Resistance in Nursing Homes and Day Care Centers
        * Asthma in Children
        * Asthma in Women
        * Autism
        * Avian Influenza A (H5N1)
        * Bat Bites and Rabies
        * Bioterrorism
        * Birth Defects and Folic Acid
        * Blindness
        * Breast Cancer
        * Breast Cancer in Young African American Women
        * Breastfeeding
        * Cancer
        * Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
        * Cardiovascular Health
        * Cerebral Palsy
        * HPV Cancer
        * Chikungunya Fever
        * Child Passenger Safety
        * Chronic Respiratory Disease
        * Climate Change
        * Climate Change and Green Infrastructure
        * Climate Change and Health
        * Climate Change and Transportation
        * Colorectal Cancer
      * Tip Sheets D-F expand
        * Deep Vein Thrombosis
        * Dengue Fever
        * Diabetes
        * Domestic and Intimate Partner Violence
        * Drowning
        * Epilepsy and Seizures
        * Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
        * Food Desert
        * Foodborne Illness
      * Tip Sheets G-K expand
        * Genital Warts
        * Genomics and Disease
        * Global Smoking
        * Group B Strep in Newborns
        * Hantavirus
        * Head Injuries and Bicycle Safety
        * Health Care Fraud
        * Hearing Loss Among Workers
        * Heat Illnesses and Death
        * Hepatitis
        * Hepatitis A
        * Hepatitis B
        * Hepatitis C
        * HIV/AIDS and Microbicides
        * HIV Prevention: PrEP and PEP
        * HIV/TB Coinfection
        * HIV and African American Women
        * HIV and Male Circumcision
        * HIV Global
        * HIV Transmission
        * HIV Treatment
        * HIV Testing
        * Seasonal Influenza (Flu)
        * Intestinal Worms
        * Jaundice
        * Kidney Disease
        * Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding
      * Tip Sheets L-O expand
        * Latex Allergy
        * Lead Poisoning Among Children Outside US
        * Lead Poisoning in Children
        * Low Immunization Rates
        * Lung Cancer
        * Lyme Disease
        * Marijuana Use and Driving
        * Marijuana Use and Teens
        * Marijuana Use and Pregnancy
        * Malaria and International Travel
        * Malaria in Global Health
        * Medically Uninsured
        * Mental Retardation
        * Mercury Poisoning
        * Natural Disasters
        * Obesity
        * Obesity and Disability
        * Obesity Prevention
        * Ovarian Cancer
      * Tip Sheets P-R expand
        * Pandemic Flu
        * Physical Inactivity
        * Pica Behavior
        * Pregnancy and Prenatal Care
        * Pregnancy and Smoking
        * Pregnancy Complications
        * Preventive Health Care
        * Prostate Cancer
        * Radiation
        * Radiation Emergencies
        * Ionizing Radiation
        * Radon
        * Raw Milk
      * Tip Sheets S-U expand
        * Salmonella, Pet Reptiles and Amphibians
        * Secondhand Smoke
        * Secondhand Smoke and Children
        * Shaken Baby Syndrome
        * Sickle Cell Disease
        * Skin Cancer
        * Smallpox
        * Smoking-Related Diseases
        * Smokeless Tobacco
        * Sports and Recreation-Related Injuries
        * Stress at Work
        * Stroke
        * Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
        * Suicide Among Youth
        * Teen Driving
        * Thalidomide
        * Tobacco
        * Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
        * Tuberculosis
        * Ulcers
        * Unintended Pregnancy
      * Tip Sheets V-Z expand
        * Violence
        * Violence and Homicide Among Youth
        * Violence in the Workplace
        * West Nile Virus
        * Women’s Health
    * Health Communication Basics expand
      * What is Health Communications?
      * How Do I Do It?
      * How Do I Know It Works?
      * What is Health Marketing?
      * Health Marketing Basics
    * Health Communication Science Digest
    * Research & Evaluation
    * Risk Communication
    * Tools & Templates expand
      * CDC Clear Communication Index
      * CDCynergy “Lite” expand
        * Problem Description
        * Market Research
        * Market Strategy
        * Interventions
        * Evaluation
        * Implementation
        * The Editions
        * Appendices
      * Success Stories
    

Get Email Updates

To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:

Email Address

What's this?

Submit

Related Topics

    
        * ![Health Out Loud Blog.](/healthcommunication/images/Blog.gif)
    

![CDC Vital Signs™ – Learn about the latest public health data. Read CDC Vital

Signs™…](https://www.cdc.gov/images/campaigns/vitalsigns/vitalsigns_150x120.jpg)

**CONTACT CDC-INFO**

Have questions? We have answers. 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) TTY:
888-232-6348

Email CDC-INFO

**CDC INFORMATION**

    
        * About CDC
    * Jobs
    * Funding
    * Policies
    * File Viewers & Players
    
    * Privacy
    * FOIA
    * No Fear Act
    * OIG
    * Nondiscrimination
    * Accessibility
    

**CONNECT WITH CDC**

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Youtube
    * Instagram
    
    
    * Syndicate
    * CDC TV
    * RSS
    * Email
    

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

USA.gov

CDC Website Exit Disclaimer external icon

    
        * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Email
    

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

file_external

#### Exit Notification/Disclaimer Policy

Close

**Links with this icon indicate that you are leaving the CDC website.**

    
        * The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cannot attest to the accuracy of a non-federal website.
    * Linking to a non-federal website does not constitute an endorsement by CDC or any of its employees of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the website.
    * You will be subject to the destination website's privacy policy when you follow the link.
    * CDC is not responsible for Section 508 compliance (accessibility) on other federal or private website.
    

For more information on CDC's web notification policies, see Website
Disclaimers.

Cancel Continue

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

