

The New Yorker

Newsletter

Get the best of _The New Yorker_ in your in-box every day.

Submit

Privacy Policy

Sign in

Shop

__

  * News
  * Culture
  * Books
  * Business & Tech
  * Humor
  * Cartoons
  * Magazine
  * Video
  * Podcasts
  * Archive
  * Goings On
  * Subscribe

The New Yorker

Subscribe

News Desk

# How Abortion Law in New York Will Change, and How It Won’t

## The Reproductive Health Act will remove barriers for women seeking to get

abortions in New York. But some wish it could have gone further.

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097b79ebe912338a37865e/1:1/w_48,c_limit/tolentino-

jia-1.png)

By Jia Tolentino

January 19, 2019

  * __

  * __

  * __

  * __

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5c421bbde6a3a35067b043cd/master/w_727,c_limit/Tolentino-

ReproductiveHealthAct.jpg)

__

The vast majority of abortions take place in the first trimester. Given how
rare late-term abortion is, few elected officials are willing to risk the
political costs of making it a cause.

Illustration by Maggie Chiang

In the late spring of 2016, Erika Christensen was thirty-one weeks pregnant,
and found out that the baby she was carrying would be unable to survive
outside the womb. Her doctor told her that he was “incompatible with life.”
Christensen and her husband wanted a child desperately—they called him
Spartacus, because of how hard he seemed to be fighting—but she decided,
immediately, to terminate the pregnancy: if the child was born, he would
suffer, and would not live long; she wanted to minimize his suffering to
whatever extent she could.

Christensen lived in New York, a state where, since 2014, an estimated twenty-
five to twenty-seven per cent of pregnancies end in abortion. Abortion was
legalized in New York in 1970, three years before the Supreme Court decided
Roe v. Wade. Abortion was a crime in most other states; in New York, it became
a crime with major exceptions. It is still regulated in the criminal code,
and, Christensen learned, it is a crime in New York if an abortion is
performed after a woman is twenty-four weeks pregnant, unless the mother’s
life is in immediate jeopardy. Even though the baby in her womb would not be
able to live outside of it, she would have to go elsewhere to have an
abortion.

Politicians had been attempting for nearly a decade to pass a law called the
Reproductive Health Act, which would remove abortion from New York’s criminal
code and codify the protections of Roe v. Wade, which affirms a woman’s right
to an abortion, with limits, in state law. The R.H.A. had been approved
multiple times by the Democrat-controlled state assembly, but it had never
passed the state senate, which was controlled by Republicans.

Christensen and her medical team made arrangements for her to travel to
Colorado, where abortion is essentially regulated like any other medical
procedure. With help from her mother, she scrounged up more than ten thousand
dollars to pay for the procedure and the trip. In Boulder, a doctor named
Warren Hern administered an injection that stopped her baby’s heart but
prevented her from bleeding and going into labor. Afterward, while waiting for
her flight, she could not help feeling as if what she’d done was shameful and
illegal. She flew back to New York and had a physically excruciating
stillbirth at a hospital.

A week and a half later, she e-mailed me. I was working at the Web site
Jezebel, which often publishes stories about abortion law. Christensen wanted
to describe what had happened to her. When we spoke on the phone, her milk was
still coming in. Her baseline experience of pregnancy had been punishing to
begin with, and New York law had made it much worse.

When New York first legalized abortion, in 1970, it was one of only four
states where the practice was legal. Of the four, New York’s law was the most
liberal, as it had no residency requirement. Between July of 1970 and January
of 1973, roughly three hundred and fifty thousand out-of-state abortion
patients came to New York; in the first two years after the state law passed,
sixty per cent of women who had abortions in New York came from out of state.
“New York used to be an oasis,” Katie Watson told me recently. Watson is a
professor and bioethicist at Northwestern, a former lawyer for the A.C.L.U. of
Illinois, and the author of “Scarlet A: The Ethics, Law, and Politics of
Ordinary Abortion.” “It changed things nationally,” she said, of New York
State. “And then it just never updated its statute.”

The vast majority of abortions take place in the first trimester. Fewer than
ten per cent of abortions occur at fourteen weeks or later, and, according to
the Guttmacher Institute, only slightly more than one per cent of abortions
are performed at twenty-one weeks or later. Given how rare late-term abortion
is, few elected officials are willing to risk the political costs of making it
a cause. Late-term abortion makes many people deeply uncomfortable: at that
point in a pregnancy, we are no longer talking about a lime-size fetus that
hardly resembles a person.

Doctors who perform late-term abortions have wrestled with the profound
difficulties of fetal personhood; they have arguably done so to a greater
extent than anyone else. Several years ago, I interviewed Dr. Susan Robinson,
a now-retired late-term-abortion provider in New Mexico who appeared in the
documentary “After Tiller,” about the only four doctors in the U.S. who, at
the time the film was made, openly performed late-term abortions. (Dr. George
Tiller, who previously had been part of that group, was murdered by an anti-
abortion activist, in 2009.) Robinson told me that, in her practice, she used
whatever terms her patients used. “If she refers to it as her baby, I’ll refer
to it as her baby,” she said. “If she’s named the baby, I’ll use the baby’s
name, too.” She would ask patients, particularly those who were there because
of fetal anomalies, if they wanted to hold their baby, and if they wanted
footprints. She would cry with them and pray with them. “I mean, imagine being
six months pregnant and finding out your baby’s missing half its brain, and
you’ve got this nursery you’ve painted at home, you’re so ready—I don’t want
them to go home from the procedure with absolutely nothing to remember and
honor the baby and its birth,” Robinson said.

I was in my mid-twenties when I saw “After Tiller,” and it was the first time
I’d really thought about late-term abortion. I was struck by Robinson’s aura
of sorrowful compassion. She spent every day with an ethical question that
many people abhor. I asked her how she drew her own lines—if she ever refused
to perform an abortion when a woman’s fetus was healthy. The calculus was
hard, she said. Sometimes the compelling factor was that the patient was
eleven years old. But what if the patient were fifteen, or sixteen? “What is
the ethical difference between doing an abortion at twenty-nine and thirty-two
weeks?” she said she would ask herself, weighing each situation. She’d had a
patient from France, she told me, who came to her at thirty-five weeks, and
she had turned that woman down. “It wouldn’t be safe,” she said.

Since that interview, I’ve come to think that understanding late-term abortion
is a key to understanding abortion and reproduction generally. For people who
believe that abortion is a medical procedure that a woman chooses to have, or
not to have, in consultation with her doctor, why would we restrict abortion
in our legal codes at all? The decision to restrict abortion in the legal code
is based on the idea that there are people who want to kill babies, and the
law exists to prevent killing. The conviction that we should instead regulate
abortion medically is rooted in the proposition that late-term abortions
happen not because women and doctors want to kill babies but because
circumstances conspire to make late-term abortions necessary, and that the
women who are in these situations, and their doctors, are the people best
suited to decide when those circumstances have arrived.

Katrina Kimport, a research sociologist and associate professor in the
department of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive sciences at the
University of California–San Francisco, has, over the past couple of years,
been conducting the most comprehensive research on late-term abortion to date.
People have certain assumptions about late-term abortion, she told me. They
imagine a woman spontaneously getting cold feet in her third trimester, or an
indecisive dawdler who decides, on a whim, at twenty-seven weeks, that she’s
simply done. “But, in reality,” Kimport told me, “these are people who were
planning to continue the pregnancy and obtained a piece of vital information
that made that change. Or they’re people who just did not know that they were
pregnant—people with other existing physical conditions, or people without
typical symptoms—who then knew they didn’t want to continue it, and then a
series of obstacles pushed them over the line.”

For Kimport and other advocates for abortion access, a woman’s ability to
decide if and when she becomes a mother is dependent not just on abortion
rights but on a continuum of reproductive health access. Restrictions on
contraception—high co-pays, insurance hoops, a lack of local clinics that
provide birth control—produce more unwanted pregnancies, and thus increase the
number of abortions. Restrictions on abortion providers, including mandatory
waiting periods, so-called “ _TRAP_ laws,” and fetal-pain laws, are intended
to cause women to give up on getting abortions, but, in many cases, they
simply insure that abortions will be performed later than women want them to
be performed.

In the study that Kimport conducted with Diana Greene Foster, her colleague at
U.C.S.F., women who sought late-term abortions were twelve weeks pregnant, on
average, when they discovered the pregnancy; women who sought first-trimester
abortions were five weeks along, on average. Odile Schalit, the director at
the Brigid Alliance, a new nonprofit that helps women travel to and from New
York in order to obtain abortions, told me that the majority of the women the
Brigid Alliance had served so far were New Yorkers who needed to leave the
state for late-term abortions. “We expect people to know immediately when
they’re pregnant, and to know exactly how to handle it,” Schalit said. “We
don’t take into account the possibility of ambivalence, that they’re minors,
or that they have to figure out how to take off work and get childcare, or
that they might be in a coercive, unsupportive, or abusive relationship, or
that they might not have the financial or logistical or bodily autonomy to
access real choice at all.”

After speaking with Christensen in 2016, I transcribed and edited our
conversation and posted it on Jezebel. To my surprise, and to Christensen’s,
more than a million people read the piece within the week. Dozens of women
wrote to me, telling me about their own late-term abortions; I forwarded their
e-mails to Christensen, who had used a pseudonym for the interview. A social
worker at Mount Sinai, the hospital where she’d delivered, also passed along
e-mails for her from women who’d needed to terminate a pregnancy in the third
trimester.

Recently, I asked Christensen about her decision to speak with me, and about
everything that’s happened to her since. “I called the clinic before I talked
to you,” she said, “and I asked if there was anything they’d like me not to
say. And then Dr. Hern grabbed the phone, and he told me, with all this
urgency, ‘Erika, you don’t need to ask permission from anyone. It’s your
story.’ ” In the subsequent correspondence with the women who e-mailed her—she
called them her “sad pen pals”—she repeated his counsel: they didn’t need to
rationalize their decisions to her or to anyone. She started to consider
becoming a pro-choice activist, under her real name. “Any fear I had about
being attacked, being called a murderer, was trumped by not wanting people to
think I was ashamed.”

A few months after the piece was published, Katharine Bodde, a senior policy
counsel at the New York Civil Liberties Union, asked me if she could contact
the woman in the interview. She got in touch with Christensen and told her
about the Reproductive Health Act. In January, 2017, Christensen did her first
public event in support of the R.H.A. A few weeks later, she and her husband,
Garin Marschall, went to Albany to talk to legislators. She had recently found
out that she was pregnant again. “They put a face on the issue,” Donna
Lieberman, the executive director of the N.Y.C.L.U., told me. “It changes the
game when lawmakers are speaking to people who have been impacted by the law.”

Christensen and Marschall had moved to Baltimore, but they trekked to Albany
eight times during New York’s 2017–18 legislative session to lobby for the
bill, sometimes telling their story a dozen times in a day. In April, 2017,
Christensen gave birth to a cherubic baby girl named Pepper. One month later,
Marschall built the Web site RHAVote.com. In early 2018, the family went on a
tour of upstate cities to talk to people at events for congressional and state
senate candidates. In the midterms, the Democrats picked up eight state senate
seats, unseated five incumbents, and won a 40–23 majority in the chamber. Most
of the newly elected Democrats had done an event in support of the R.H.A.

Soon after the midterms, Governor Andrew Cuomo issued a statement about the
legislative priorities for his third term. With the appointment of Brett
Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court, the “federal assault on women’s reproductive
rights” had extended to a “Supreme Court that threatens to roll back Roe v.
Wade,” the statement read. Cuomo insisted that both the R.H.A. and the
Comprehensive Contraception Coverage Act should be passed during the first
thirty days of the new term.

The R.H.A. was originally written to garner bipartisan support, so that it
could pass a conservative-controlled senate. It legalized late-term abortions,
like Christensen’s, that involve the viability of a fetus. But, with a strong
Democratic majority, there was a new question to consider. Did the political
will exist to go further than Roe, and to affirm a woman’s right to an
abortion with no legal restrictions?

“I’m not sure that people—and specifically I mean pro-choice people who
believe in limits, which is a lot of people—understand the full complexity of
the issue,” Christensen told me. The facts of her own case, she said, lent
themselves to sympathy, even among religious conservatives: she was a middle-
class white woman who wanted to be a mother. But she didn’t see her abortion
as a tragedy. She felt lucky that she was able to get it. “And the same goes
for cases that the R.H.A. doesn’t cover, cases that don’t seem as
sympathetic—the woman from a rural area who didn’t find out she was pregnant
until seventeen weeks, who has three kids already and no travel support. Do we
leave those women out? And, if we do leave them out, do we at least understand
what we’re doing?” Christensen said that, because of her year of intense
hormonal fluctuations, she hadn’t known that she was pregnant with Pepper
until she was sixteen weeks along.

“The R.H.A. is a huge, enormously significant, long-awaited correction,” she
said. “If it passes exactly as is, it would be a huge step in the right
direction. But, in a room full of people who trust women, I don’t know why we
would only trust them in specific circumstances. And I’m afraid that, if the
R.H.A. passes, no one will be ready to talk about abortion in New York again
until we’re dead. But we’re certainly going to try.”

A law that governs abortion by examining a woman’s reasons for having one
carries an implicit suggestion that there are objectively correct choices in
pregnancy, choices that can be ascertained and judged by the body politic. But
a woman who receives dire news about her fetus might do any number of things.
She might choose to enter perinatal hospice, for instance, a model of care for
parents who continue pregnancies when the baby’s life is expected to be brief.
A woman whose pregnancy puts her in serious and immediate danger—from her own
body, from her partner—might choose to continue her pregnancy and risk her own
life. “What if your doctor says that the baby will live ten days?” Kimport
told me. “What if there’s a five-per-cent chance that it will live to five
years? How do you make sense of that? How do you codify this decision-making
in a law that is supposed to apply to everyone?”

“It becomes very complicated when you say that the law decides whether a
reason for abortion is valid or invalid,” Kimport went on. “But when you let
patients decide about abortion it’s much, much simpler in the end.”

Soon after the midterms in November, R.H.A. advocates—representatives from the
National Institute for Reproductive Health, the N.Y.C.L.U., and other
organizations—met with the bill’s sponsors, the state assemblywoman Deborah
Glick and the state senator Liz Krueger. The R.H.A. was nearly certain to
pass, and yet the situation was delicate. The Democratic majority had made new
possibilities visible: Oregon, for example, affirms abortion as a
constitutional right and has no legislative restrictions on the procedure
whatsoever. But to introduce either of those options might threaten the
Democratic majority that made them possible in the first place. The R.H.A.
still has vocal opponents. The Catholic Bishops of New York State recently
denounced it; anti-abortion advocates have argued that the R.H.A. removes the
state’s ability to hold domestic abusers of pregnant women fully accountable,
and that the maternal-health exception effectively permits late-term abortion
“on demand” already. Republican opposition to the bill had been subdued over
the past year but was almost certain to flare to life if it were significantly
changed.

In the end, the bill’s language was expanded—a memo at the top of the bill
recognizes “a woman’s fundamental right to access safe, legal abortion”—but
its substance remained largely the same. On January 17th, Glick and Krueger
reintroduced the bill. “After years of fighting for the passage of this
essential protection for women, our moment has finally arrived,” Glick said.
Senate Democrats voiced their intention of passing it by January 22nd, the
anniversary of Roe v. Wade. At a recent event at Barnard College, Cuomo,
standing onstage with Hillary Clinton, reaffirmed his commitment to the R.H.A,
and pledged that he would not pass a budget until the R.H.A. and C.C.A. were
both passed.“The Republican Senate said, ‘You don’t need a state law codifying
Roe v. Wade,’ ” he said. “ ‘No administration would ever roll back Roe v.
Wade.’ ” Cuomo called on the legislature to pass a constitutional
amendment—which must pass in two separate legislative sessions and then be
approved by voters—to affirm reproductive rights in the state constitution.
This will likely be the next big push for advocates of the R.H.A.

“We have to understand abortion as an equal-rights issue,” Watson, the
Northwestern professor, told me. “Only women can have the consequences of an
unwanted pregnancy after sex.” She was interested, she said, in “moving from
the politics of sympathy to the politics of respect. The politics of sympathy
holds that a woman gets to have an abortion because it’s justified. The
politics of respect would say that the pregnant woman determines the moral
status of her fetus or embryo, and weighs that assessment against her own
reasoning.” Really, she added, her preference was to take the law out of the
picture. “Why is later abortion not just a matter of what doctors would or
wouldn’t do?”

While I was writing this piece, Christensen sent me an e-mail. She included a
video of Pepper, who is nineteen months old now, in rainbow socks, playing
with her mother’s dogs. “As other states grow more and more restrictive, we’re
going to have more and more people coming to New York,” she wrote. “Do we want
them to scramble over the state line and feel like they’re begging for help?
Or do we want them to see that there’s no shame here, that they’re supported
in their decisions?” After her abortion, she said, and in everything that
followed, she had realized that she was good at talking to people about
difficult things. “And we need to have those harder conversations,” she added.
“We need to ask people to work through and maybe live with their discomfort
with this issue. We need people to understand that they may have to exchange
some of their comfort in order to afford women real dignity, real trust.”

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097b79ebe912338a37865e/1:1/w_130,c_limit/tolentino-

jia-1.png)

  * Jia Tolentino is a staff writer at The New Yorker. Her first book, the essay collection “Trick Mirror,” will be published in August.

Read more »

More:

  * Abortion
  * Abortion Rights
  * New York State
  * Women’s Rights
  * Women’s Health

Sign up for our daily newsletter and get the best of _The New Yorker_ in your
in-box.

Submit

### Most Popular

  * 1.

Our Columnists

##### What HBO’s “Chernobyl” Got Right, and What It Got Terribly Wrong

By Masha Gessen

  * 2.

Letter from Trump’s Washington

##### Republicans Have Become the Except-When-Trump-Does-It Party

By Susan B. Glasser

  * 3.

Culture Desk

##### Keanu Reeves Is Too Good for This World

By Naomi Fry

  * 4.

A Reporter at Large

##### Cross-Channel Trip—I

By A. J. Liebling

  * 5.

Our Columnists

##### A Gobshite American President in Ireland

By John Cassidy

our thirty most popular

  * __

  * __

  * __

  * __

##### Video

The Mothers Most Vulnerable to Incarceration

The high rate of female incarceration in Oklahoma spurred a group of New York
City lawyers to launch a practice in Tulsa solely to represent women with
children.

##### Recommended Stories

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5bbe22670cdf452cf93ca314/4:3/w_620,c_limit/Tolentino-

Me-Too.jpg)

Our Columnists

## One Year of #MeToo: What Women’s Speech Is Still Not Allowed to Do

## Is this profound collective reckoning with the extent to which men have

been allowed to abuse their power an epochal shift toward a more equal society
or a fleeting moment that cannot last?

By Jia Tolentino

Oct. 10, 2018

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097f6e1c7a8e33fb390978/4:3/w_620,c_limit/170403_r29651_rd.jpg)

Books

## Why It’s Become So Hard to Get an Abortion

## When you can’t ban something outright, it’s possible to make the process of

obtaining it so onerous as to be a kind of punishment.

By Margaret Talbot

Mar. 27, 2017

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5b05c38017cfc821059c1c59/4:3/w_620,c_limit/Talbot-

IrishAbortionVote.jpg)

Daily Comment

## Ireland’s Vote on Abortion Is a Referendum on the Nation’s Future

## The election--a test of the Catholic Church’s grip on the country--will

determine whether Irish women will continue to be shamed and coerced if they
don’t want to carry their pregnancies to term.

By Margaret Talbot

May 24, 2018

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5cf6da70cab4ead158e7152b/4:3/w_620,c_limit/Gessen-

Chernobyl-2.jpg)

Our Columnists

## What HBO’s “Chernobyl” Got Right, and What It Got Terribly Wrong

## The show’s creators imagine confrontation where it was unthinkable--and, in

doing so, they cross the line from conjuring a fiction to creating a lie.

By Masha Gessen

Jun. 04, 2019

#### Listen to the New Yorker Radio Hour

#### Buy the Cover

#### Play the Crossword

#### Play the Jigsaw Puzzle

#### News & Politics

  * Daily Comment
  * Our Columnists
  * News Desk

#### Culture

  * Cultural Comment
  * Culture Desk
  * Goings On About Town
  * The Critics

#### Business, Science & Tech

  * Currency
  * Elements

#### Humor

  * Daily Shouts
  * Shouts & Murmurs
  * The Borowitz Report

#### Cartoons

  * Daily Cartoon
  * Cartoon Caption Contest
  * Cartoon Bank

#### Books & Fiction

  * Page-Turner
  * Books
  * Poems
  * Fiction

#### Magazine

  * This Week's Issue
  * Archive
  * Subscribe

#### Photography

  * Photo Booth
  * Portfolio

#### Video

  * Culture
  * Humor
  * News
  * Politics
  * Science & Tech
  * Sports

#### Podcasts

  * The New Yorker Radio Hour
  * Political Scene
  * The Writer's Voice
  * Fiction
  * Poetry

#### More

  * Customer Care
  * Buy the Cover
  * Apps
  * Crossword Puzzle
  * Jigsaw Puzzle
  * SecureDrop
  * Store
  * RSS
  * Site Map

#### Newsletters

  * The Daily
  * The New Yorker Recommends
  * Daily Humor
  * John Cassidy
  * The Borowitz Report
  * Amy Davidson Sorkin
  * Midterms 2018
  * Food
  * UK

#### About Us

  * About
  * Careers
  * Contact
  * FAQ
  * Media Kit
  * Press
  * Accessibility Help

SectionsNews & PoliticsCultureBusiness, Science & TechHumorCartoonsBooks &
FictionMagazinePhotographyVideoPodcastsMoreNewsletters

AboutCareersContactFAQMedia KitPressAccessibility Help

#### Follow Us

© 2019 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any
portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated
5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18). Your
California Privacy Rights. The material on this site may not be reproduced,
distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior
written permission of Condé Nast. _The New Yorker_ may earn a portion of sales
from products and services that are purchased through links on our site as
part of our affiliate partnerships with retailers. Ad Choices

Our sitesAllureArs TechnicaBackchannelBon AppétitBridesCondé Nast
TravelerEpicuriousGlamourGolf DigestGolf WorldGQGQ StylePitchforkSelfStyleTeen
VogueThe New YorkerThe SceneVanity FairVogueWWired

__

Sign in

Shop

  * News
  * Culture
  * Books
  * Business & Tech
  * Humor
  * Cartoons
  * Magazine
  * Video
  * Podcasts
  * Archive
  * Goings On

Get the best of _The New Yorker_ in your in-box every day.

Submit

Privacy Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

