

Please click here if you are not redirected within a few seconds.

advertisement

![BabyCenter logo](/images/logos/babycenter_logo_small_symbol.svg)

1

LOG IN / SIGN UP

    
        * COMMUNITY
    * GETTING PREGNANT
    * PREGNANCY
    * BABY
    * TODDLER
    * PRESCHOOLER
    * BIG KID
    * HEALTH
    * VIDEO
    * PRODUCTS & GEAR
    * FOR YOU
    

Join now to personalize

BabyCenter for your pregnancy

    
        * Baby
    *     * Your Newborn Baby
    *     * Newborns: The Early Weeks
    

# Is it true that babies can recognize their mother's voice at birth?

Answered by The BabyCenter Editorial Team

Yes, researchers have long known that newborns recognize – and prefer – their
mom's voice. And any new mother can tell you that the sound of her voice
delights her new baby. Some babies also seem soothed by noises like whirring
fans and washing machines because these probably sound similar to what they
heard in the womb.

Amazingly, babies may be able to recognize their mother's voice even before
birth. A study done at the Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma, Washington
found that babies in the womb actively listen to their mother's voice during
the last ten weeks of pregnancy. Then at birth they can distinguish between
the sound of their native language and a foreign language, suggesting that
moms are their babies' first language teachers.

Show sources

AAFP. 2011. Your baby's development: The third trimester. American Academy of
Family Physicians. http://familydoctor.org/familydoctor/en/pregnancy-
newborns/fetal-health/your-babys-development-the-third-trimester.html

Kisilevsky B, et al. 2003. Effects of experience on fetal voice recognition.
Psychological Science 14(3):220-224.

Moon C, et al. 2013. Language experienced in utero affects vowel perception
after birth: a two-country study. Acta Paediatrica 102(2):156-60.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23173548 [Accessed June 2016]

ScienceDaily. 2003. Fetus heart races when mom reads poetry; new findings
reveal fetuses recognize mother’s voice in-utero.
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2003/05/030513080440.htm [Accessed June
2016]

Thompson LA, et al. 2009. Cortisol reactivity, maternal sensitivity, and
infant preference for mother's familiar face and rhyme in 6-month-old infants.
Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology 27(2):143-67.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2723815/ [Accessed June 2016]

University of Washington. 2013. While in womb, babies begin learning language
from their mothers. http://www.washington.edu/news/2013/01/02/while-in-womb-
babies-begin-learning-language-from-their-
mothers/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=while-in-womb-babies-
begin-learning-language-from-their-mothers

![BabyCenter

logo](/ims/2014/11Nov/xtree_80x80.gif.pagespeed.ic.IwkOLwxRGd.png)

The BabyCenter Editorial Team

Our staff has decades of experience informing new parents. Most of us have
worked for major magazines like _Parenting, Parents_ , and _Health_. And most
important, we're living the subject firsthand, raising newborns, toddlers, and
teens.

advertisement | page continues below

View comments (2)

advertisement

Featured video

####

###### All pregnancy, parenting, and birth videos >

advertisement

Where to go next

![](/images/logos/defaultArtifactThumbOld.svg)

Is it true? For babies

![](/ims/2016/01/305x229xiStock_65104813_4x3.jpg.pagespeed.ic.yWlNBmm8HD.jpg)

Is it true that babies need to wear shoes to help their feet develop?

![](/ims/2017/02/305x229xiStock-538670430_4x3.jpg.pagespeed.ic.Gwrg9_kOgO.jpg)

Is it true that boy babies are more likely to be colicky than girl babies?

![](/ims/2014/12/305x229xUS_231-181414205_4x3.jpg.pagespeed.ic.eQ2ZqPi1gj.jpg)

Is it true that listening to classical music makes a baby smarter?

Freebies & Coupons

Get coupons

Editor's picks

![mother breastfeeding her sleepy

baby](/ims/2016/03/96x72xiStock_33585602_4x3.jpg.pagespeed.ic.Yq38uN-Zq0.jpg)

Expert sleep strategies for babies

![cartoon image of mom, child, and an animated poop with

legs](/ims/2018/01/96x72xUS_baby-poop-guide_-video-

still_4x3.jpg.pagespeed.ic.uHI_1IKqHX.jpg) 2:18

Baby poop guide: 11 types of baby poop

![mom and dad smiling with their

baby](/ims/2018/02/96x72xiStock-909369926_4x3.jpg.pagespeed.ic.Vdts9ARhKk.jpg)

Find the best gear for your baby. See the Moms' Picks winners.

advertisement

![phone

image](/images/pngOriginals/Phones_app.png.pagespeed.ce.q8P7uOIKyH.png)

Get the BabyCenter pregnancy & baby app

![download iOS app

button](/ims/2016/03/172x51xDownload_on_the_App_Store_Badge_US_UK_CA_AU.png.pagespeed.ic.63rJyB5Z-n.png)

![download Android app button](/ims/2018/07/178x51xgoogle-

play.png.pagespeed.ic.S0xk3cgioO.png)

##### ABOUT BABYCENTER

    
        * About us
    * Awards
    * Careers
    * Advertise with us
    * Press Center
    * Mission Motherhood
    * Privacy Policy
    * Terms of Use
    * Ad Choices
    * Free Stuff & Great Deals
    * Love us?
    

##### GET HELP

    
        * Help Center
    * Contact Us: General inquiries
    * Contact Us: Community
    * Community Guidelines
    * Email Subscriptions
    * Account Details
    * Family Information
    

##### OTHER SITES

    
        * BabyCenter en Español
    * Baby.com
    * Pregnancy.com
    * Arabia
    * Australia
    * Brazil
    * Canada
    * France
    * Germany
    * India
    * Malaysia
    * UK
    

##### BABYCENTER APPS

    
        * Pregnancy & Baby
    * Baby Names for iOS
    * My Pregnancy Alexa Skill
    * BabyCenter Roku Channel
    

Connect with us

Track your baby's development

Get expert guidance from the world's #1 pregnancy and parenting resource,
delivered via email, our apps, and website.

Join now

![BabyCenter logo

symbol](/images/svgOriginals/BabyCenter_logo_tree_footer.svg)

XO,

Your friends at BabyCenter

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information: verify here.

All contents copyright (C) BabyCenter, L.L.C. 1997-2019 All rights reserved.

This Internet site provides information of a general nature and is designed
for educational purposes only. If you have any concerns about your own health
or the health of your child, you should always consult with a physician or
other healthcare professional. Please review the Terms of Use before using
this site. Your use of the site indicates your agreement to be bound by the
Terms of Use.

This site is published by BabyCenter, L.L.C., which is responsible for its
contents as further described and qualified in the Terms of Use.

New to BabyCenter? Join now

Log in to continue

Email address

Password

Forgot your password?

Keep me logged in

Log in

![blue background](/images/registrationFloater/reg_floater_bg-01.svg)

**Track your baby's development**

Get expert guidance from the world's #1 pregnancy and parenting resources,
delivered via email, our apps, and website.

Track my baby

    
        * Community
    
      * Birth Clubs
      * Groups
      * Topics
      * Birth Stories
      * Mom Answers
    

See all in Community

    
        * Getting Pregnant
    
      * Ovulation Calculator
      * Pregnancy Symptoms
      * How to Get Pregnant
      * What Cervical Mucus Looks Like
      * When Do I Ovulate?
      * How Long it Takes to Get Pregnant
      * Am I Pregnant?
    

See all in Getting Pregnant

    
        * Pregnancy
    
      * Due Date Calculator
      * Baby Name Finder
      * Popular Baby Names
      * Pregnancy Week by Week
      * Sex During Pregnancy
      * Weight Gain Tracker
      * Signs of Labor
      * Morning Sickness
    

See all in Pregnancy

    
        * Baby
    
      * Feeding Guide
      * Sleep Basics & Training
      * Soothe a Crying Baby
      * When Babies Start Talking
      * When Babies Roll Over
      * When Babies Crawl
      * First-Year Baby Costs Calculator
    

See all in Baby

    
        * Toddler
    
      * Average Weight & Height
      * Autism Signs
      * Child Growth Chart
      * Night Terrors
      * Moving from Crib to Bed
      * Development Milestones
      * Toddler Feeding Guide
    

See all in Toddler

    
        * Preschooler
    
      * Height Predictor
      * Potty Training: Boys
      * Potty training: Girls
      * How Much Sleep (Ages 3+)
      * Ready for Preschool?
      * Napping (Ages 2 to 3)
    

See all in Preschooler

    
        * Big Kid
    
      * Jokes for Kids
      * Growth Spurts
      * Aggression
    

See all in Big Kid

    
        * Health
    
      * Photos: Rashes & Skin Conditions
      * Symptom Checker
      * Vaccine Scheduler
      * Reducing a Fever
      * Teething
      * Acetaminophen Dosage Chart
      * Constipation in Babies
      * Ear Infection Symptoms
    

See all in Health

    
        * Video
    
      * Labor and birth
      * Live Birth: Natural
      * Water Birth
      * How to Bathe a Baby
      * How to Use a Breast Pump
    

See all in Video

    
        * Gear
    
      * Baby Registry Checklist
      * 2018 Best Baby Products
    

See all in Gear

    
        * For You
    
      * Family Finance
      * Life as a Mom
    

See all in For You

Connect with us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035600&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-604678h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1602371060026225&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/1071964800/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

