

Menu

Home

The Ancient History of Abortion

Search

Search the site GO

#### Issues

    
        * Women's Issues 
      * Reproductive Rights 
      * Women & Violence 
    * The U. S. Government 
    * U.S. Foreign Policy 
    * U.S. Liberal Politics 
    * U.S. Conservative Politics 
    * Civil Liberties 
    * The Middle East 
    * Terrorism 
    * Race Relations 
    * Immigration 
    * Crime & Punishment 
    * Animal Rights 
    * Canadian Government
    

View More

    
        * Science, Tech, Math
    
      * Science
      * Math
      * Social Sciences
      * Computer Science
      * Animals & Nature
    * Humanities
    
      * History & Culture
      * Visual Arts
      * Literature
      * English
      * Geography
      * Philosophy
      * Issues
    * Languages
    
      * English as a Second Language
      * Spanish
      * French
      * German
      * Italian
      * Japanese
      * Mandarin
      * Russian
    * Resources
    
      * For Students & Parents
      * For Educators
      * For Adult Learners
    

Humanities â€º Issues

# The Ancient History of Abortion

    
        * Share 
    * Flipboard 
    * Email
    

Print

![Protestors gathered for and against

abortion.](https://www.thoughtco.com/thmb/MquoWPqQtwy5MSliZdPM5jRVfZY=/768x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/137617416-56a153013df78cf77269a1f9.jpg)

Brendan Hoffman/Stringer / Getty Images

![Ideas and Issues](https://www.thoughtco.com/thmb/vHg7eEJlBFYfRZU-

Oe5ixxKkX6U=/220x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/left_rail_issues-58a22da468a0972917bfb5dc.png)

#### Issues

    
        * Women's Issues 
      * Reproductive Rights 
      * Women & Violence 
    * The U. S. Government 
    * U.S. Foreign Policy 
    * U.S. Liberal Politics 
    * U.S. Conservative Politics 
    * Civil Liberties 
    * The Middle East 
    * Terrorism 
    * Race Relations 
    * Immigration 
    * Crime & Punishment 
    * Animal Rights 
    * Canadian Government
    

View More

by Tom Head

Tom Head has written more than 25 books including "Civil Liberties: A
Beginner's Guide." He has served on the board of the Mississippi ACLU and is
an award-winning columnist.

Updated July 05, 2018

Abortion is often presented as if it were new, cutting-edge, scientific--a
product of the modern era--when it is, in fact, as old as recorded history.

### Earliest Known Description of Abortion

The earliest known description of abortion comes from the Ebers Papyrus (ca.
1550 BCE), an ancient Egyptian medical text drawn, ostensibly, from records
dating as far back as the third millennium BCE. The Ebers Papyrus suggests
that an abortion can be induced with the use of a plant-fiber tampon coated
with a compound that included honey and crushed dates. Later herbal
abortifacients included the long-extinct silphium, the most prized medicinal
plant of the ancient world, and pennyroyal, which is still sometimes used to
induce abortions (but not safely, as it is highly toxic). In Aristophanes'
_Lysistrata_ , Calonice refers to a young woman as "well-cropped, and trimmed,
and spruced with pennyroyal."

Abortion is never explicitly mentioned in the Bible, but we know that the
ancient Egyptians, Persians, and Romans, among others, would have practiced it
during their respective eras. The absence of any discussion of abortion in the
Bible is conspicuous, and later authorities attempted to close the gap.

The Babylonian Talmud (Niddah 23a) suggests a Jewish response, by a Rabbi
Meir, that would have been consistent with contemporaneous secular sources
permitting abortion during early pregnancy: "[A woman] can only abort
something in the shape of a stone, and that can only be described as a lump."
Chapter two of an early Christian text prohibits all abortion but does so only
within the context of a longer passage that also condemns theft, covetousness,
perjury, hypocrisy, and pride. Abortion is never mentioned in the Qur'an, and
later Muslim scholars hold a range of views regarding the morality of the
practice--some holding that it is always unacceptable, others holding that it
is acceptable up to the 16th week of pregnancy.

### Earliest Legal Ban on Abortion

The earliest legal ban on abortion dates from the 11th-century BCE Code of
Assura and imposes the death penalty on married women who procure abortions
without the permission of their husbands. We know that some regions of ancient
Greece also had some sort of ban on abortion, because there are fragments of
speeches from the ancient Greek lawyer-orator Lysias (445-380 BCE) in which he
defends a woman accused of having an abortion. But, much like the Code of
Assura, it may have only applied in cases where the husband had not granted
permission for the pregnancy to be terminated. The Hippocratic Oath forbade
physicians from inducing elective abortions (requiring that physicians vow
"not give to a woman a pessary to produce abortion"), but Aristotle held that
abortion was ethical if performed during the first trimester of pregnancy,
writing in the _Historia Animalium_ that there is a distinctive change that
takes place early in the second trimester:

> About this period (the ninetieth day) the embryo begins to resolve into
distinct parts, it having hitherto consisted of a fleshlike substance without
distinction of parts. What is called effluxion is a destruction of the embryo
within the first week, while abortion occurs up to the fortieth day; and the
greater number of such embryos as perish do so within the space of these forty
days.

As far as we know, surgical abortion was not common until the end of the 19th
century and would have been reckless prior to the invention of the Hegar
dilator in 1879, which made dilation-and-curettage (D&C) possible. But
pharmaceutically-induced abortions, different in function and similar in
effect, were extremely common in the ancient world.

Continue Reading

    
        * ![Parthenon of Athens](//:0)
    

#### Abortion in the Ancient and Premodern World

    
        * ![8/96 Oklahoma The Death Chamber at Oklahoma State Penitenitary, where Steven Keith Hatch was execute](//:0)
    

#### Anti-Abortion Myths - Debunking Provably False Claims By Activists

    
        * ![Doctor talking with female patient](//:0)
    

#### What Is Abortion? An Overview and History

    
        * ![Pro-choice rally at Love Park November 13, 2003 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania](//:0)
    

#### A Brief History of the Abortion Controversy in the United States

    
        * ![Young woman patient with gynecologist in the office](//:0)
    

#### What Is the Difference Between Medical and Surgical Abortion?

    
        * ![Nat'l Organization For Women Marks Roe V. Wade Anniversary At Supreme Court](//:0)
    

#### Why Abortion Issues Surface in Every American Election

    
        * ![Annual March For Life Winds Through Washington DC](//:0)
    

#### Why Is Abortion Legal in the US?

    
        * ![Woman looking at pregnancy test](//:0)
    

#### Top Reasons Women Have an Abortion

    
        * ![Teenage girl sitting on bed with pregnancy test](//:0)
    

#### The Top Reasons Why Teens Choose Abortion

    
        * ![Anti choice Demonstrators March In Boston](//:0)
    

#### Does a Fetus Have Rights?

    
        * ![Anti-Abortion Activists March In Washington](//:0)
    

#### Is Abortion Legal in Every State?

    
        * ![Pro-choice and pro-life signs at 2005 march in Washington, DC.](//:0)
    

#### The Historic Roe v. Wade Supreme Court Decision

    
        * ![Abortion Protest March](//:0)
    

#### Abortion on Demand: A Second Wave Feminist Demand

    
        * ![Illustration depicting a woman looking at two doors with the heading, ](//:0)
    

#### A Look at What Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Supporters Believe

    
        * ![Professionals discussing in doctor's office](//:0)
    

#### Does the Government Pay for Abortions?

    
        * ![US Supreme Court Building](//:0)
    

#### Learn More About Women's Reproductive Rights and the Constitution

Home

Learn Something New Every Day

Email Address Sign up

There was an error. Please try again.

You're in! Thanks for signing up.

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you for signing up.

Follow Us

    
        * Facebook Facebook
    * Flipboard Flipboard
    
    * Science, Tech, Math
    * Humanities
    * Languages
    * Resources
    * About Us
    * Advertise
    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Careers
    * Editorial Guidelines
    * Contact
    * Terms of Use
    

ThoughtCo is part of the Dotdash publishing family.

    
        * Verywell Family
    * Verywell Mind
    * The Balance
    * Lifewire
    * and more
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

