

Sign Up Log In Log In Keep me logged in Forgot your password? Log In

![Livestrong Logo](/lscp/images/svg/livestrong_logo_horizontal.svg)

    
        * Recipes 
    * Fitness 
    * Health 
    * MyPlate 
    * Stronger Women 
    * More 
      * News 
      * Food 
      * Diseases & Conditions 
      * Lifestyle 
      * Style & Beauty 
      * Parenting 
      * Relationships & Family 
      * Weight Management 
      * BMI Calculator
    
    1. Livestrong
    2. Parenting
    3. General Parenting
    4. Parenting Advice
    

# When Do Newborns Recognize Their Parents' Voices?

Sharon Perkins

![closing symbol](/lscp/images/svg/close-black.svg)

## About the Author:

### Sharon Perkins

A registered nurse with more than 25 years of experience in oncology,
labor/delivery, neonatal intensive care, infertility and ophthalmology, Sharon
Perkins has also coauthored and edited numerous health books for the Wiley
"Dummies" series. Perkins also has extensive experience working in home health
with medically fragile pediatric patients.

View Full Profile

    
        *     *     *     *     * If you think that your unborn baby responds when you talk to him, you're right. Babies recognize familiar voices even before they're born, especially Mom's voice. After your baby is born, he'll turn his head toward you when you talk, recognizing your voice. You can facilitate his getting to know you by talking to him often even before he enters this world.
    

![Pregnant woman looking at growing

stomach](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)![Pregnant

woman looking at growing

stomach](https://img.livestrong.com/630x/photos.demandstudios.com/getty/article/74/202/92850311.jpg)

Talking to your baby helps him recognize your voice at birth. (Image:
Photos.com/PhotoObjects.net/Getty Images)

## Fetal Hearing

Ears take time to develop during pregnancy. The inner and middle portions of
the ear, essential for hearing, develop in the fifth month of pregnancy,
according to Penn Medicine. By 25 to 29 weeks of pregnancy, your baby can hear
sounds from the outside world and respond consistently to them, the American
Academy of Audiology explains.

## Recognizing Mom

Your baby hears your voice best partially because he's closest to you
physically. He hears your voice not only as ambient sound but also experiences
it internally through the vibration of your vocal cords. In a Canadian study
published in the May 2003 issue of "Psychological Science," fetal heart rate
increased in response to a fetus's own mother's voice and decreased when the
fetus heard another mother's voice. This effect appears to increase as your
due date comes closer, found another Canadian study published in the March
2011 issue of "Developmental Science." In this study, 46 percent of fetuses
responded to their mother's voice at 32 to 34 weeks, increasing to 83 percent
at term.

## Recognizing Dad

Because it's noisy inside the womb and because outside sounds aren't heard as
well as internal sounds, there's no proof that babies recognize Dad's voice at
birth. Few studies have tested a baby's preference for their own father's
voice over other male voices. A 1999 Virginia Tech study published in
"Developmental Psychobiology" found that 4-month-old infants did not show a
preference for their father's voice over other male voices but did recognize
voices they'd heard previously. Researchers concluded that there is a
biological difference in maternal vs. paternal recognition in infants.

## Talking to Your Baby

Talking to your baby often in a low, calm voice helps him recognize who you
are before birth. Your baby learns to recognize and show a preference for the
speech patterns and vowel sounds associated with your native language by the
time he's born, according to a Canadian study published in the March 2010
issue of "Psychological Science." Your baby may even recognize stories you
read to him during pregnancy after birth, suggests a study conducted by
Anthony DeCasper at the University of South Carolina.

REFERENCES & RESOURCES

    
        * Psychological Science: Effects of Experience on Fetal Voice Recognition 
    * Developmental Science: Onset and Maturation of Fetal Heart Rate Response to the Mother’s Voice Over Late Gestation 
    * Penn Medicine: Fetal Ear Development 
    * American Academy of Audiology: Fetal Hearing 
    * Developmental Psychobiology: A Lack of Evidence in 4-month-old Human Infants for Paternal Voice Preference 
    * Psychological Science: The Roots of Bilingualism in Newborns 
    * Pennsylvania State University: Probing Question, Can Babies Learn in Utero?
    

Load comments

## People Are Reading

1

### How to Communicate With an Unborn Baby

2

### Songs to Dedicate to Your Unborn Baby

3

### Building a Bond, 12 Ways

4

### The Effects of Music on Prenatal Babies

5

### How to Encourage Learning for a 3-Month-Old Baby

6

### When Do Babies Recognize Familiar People?

![](https://app.appsflyer.com/id502317923?pid=Livestrong.com%20Referrals&c=Smart%20Banner&af_dp=myplate%3A%2F%2F)

## Get the latest tips on diet, exercise and healthy living.

Woman

Man

Sign Up

    
        * MORE 
    * Contact & FAQ 
    * About 
    * Advertise 
    * Terms of Use 
    * Privacy Policy
    

PARTNER & LICENSEE OF THE LIVESTRONG FOUNDATION

Copyright © 2019 Leaf Group Ltd. Use of this web site constitutes acceptance
of the LIVESTRONG.COM Terms of Use , Privacy Policy and Copyright Policy . The
material appearing on LIVESTRONG.COM is for educational use only. It should
not be used as a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis or
treatment. LIVESTRONG is a registered trademark of the LIVESTRONG Foundation.
The LIVESTRONG Foundation and LIVESTRONG.COM do not endorse any of the
products or services that are advertised on the web site. Moreover, we do not
select every advertiser or advertisement that appears on the web site-many of
the advertisements are served by third party advertising companies.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

