

# Unconscious mind

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

The **unconscious mind** (or **the unconscious** ) consists of the processes
in the mind which occur automatically and are not available to introspection,
and include thought processes, memories, interests, and motivations.[1]

Even though these processes exist well under the surface of conscious
awareness they are theorized to exert an impact on behavior. The term was
coined by the 18th-century German Romantic philosopher Friedrich Schelling and
later introduced into English by the poet and essayist Samuel Taylor
Coleridge.[2][3]

Empirical evidence suggests that unconscious phenomena include repressed
feelings, automatic skills, subliminal perceptions, and automatic
reactions,[1] and possibly also complexes, hidden phobias and desires.

The concept was popularized by the Austrian neurologist and psychoanalyst
Sigmund Freud. In psychoanalytic theory, unconscious processes are understood
to be directly represented in dreams, as well as in slips of the tongue and
jokes.

Thus the unconscious mind can be seen as the source of dreams and automatic
thoughts (those that appear without any apparent cause), the repository of
forgotten memories (that may still be accessible to consciousness at some
later time), and the locus of implicit knowledge (the things that we have
learned so well that we do them without thinking).

It has been argued that consciousness is influenced by other parts of the
mind. These include unconsciousness as a personal habit, being unaware, and
intuition. Phenomena related to semi-consciousness include awakening, implicit
memory, subliminal messages, trances, hypnagogia, and hypnosis. While sleep,
sleepwalking, dreaming, delirium, and comas may signal the presence of
unconscious processes, these processes are seen as symptoms rather than the
unconscious mind itself.

Some critics have doubted the existence of the unconscious.[4][5][6]

## Contents

    
        * 1 Historical overview
    * 2 Psychology
      * 2.1 Freud's view
      * 2.2 Jung's view
    * 3 Controversy
    * 4 Dreams
      * 4.1 Freud
      * 4.2 Opposing theories
    * 5 Contemporary cognitive psychology
      * 5.1 Research
      * 5.2 Unconscious processing of information about frequency
    * 6 See also
    * 7 Notes
    * 8 References
    * 9 External links
    

## Historical overview[edit]

The term "unconscious" (German: _Unbewusste_ ) was coined by the 18th-century
German Romantic philosopher Friedrich Schelling (in his _System of
Transcendental Idealism_ , ch. 6, § 3) and later introduced into English by
the poet and essayist Samuel Taylor Coleridge (in his _Biographia Literaria_
).[2][3] Some rare earlier instances of the term "unconsciousness" ( _
_Unbewußtseyn__ ) can be found in the work of the 18th-century German
physician and philosopher Ernst Platner.[7][8]

Influences on thinking that originate from outside of an individual's
consciousness were reflected in the ancient ideas of temptation, divine
inspiration, and the predominant role of the gods in affecting motives and
actions. The idea of internalised unconscious processes in the mind was also
instigated in antiquity and has been explored across a wide variety of
cultures. Unconscious aspects of mentality were referred to between 2500 and
600 BC in the Hindu texts known as the Vedas, found today in Ayurvedic
medicine.[9][10][11]

Paracelsus is credited as the first to make mention of an unconscious aspect
of cognition in his work _Von den Krankheiten_ (translates as "About
illnesses", 1567), and his clinical methodology created a cogent system that
is regarded by some as the beginning of modern scientific psychology.[12]
William Shakespeare explored the role of the unconscious[13] in many of his
plays, without naming it as such.[14][15][16] In addition, Western
philosophers such as Arthur Schopenhauer,[17][18] Baruch Spinoza, Gottfried
Leibniz, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Eduard von
Hartmann, Søren Kierkegaard, and Friedrich Nietzsche[19] used the word
unconscious.

In 1880, Edmond Colsenet supports at the Sorbonne, a philosophy thesis on the
unconscious.[20] Elie Rabier and Alfred Fouillee perform syntheses of the
unconscious "at a time when Freud was not interested in the concept".[21]

## Psychology[edit]

Psychologist Jacques Van Rillaer points out that, "the unconscious was not
discovered by Freud. In 1890, when psychoanalysis was still unheard of,
William James, in his monumental treatise on psychology ( _The Principles of
Psychology_ ), examined the way Schopenhauer, von Hartmann, Janet, Binet and
others had used the term 'unconscious' and 'subconscious'".[22] Historian of
psychology Mark Altschule observes that, "It is difficult—or perhaps
impossible—to find a nineteenth-century psychologist or psychiatrist who did
not recognize unconscious cerebration as not only real but of the highest
importance."[23]

Van Rilliaer could have also mentioned that Eduard von Hartmann published a
book dedicated to this topic, _Philosophy of the Unconscious,_ in 1869—long
before anybody else.

Furthermore, 19th century German psychologists, Gustav Fechner and Wilhelm
Wundt, had begun to use the term in their experimental psychology, in the
context of manifold, jumbled sense data that the mind organizes at an
_unconscious_ level before revealing it as a cogent totality in conscious
form."[24]

### Freud's view[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/be/Structural-

Iceberg.svg/240px-Structural-Iceberg.svg.png)

An iceberg is often (though misleadingly) used to provide a visual
representation of Freud's theory that most of the human mind operates
unconsciously.

Sigmund Freud and his followers developed an account of the unconscious mind.
It plays an important role in psychoanalysis.

Freud divided the mind into the conscious mind (or the ego) and the
unconscious mind. The latter was then further divided into the id (or
instincts and drive) and the superego (or conscience). In this theory, the
unconscious refers to the mental processes of which individuals make
themselves unaware.[25] Freud proposed a vertical and hierarchical
architecture of human consciousness: the conscious mind, the preconscious, and
the unconscious mind—each lying beneath the other. He believed that
significant psychic events take place "below the surface" in the unconscious
mind,[26] like hidden messages from the unconscious. He interpreted such
events as having both symbolic and actual significance.

In psychoanalytic terms, the unconscious does not include all that is not
conscious, but rather what is actively repressed from conscious thought or
what a person is averse to knowing consciously. Freud viewed the unconscious
as a repository for socially unacceptable ideas, wishes or desires, traumatic
memories, and painful emotions put out of mind by the mechanism of
psychological repression. However, the contents did not necessarily have to be
solely negative. In the psychoanalytic view, the unconscious is a force that
can only be recognized by its effects—it expresses itself in the symptom. In a
sense, this view places the conscious self as an adversary to its unconscious,
warring to keep the unconscious hidden. Unconscious thoughts are not directly
accessible to ordinary introspection, but are supposed to be capable of being
"tapped" and "interpreted" by special methods and techniques such as
meditation, free association (a method largely introduced by Freud), dream
analysis, and verbal slips (commonly known as a Freudian slip), examined and
conducted during psychoanalysis. Seeing as these unconscious thoughts are
normally cryptic, psychoanalysts are considered experts in interpreting their
messages.[ _citation needed_ ]

Freud based his concept of the unconscious on a variety of observations. For
example, he considered "slips of the tongue" to be related to the unconscious
in that they often appeared to show a person's true feelings on a subject. For
example, "I decided to take a summer curse". This example shows a slip of the
word "course" where the speaker accidentally used the word curse which would
show that they have negative feelings about having to do this. Freud noticed
that also his patient's dreams expressed important feelings they were unaware
of. After these observations, he came to the conclusion that psychological
disturbances are largely caused by personal conflicts existing at the
unconscious level. His psychoanalytic theory acts to explain personality,
motivation and mental disorders by focusing on unconscious determinants of
behavior.[27]

Freud later used his notion of the unconscious in order to explain certain
kinds of neurotic behavior.[28] The theory of the unconscious was
substantially transformed by later psychiatrists, among them Carl Jung and
Jacques Lacan.

In his 1932/1933 conferences, Freud "proposes to abandon the notion of the
unconscious that ambiguous judge".[29]

### Jung's view[edit]

Main articles: Carl Jung and Collective unconscious

Carl Gustav Jung, a Swiss psychiatrist, developed the concept further. He
agreed with Freud that the unconscious is a determinant of personality, but he
proposed that the unconscious be divided into two layers: the personal
unconscious and the collective unconscious. The personal unconscious is a
reservoir of material that was once conscious but has been forgotten or
suppressed, much like Freud's notion. The collective unconscious, however, is
the deepest level of the psyche, containing the accumulation of inherited
psychic structures and archetypal experiences. Archetypes are not memories but
images with universal meanings that are apparent in the culture's use of
symbols. The collective unconscious is therefore said to be inherited and
contain material of an entire species rather than of an individual.[30] Every
person shares the collective unconscious with the entire human species, as
Jung puts it: [the] "whole spiritual heritage of mankind's evolution, born
anew in the brain structure of every individual".[31]

In addition to the structure of the unconscious, Jung differed from Freud in
that he did not believe that sexuality was at the base of all unconscious
thoughts.[32]

## Controversy[edit]

The notion that the unconscious mind exists at all has been disputed.

Franz Brentano rejected the concept of the unconscious in his 1874 book
_Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint_ , although his rejection followed
largely from his definitions of consciousness and unconsciousness.[33]

Jean-Paul Sartre offers a critique of Freud's theory of the unconscious in
_Being and Nothingness_ , based on the claim that consciousness is essentially
self-conscious. Sartre also argues that Freud's theory of repression is
internally flawed. Philosopher Thomas Baldwin argues that Sartre's argument is
based on a misunderstanding of Freud.[4]

Erich Fromm contends that, "The term 'the unconscious' is actually a
mystification (even though one might use it for reasons of convenience, as I
am guilty of doing in these pages). There is no such thing as _the_
unconscious; there are only experiences of which we are aware, and others of
which we are not aware, that is, _of which we are unconscious_. If I hate a
man because I am afraid of him, and if I am aware of my hate but not of my
fear, we may say that my hate is conscious and that my fear is unconscious;
still my fear does not lie in that mysterious place: 'the' unconscious."[34]

John Searle has offered a critique of the Freudian unconscious. He argues that
the Freudian cases of shallow, consciously held mental states would be best
characterized as 'repressed consciousness,' while the idea of more deeply
unconscious mental states is more problematic. He contends that the very
notion of a collection of "thoughts" that exist in a privileged region of the
mind such that they are _in principle never accessible_ to conscious
awareness, is incoherent. This is not to imply that there are not
"nonconscious" processes that form the basis of much of conscious life.
Rather, Searle simply claims that to posit the existence of something that is
like a "thought" in every way except for the fact that no one can ever be
aware of it (can never, indeed, "think" it) is an incoherent concept. To speak
of "something" as a "thought" either implies that it is being thought by a
thinker or that it could be thought by a thinker. Processes that are not
causally related to the phenomenon called thinking are more appropriately
called the nonconscious processes of the brain.[35]

Other critics of the Freudian unconscious include David Stannard,[5] Richard
Webster,[6] Ethan Watters,[36] Richard Ofshe,[36] and Eric Thomas Weber.[37]

David Holmes[38] examined sixty years of research about the Freudian concept
of "repression", and concluded that there is no positive evidence for this
concept. Given the lack of evidence for many Freudian hypotheses, some
scientific researchers proposed the existence of unconscious mechanisms that
are very different from the Freudian ones. They speak of a "cognitive
unconscious" (John Kihlstrom),[39][40] an "adaptive unconscious" (Timothy
Wilson),[41] or a "dumb unconscious" (Loftus & Klinger),[42] which executes
automatic processes but lacks the complex mechanisms of repression and
symbolic return of the repressed, and Robert Langs deep unconcious wisdom
system.

In modern cognitive psychology, many researchers have sought to strip the
notion of the unconscious from its Freudian heritage, and alternative terms
such as "implicit" or "automatic" have been used. These traditions emphasize
the degree to which cognitive processing happens outside the scope of
cognitive awareness, and show that things we are unaware of can nonetheless
influence other cognitive processes as well as behavior.[43][44][45][46][47]
Active research traditions related to the unconscious include implicit memory
(see priming, implicit attitudes), and nonconscious acquisition of knowledge
(see Lewicki, see also the section on cognitive perspective, below).

## Dreams[edit]

### Freud[edit]

In terms of the unconscious, the purpose of dreams, as stated by Freud, is to
fulfill repressed wishes through the process of dreaming, since they cannot be
fulfilled in real life. For example, if someone were to rob a store and to
feel guilty about it, they might dream about a scenario in which their actions
were justified and renders them blameless. Freud asserted that the wish-
fulfilling aspect of the dream may be disguised due to the difficulty in
distinguishing between manifest content and latent content. The manifest
content consists of the plot of a dream at the surface level.[48] The latent
content refers to the hidden or disguised meaning of the events in the plot.
The latent content of the dream is what supports the idea of wish fulfillment.
It represents the intimate information in the dreamer's current issues and
childhood conflict.[49][50]

### Opposing theories[edit]

In response to Freud's theory on dreams, other psychologists have come up with
theories to counter his argument. Theorist Rosalind Cartwright proposed that
dreams provide people with the opportunity to act out and work through
everyday problems and emotional issues in a non-real setting with no
consequences. According to her cognitive problem solving view, a large amount
of continuity exists between our waking thought and the thoughts that exist in
dreams. Proponents of this view believe that dreams allow participation in
creative thinking and alternate ways to handle situations when dealing with
personal issues because dreams are not restrained by logic or realism.[50]

In addition to this, Allan Hobson and colleagues came up with the activation-
synthesis hypothesis which proposes that dreams are simply the side effects of
the neural activity in the brain that produces beta brain waves during REM
sleep that are associated with wakefulness. According to this hypothesis,
neurons fire periodically during sleep in the lower brain levels and thus send
random signals to the cortex. The cortex then synthesizes a dream in reaction
to these signals in order to try to make sense of why the brain is sending
them. However, the hypothesis does not state that dreams are meaningless, it
just downplays the role that emotional factors play in determining dreams.[50]

## Contemporary cognitive psychology[edit]

### Research[edit]

While, historically, the psychoanalytic research tradition was the first to
focus on the phenomenon of unconscious mental activity, there is an extensive
body of conclusive research and knowledge in contemporary cognitive psychology
devoted to the mental activity that is not mediated by conscious awareness.

Most of that (cognitive) research on unconscious processes has been done in
the mainstream, academic tradition of the information processing paradigm. As
opposed to the psychoanalytic tradition, driven by the relatively speculative
(in the sense of being hard to empirically verify) theoretical concepts such
as the Oedipus complex or Electra complex, the cognitive tradition of research
on unconscious processes is based on relatively few theoretical assumptions
and is very empirically oriented (i.e., it is mostly data driven). Cognitive
research has revealed that automatically, and clearly outside of conscious
awareness, individuals register and acquire more information than what they
can experience through their conscious thoughts. (See Augusto, 2010, for a
recent comprehensive survey.)[51]

### Unconscious processing of information about frequency[edit]

For example, an extensive line of research conducted by Hasher and Zacks[52]
has demonstrated that individuals register information about the frequency of
events automatically (i.e., outside of conscious awareness and without
engaging conscious information processing resources). Moreover, perceivers do
this unintentionally, truly "automatically," regardless of the instructions
they receive, and regardless of the information processing goals they have.
The ability to unconsciously and relatively accurately tally the frequency of
events appears to have little or no relation to the individual's age,[53]
education, intelligence, or personality, thus it may represent one of the
fundamental building blocks of human orientation in the environment and
possibly the acquisition of procedural knowledge and experience, in general.

## See also[edit]

    
        * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Phrenology1.jpg/24px-Phrenology1.jpg)Mind and Brain portal
    * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Nicolas_P._Rougier%27s_rendering_of_the_human_brain.png/32px-Nicolas_P._Rougier%27s_rendering_of_the_human_brain.png)Thinking portal
    
    * Adaptive unconscious
    * Consciousness
    * Ernst Platner
    * Introspection illusion
    * List of thought processes
    * Mind's eye
    * Minimally conscious state
    * Neuroscience of free will
    * Philosophy of mind
    * Preconscious
    * Subconscious
    * Subconscious sex
    * Transpersonal psychology
    * Unconscious cognition
    * Unconscious communication
    

Books

    
        * _Psyche_ (1846)
    * _The Philosophy of the Unconscious_ (1869)
    

## Notes[edit]

    
        1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Westen, Drew (1999). "The Scientific Status of Unconscious Processes: Is Freud Really Dead?". _Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association_. **47** (4): 1061–1106. doi:10.1177/000306519904700404. PMID 10650551. Retrieved  June 1, 2012.
    2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bynum; Browne; Porter (1981). _The Macmillan Dictionary of the History of Science_. London. p. 292.
    3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Christopher John Murray, _Encyclopedia of the Romantic Era, 1760-1850_ (Taylor  & Francis, 2004: ISBN 1-57958-422-5), pp. 1001–02.
    4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Thomas Baldwin (1995). Ted Honderich (ed.). _The Oxford Companion to Philosophy_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 792. ISBN 978-0-19-866132-0.
    5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ See "The Problem of Logic", Chapter 3 of _Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory_ , published by Oxford University Press, 1980
    6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ See "Exploring the Unconscious: Self-Analysis and Oedipus", Chapter 11 of _Why Freud Was Wrong: Sin, Science and Psychoanalysis_ , published by The Orwell Press, 2005
    7. **^** Ernst Platner, _Philosophische Aphorismen nebst einigen Anleitungen zur philosophischen Geschichte_, Vol. 1 (Leipzig: Schwickertscher Verlag, 1793 [1776]), p. 86.
    8. **^** Angus Nicholls and Martin Liebscher, _Thinking the Unconscious: Nineteenth-Century German Thought_ (2010), Cambridge University Press, 2010, p. 9.
    9. **^** Alexander, C. N. 1990. Growth of Higher Stages of Consciousness: Maharishi's Vedic Psychology of Human Development. C. N. Alexander and E.J. Langer (eds.). Higher Stages of Human Development. Perspectives on Human Growth. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press
    10. **^** Meyer-Dinkgräfe, D. (1996). _Consciousness and the Actor. A Reassessment of Western and Indian Approaches to the Actor's Emotional Involvement from the Perspective of Vedic Psychology_. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-0-8204-3180-2.
    11. **^** Haney, W.S. II. "Unity in Vedic aesthetics: the self-interac, the known, and the process of knowing". _Analecta Husserliana and Western Psychology: A Comparison' 1934_.
    12. **^** Harms, Ernest., _Origins of Modern Psychiatry_ , Thomas 1967 ASIN: B000NR852U, p. 20
    13. **^** The Design Within: Psychoanalytic Approaches to Shakespeare: Edited by M. D. Faber. New York: Science House. 1970 An anthology of 33 papers on Shakespearean plays by psychoanalysts and literary critics whose work has been influenced by psychoanalysis
    14. **^** Meyer-Dinkgräfe, Daniel "Hamlet's Procrastination: A Parallel to the Bhagavad-Gita, in Hamlet East West, edited by. Marta Gibinska and Jerzy Limon. Gdansk: Theatrum Gedanese Foundation, 1998e, pp. 187-195
    15. **^** Meyer-Dinkgräfe, Daniel 'Consciousness and the Actor: A Reassessment of Western and Indian Approaches to the Actor's Emotional Involvement from the Perspective of Vedic Psychology.' Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1996a. (Series 30: Theatre, Film and Television, Vol. 67)
    16. **^** Yarrow, Ralph (July–December 1997). "Identity and Consciousness East and West: the case of Russell Hoban". _Journal of Literature & Aesthetics_. **5** (2): 19–26.
    17. **^** Ellenberger, H. (1970) _The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry_ New York: Basic Books, p. 542
    18. **^** Young, Christopher and Brook, Andrew (1994) _Schopenhauer and Freud_ quotation:
    

> Ellenberger, in his classic 1970 history of dynamic psychology. He remarks
on Schopenhauer's psychological doctrines several times, crediting him for
example with recognizing parapraxes, and urges that Schopenhauer "was
definitely among the ancestors of modern dynamic psychiatry." (1970, p. 205).
He also cites with approval Foerster's interesting claim that "no one should
deal with psychoanalysis before having thoroughly studied Schopenhauer."
(1970, p. 542). In general, he views Schopenhauer as the first and most
important of the many nineteenth-century philosophers of the unconscious, and
concludes that "there cannot be the slightest doubt that Freud's thought
echoes theirs." (1970, p. 542).

    
        19. **^** .Friedrich Nietzsche, preface to the second edition of "The Gay science" 1886
    20. **^** "Un débat sur l'inconscient avant Freud: la réception de Eduard von Hartmann chez les psychologues et philosophes français". de Serge Nicolas et Laurent Fedi, L'Harmattan, 2008, p.8
    21. **^** "Un débat sur l'inconscient avant Freud: la réception de Eduard von Hartmann chez les psychologues et philosophes français". de Serge Nicolas et Laurent Fedi, L'Harmattan, Paris, 2008, p.8
    22. **^** Meyer, Catherine (edited by). _Le livre noir de la psychanalyse: Vivre, penser et aller mieux sans Freud_. Paris: Les Arènes, 2005, p.217
    23. **^** Altschule, Mark. _Origins of Concepts in Human Behavior_. New York: Wiley, 1977, p.199
    24. **^** Wozniak, Robert H. _Mind and Body: Rene Déscartes to William James_. Washington DC: American Psychological Association, 1992
    25. **^** Geraskov, Emil Asenov (November 1, 1994). "The internal contradiction and the unconscious sources of activity". _Journal of Psychology_. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. " This article is an attempt to give new meaning to well-known experimental studies, analysis of which may allow us to discover unconscious behavior that has so far remained unnoticed by researchers. Those studies confirm many of the statements by Freud, but they also reveal new aspects of the unconscious psychic. The first global psychological concept of the internal contradiction as an unconscious factor influencing human behavior was developed by Sigmund Freud. In his opinion, this contradiction is expressed in the struggle between the biological instincts and the self."
    26. **^** For example, dreaming: Freud called dream symbols the "royal road to the unconscious"
    27. **^** Wayne Weiten (2011). _Psychology: Themes and Variations_. Cengage Learning. p. 6. ISBN 9780495813101.
    28. **^** Jung, Carl; et al. (1964). "Man and His Symbols". "Sigmund Freud was the pioneer who first tried to explore empirically the unconscious background of consciousness. He worked on the general assumption that dreams are not a matter of chance but are associated with conscious thoughts and problems. This assumption was not in the least arbitrary. It was based upon the conclusion of eminent neurologists (for instance, Pierre Janet) that neurotic symptoms are related to some conscious experience. They even appear to be split-off areas of the conscious mind, which, at another time and under different conditions, can be conscious."
    29. **^** 'Une histoire des sciences humaines _, sous la direction de J.-F. Dortier, éditions Sciences humaines, 2006,ISBN 9782912601360 - part : 1900-1950 "Le temps des fondations"; chapter about Freud_
    30. **^** "collective unconscious (psychology) -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia." Encyclopedia - Britannica Online Encyclopedia. N.p., n.d. Web. 4 Dec. 2011. <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/125572/collective-unconscious>.
    31. **^** Campbell, J. (1971). Hero with a thousand faces. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
    32. **^** "Jung, Carl Gustav." The Columbia encyclopedia. 6th. ed. Columbia: Columbia University Press, 2000. 1490. Print.
    33. **^** Vitz, Paul C. (1988). _Sigmund Freud's Christian Unconscious_. New York: The Guilford Press. pp. 59–62, 107ff. ISBN 978-0-89862-673-5.
    34. **^** Fromm, Erich. _Beyond the Chains of Illusion: My Encounter with Marx & Freud_. London: Sphere Books, 1980, p. 93
    35. **^** Searle, John. _The Rediscovery of the Mind_. MIT Press, 1994, pp. 151-173
    36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ See "A Profession in Crisis", Chapter 1 of _Therapy's Delusions: The Myth of the Unconscious and the Exploitation of Today's Walking Worried_ , published by Scribner, 1999
    37. **^** Weber ET (2012). "James's Critiques of the Freudian Unconscious – 25 Years Earlier" (PDF). _William James Studies_. **9** : 94–119. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-09-28.
    38. **^** List of his publications at [1] retrieved April 18, 2007
    39. **^** Kihlstrom, J.F. (2002). "The unconscious". In Ramachandran, V.S. (ed.). _Encyclopedia of the Human Brain_. **4**. San Diego CA: Academic. pp. 635–646.
    40. **^** Kihlstrom, J.F.; Beer, J.S.; Klein, S.B. (2002). "Self and identity as memory". In Leary, M.R.; Tangney, J. (eds.). _Handbook of self and identity_. New York: Guilford Press. pp. 68–90.
    41. **^** Wilson T D Strangers to Ourselves Discovering the Adaptive Unconscious
    42. **^** Loftus EF, Klinger MR (June 1992). "Is the unconscious smart or dumb?". _Am Psychol_. **47** (6): 761–5. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.47.6.761. PMID 1616173.
    43. **^** Greenwald AG, Draine SC, Abrams RL (September 1996). "Three cognitive markers of unconscious semantic activation". _Science_. **273** (5282): 1699–702. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.80.3946. doi:10.1126/science.273.5282.1699. PMID 8781230.
    44. **^** Gaillard R, Del Cul A, Naccache L, Vinckier F, Cohen L, Dehaene S (May 2006). "Nonconscious semantic processing of emotional words modulates conscious access". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **103** (19): 7524–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.0600584103. PMC 1464371. PMID 16648261.
    45. **^** Kiefer M, Brendel D (February 2006). "Attentional modulation of unconscious "automatic" processes: evidence from event-related potentials in a masked priming paradigm". _J Cogn Neurosci_. **18** (2): 184–98. doi:10.1162/089892906775783688. PMID 16494680.
    46. **^** Naccache L, Gaillard R, Adam C, et al. (May 2005). "A direct intracranial record of emotions evoked by subliminal words". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **102** (21): 7713–7. doi:10.1073/pnas.0500542102. PMC 1140423. PMID 15897465.
    47. **^** Smith, E.R.; DeCoster, J. (2000). "Dual-Process Models in Social and Cognitive Psychology: Conceptual Integration and Links to Underlying Memory Systems" (PDF). _Personality and Social Psychology Review_. **4** (2): 108–131. doi:10.1207/S15327957PSPR0402_01.
    48. **^** Nagera, Humberto, ed. (2014) [1969]. "Manifest content (pp. 52ff.)". _Basic Psychoanalytic Concepts on the Theory of Dreams_. Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-31767047-6.
    49. **^** Nagera, Humberto, ed. (2014) [1969]. "Latent dream-content (pp. 31ff.)". _Basic Psychoanalytic Concepts on the Theory of Dreams_. Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-31767048-3.
    50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Wayne Weiten (2011). _Psychology: Themes and Variations_. Cengage Learning. pp. 166–167. ISBN 978-0-495-81310-1.
    51. **^** Augusto, L.M. (2010). "Unconscious knowledge: A survey". _Advances in Cognitive Psychology_. **6** : 116–141. doi:10.2478/v10053-008-0081-5. PMC 3101524. PMID 21814538.
    52. **^** Hasher L, Zacks RT (December 1984). "Automatic processing of fundamental information: the case of frequency of occurrence". _Am Psychol_. **39** (12): 1372–88. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.39.12.1372. PMID 6395744.
    53. **^** Connolly, Deborah Ann (1993). _A developmental evaluation of frequency information in lists, scripts, and stories_ (M.A. thesis) Wilfrid Laurier University
    

## References[edit]

    
        * Matt Ffytche, _The Foundation of the Unconscious: Schelling, Freud and the Birth of the Modern Psyche_, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
    * Jon Mills, _The Unconscious Abyss: Hegel's Anticipation of Psychoanalysis_, SUNY Press, 2002.
    * Jon Mills, _Underworlds: Philosophies of the Unconscious from Psychoanalysis to Metaphysics._ Routledge, 2014.
    * S. J. McGrath, _The Dark Ground of Spirit: Schelling and the Unconscious_, Taylor & Francis Group, 2012.
    

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Unconscious mind**_  
---|---  
* _Dictionary of Philosophy of Mind_ , "Implicit Memory" * Nonconscious Acquisition of Information (a reprint from _American Psychologist_ , 1992) * The Rediscovery of the Unconscious * "The Unconscious: Frequently Asked Questions". London: Freud Museum.
    
        * v
    * t
    * e
    

Hidden messages

* * *

Main|

    
        * Hidden messages
    * Subliminal message
    

Audio|

    
        * Backmasking
    * Reverse speech
    

Numeric|

    
        * Numerology
    * Theomatics
    * Bible code
    * Cryptology
    

Visual|

    
        * Fnord
    * Paranoiac-critical method
    * Pareidolia
    * Sacred geometry
    * Steganography
    * Visual cryptography
    

Other|

    
        * Anagram
    * Apophenia
    * Asemic writing
    * Easter egg
    * Clustering illusion
    * Observer-expectancy effect
    * Pattern recognition
    * Palindrome
    * Synchronicity
    * Unconscious mind
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Analytical psychology

* * *

People|

    
        * Aušra Augustinavičiūtė
    * Marie-Louise von Franz
    * Sigmund Freud
    * Carl Jung
    * David Keirsey
    * Isabel Myers
    * Katharine Cook Briggs
    

Concepts|

    
        * Archetype
    * Collective unconscious
    * Personal unconscious
    
    * v
    * t
    * e
    

Carl Jung

* * *

Theories|

    
        * Analytical psychology
    * Cognitive functions
    * Interpretation of religion
    * Personality type
    * Synchronicity
    * Theory of neurosis
    

Concepts|

| The psyche|

    
        * Anima and animus
    * Collective unconscious
    * Complex
    * Electra complex
    * Inner child
    * Personal unconscious
    * Persona
    * Self
    * Shadow
    

---|---  
Jungian archetypes|

    
        * Apollo
    * Trickster
    * Wise Old Man and Wise Old Woman
    * Wounded healer
    

Other|

    
        * Active imagination
    * Enantiodromia
    * Extraversion and introversion
    * Individuation
    * _Participation mystique_
    

Works and  
publications|

| Early|

    
        * _Psychology of the Unconscious_
    * _Two Essays on Analytical Psychology_
    * _Psychological Types_
    

---|---  
Later|

    
        * _Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self_
    * _Answer to Job_
    * _Synchronicity_
    * _Symbols of Transformation_
    

Posthumous|

    
        * _Man and His Symbols_
    * _Memories, Dreams, Reflections_
    * _Red Book_
      * _Black Books_
    * _Seven Sermons to the Dead_
    

_The Collected Works_  
_of C. G. Jung_ |

    
        * _Psychiatric Studies_ (1970)
    * _Experimental Researches_ (1973)
    * _Psychogenesis of Mental Disease_ (1960)
    * _Freud& Psychoanalysis_ (1961)
    * _Symbols of Transformation_ (1967, a revision of _Psychology of the Unconscious_ , 1912) .
    * _Psychological Types_ (1971)
    * _Two Essays on Analytical Psychology_ (1967)
    * _Structure& Dynamics of the Psyche_ (1969)
    * _Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious_ (1969)
    * _Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self_ (1969)
    * _Civilization in Transition_ (1970)
    * _Psychology and Religion: West and East_ (1970)
    * _Psychology and Alchemy_ (1968)
    * _Alchemical Studies_ (1968)
    * _Mysterium Coniunctionis_ (1970)
    * _Spirit in Man, Art, and Literature_ (1966)
    * _Practice of Psychotherapy_ (1966)
    * _Development of Personality_ (1954)
    * _The Symbolic Life_ (1977)
    * _General Bibliography_ (Revised Edition) (1990)
    * _General Index_ (1979)
    

People|

| _Jungfrauen_ |

    
        * Marie-Louise von Franz
    * Barbara Hannah
    * Jolande Jacobi
    * Aniela Jaffé
    * Emma Jung
    * Toni Wolff
    

---|---  
Colleagues|

    
        * Sigmund Freud
    * Wolfgang Pauli
    * Sabina Spielrein
    * Victor White
    * Richard Wilhelm
    

Followers|

    
        * Joseph Campbell
    * James Hillman
    * Erich Neumann
    * Laurens van der Post
    * Sonu Shamdasani
    * June Singer
    * Anthony Stevens
    

Organizations|

    
        * Bollingen Foundation
    * C. G. Jung Institute in Zürich
    * Int'l Assoc. for Analytical Psychology
    * Int'l Assoc. for Jungian Studies
    * Philemon Foundation
    

Popular culture|

    
        * _A Dangerous Method_
    * _Synchronicity_ (album
    * song 1
    * 2)
    * Shadow Man
    * _The Soul Keeper_
    * Persona (series)
    

Other|

    
        * Archetypal literary criticism
    * Archetypal pedagogy
    * Bollingen Prize
    * Bollingen Tower
    * Burghölzli
    * Eranos
    * _I Ching_
    * _The Secret of the Golden Flower_
    
    * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Commons
    * ![Wikiquote page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/13px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) Wikiquote
    * ![Wikisource page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/15px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png) Wikisource texts
    

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

    
        * BNF: cb11932099v (data)
    * GND: 4186835-3
    * NDL: 00567892
    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unconscious_mind&oldid=900095085"

Categories:

    
        * Unconscious
    * Analytical psychology
    * Neuropsychology
    * Central nervous system
    * Hypnosis
    * Mental processes
    * Psychoanalytic terminology
    * Freudian psychology
    

Hidden categories:

    
        * Articles containing German-language text
    * All articles with unsourced statements
    * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015
    * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

    
        * Not logged in
    * Talk
    * Contributions
    * Create account
    * Log in
    

### Namespaces

    
        * Article
    * Talk
    

### Variants

### Views

    
        * Read
    * Edit
    * View history
    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

    
        * Main page
    * Contents
    * Featured content
    * Current events
    * Random article
    * Donate to Wikipedia
    * Wikipedia store
    

### Interaction

    
        * Help
    * About Wikipedia
    * Community portal
    * Recent changes
    * Contact page
    

### Tools

    
        * What links here
    * Related changes
    * Upload file
    * Special pages
    * Permanent link
    * Page information
    * Wikidata item
    * Cite this page
    

### In other projects

    
        * Wikiquote
    

### Print/export

    
        * Create a book
    * Download as PDF
    * Printable version
    

### Languages

    
        * Alemannisch
    * العربية
    * অসমীয়া
    * Asturianu
    * বাংলা
    * Български
    * Català
    * Čeština
    * Dansk
    * Deutsch
    * Eesti
    * Ελληνικά
    * Español
    * Esperanto
    * Euskara
    * فارسی
    * Français
    * Frysk
    * Gaeilge
    * Galego
    * 한국어
    * Հայերեն
    * Íslenska
    * Italiano
    * עברית
    * Kabɩyɛ
    * Қазақша
    * Kurdî
    * Кыргызча
    * Lietuvių
    * Magyar
    * Македонски
    * مصرى
    * Bahasa Melayu
    * Nederlands
    * 日本語
    * Occitan
    * Português
    * Română
    * Русский
    * Sicilianu
    * Simple English
    * Slovenčina
    * Српски / srpski
    * Suomi
    * Svenska
    * தமிழ்
    * ไทย
    * Тоҷикӣ
    * Українська
    * Tiếng Việt
    * 中文
    

Edit links

    
        * This page was last edited on 3 June 2019, at 11:47 (UTC).
    * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
    * Privacy policy
    * About Wikipedia
    * Disclaimers
    * Contact Wikipedia
    * Developers
    * Cookie statement
    * Mobile view
    * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
    * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

