

Skip to main content

![](/sites/majorityleader.house.gov/themes/hoyer/images/logo.svg)

    
        * Newsroom
    
        * NEWSROOM
        * Press Releases
        * Floor Statements
        * Speeches
        * Articles & Op-Eds
        *  
        * Issue Reports
        * Leader's Report
        * Press Staff Blog
    
        * PRESS RESOURCES
        * Photos
        * Videos
    
    * Issues 
      * Defense and National Security
      * Education
      * Energy and the Environment
      * Fiscal Responsibility
      * Health Care
      * Immigration
      * Jobs and Economy
      * Make It In America
      * Older Americans & Seniors
      * Poverty, Income Inequality, and Opportunity
      * Veterans
      * Voting Rights
      * Young Americans
    * Resources
    
        * FLOOR RESOURCES
        * On the Floor
    

Curent legislative agenda.

    
            * The Daily Leader
    

A legislative summary of the of the day's schedule and legislation.

    
            * The Weekly Leader
    

An overview of the next week's expected schedule and legislation, published
the Friday before each week the House is in session.

    
            *  
        * Floor Updates
    

Real-time updates on roll call votes and other floor proceedings.

    
            * Legislative Protocols
    

Guidelines for Commemoratives, Gold Medals, and Coins on the House floor.

    
            * DIGITAL RESOURCES
        * Resume Bank
    

Work for a Member of Congress.

    
            * Whip Watch
    

A mobile app designed to help House staff, the press, and the public better
follow the latest developments from the House Floor.

    
            *  
        * Jobs Board
    

Job announcements by Members of Congress.

    
            * All-Star Competition
    

Hosted annually by Democratic Whip Steny Hoyer, this three week competition
among House Democrats is a race to acquire the most new followers on social
networks.

    
        * House Calendar
    * About
    *     * ![](/sites/majorityleader.house.gov/themes/hoyer/images/logo.svg)
    
    * Statement ● Immigration
    

# Hoyer Floor Remarks On House Republicans’ Decision to Pander to President

Trump, Risk A Government Shutdown

For Immediate Release:

December 20, 2018

Contact Info:

Mariel Saez 202-225-3130

**WASHINGTON, DC - House Democratic Whip Steny H. Hoyer (MD) spoke on the
House Floor today on House Republicans’ decision to pander to President Trump
on his costly, ineffective border wall and risk a government shutdown. Below
is a link to the video and transcript of his remarks:**

![](//www.majorityleader.gov/sites/democraticwhip.house.gov/files/SHH%20Floor%20Speech%2012.20.18.png)  
Click here to watch the full remarks.

“What a sad day. Mr. Chairman [Rodney Frelinghuysen], I feel badly that you're
leaving on this note. I know it is not your wish. I know that if you were in
charge, we would have reached agreement. I know under your leadership we [came
to agreement on] six bills [that] were forged in a bipartisan way – not our
bills, your bills.

“Ladies and gentlemen, the seventh bill is also agreed to – save for one item
– so that approximately 96% of the legislation has been agreed to by both
sides. And the United States Senate has passed a Continuing Resolution based
upon those bills by voice vote. Yet, here we are twisting in the wind at 7:00
p.m. on the day before the government shuts down.

“What a sad performance. What a regrettable lack of responsibility. How we
have undermined the faith of our people; treated the federal employee
terribly; and given cause for the rest of the world to think: ‘what are they
doing?’

“There is not one person on the Republican side of the aisle that believes if
they pass this bill that it will be accepted by the Senate. Not one of you
believes that, and so we are playing political games here to pander to the
President of the United States who sadly rejected a compromise that was
reached by all of us.

“The Majority Leader of your party and the Speaker were for this compromise.
Democrats for this compromise and the Senate was for this compromise. One
person [opposed it]. Why are we here?

“‘I will shut down the government, absolutely. I am proud to shut down the
government.’ That is what the President of the United States said just a few
days ago.

“And today, he put the entire Congress a tizzy. How sad it is that the
Republican  
leadership of this Congress and the last Congress have consistently been
unable to meet their fiscal responsibilities.

“[Former Speaker of the House] John Boehner brought a bill to open up the
government — and sadly, only 78 Republicans would follow their leadership. Mr.
Boehner, Mr. Cantor, and Mr. McCarthy [supported that bill]. Only 78 [voted
for it]. And the rest, including the present Director of OMB voted to keep
government shut down.

“So I’m not surprised that we're here, but it is sad that we are here acting
so irresponsibly.

“If we have one duty as we come here, it is to have our government function
effectively for our people; and we are failing tonight; and this is a
pretense. This bill is going nowhere. The Senate won't accept it. Now, perhaps
the Senate will send it back, amended, perhaps.

“But, ladies and gentlemen, we are, we think, adults. Let's act responsibly.
Defeat this bill.”

    
        * facebook
    * twitterbird
    * youtube
    * instagram
    * email
    

![house.gov](/sites/majorityleader.house.gov/themes/hoyer/images/house-

logo.png)
![dems.gov](/sites/majorityleader.house.gov/themes/hoyer/images/dems-gov.png)

House of Representatives | Contact Us | Site Map | Privacy Policy

Mailing Address: 1705 Longworth House Office Building, Washington DC 20515 |
Office: (202) 225-4131 Fax: (202) 225-4300

©2019 Steny Hoyer. All rights reserved.

×

#### Alert

Close

    
        * ×
    * Newsroom
      * Press Releases
      * Floor Statements
      * Speeches
      * Articles & Op-Eds
      * Issue Reports
      * Leaders Report
      * Press Staff Blog
    * Issues
    * Floor Resources
      * On the Floor
      * Floor Updates
      * The Daily Leader
      * The Weekly Leader
      * Legislative Protocols
    * House Calendar
    * About
    * Search
    * Email
    
    * facebook
    * twitterbird
    * youtube
    * flickr
    * instagram
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

