

![ScienceDaily](/images/sd-logo.png)

* * *

Your source for the latest research news

Follow **___** _Subscribe ____

**Just In:**

    
        * How Old Are Your Organs? Mix of Young, Old
    * New Insight Into Origin of Canadian Rockies
    * Alzheimer's Protein: Plaques, Cell Death in Mice
    * Magnetism Deep Within Earth's Mantle
    * Surprising Enzymes in Giant Ocean Viruses
    * Bees Can Link Symbols to Numbers: Study
    * Hoard of the Rings: Ancient Cereal-Based Product
    * Honey Bee Colonies Down by 16 Percent
    * Spider Glue Genes: New Biomaterials?
    * Is There a Limit to Human Endurance?
    

advertisement

Follow all of ScienceDaily's **latest research news** and **top science
headlines**!

Science News

from research organizations

* * *

# Mom's voice plays special role in activating newborn's brain

Date:

    
        December 17, 2010
    

Source:

    
        Universite de Montreal
    

Summary:

    
        A mother's voice will preferentially activate the parts of the brain responsible for language learning, say researchers. The research team made the discovery after performing electrical recordings on the infants within the 24 hours following their birth.
    

Share:

FULL STORY

* * *

A mother's voice will preferentially activate the parts of the brain
responsible for language learning, say researchers from the University of
Montreal and the Sainte-Justine University Hospital Research Centre. The
research team made the discovery after performing electrical recordings on the
infants within the 24 hours following their birth.

advertisement

* * *

The brain signals also revealed that while the infants did react to other
women's voices, these sounds only activated the voice recognition parts of the
brains. "This is exciting research that proves for the first time that the
newborn's brain responds strongly to the mother's voice and shows,
scientifically speaking, that the mother's voice is special to babies," said
lead researcher Dr. Maryse Lassonde of the University of Montreal's Department
of Psychology and the Sainte-Justine University Hospital Research Centre.

Brain exploration had never before been undertaken on such young participants.
"We applied electrodes to the heads of 16 babies while they were sleeping,"
Lassonde explained, "and we asked the mother to make the short 'A' vowel sound
-- like in the French word 'allo.' We then repeated the exercise with the
female nurse who brought the baby to the lab. When the mother spoke, the scans
very clearly show reactions in the left-hemisphere of the brain, and in
particular the language processing and motor skills circuit. Conversely, when
the stranger spoke, the right-hemisphere of the brain reacted. The right-
hemisphere is associated with voice recognition."

"Motherese" -- the special voice mother's use to communicate with their babies
-- is scientifically recognized. The researchers took this into account by
involving a nurse who is herself a mother, and they also countered the
"novelty" aspect by arranging for the mother to meet with the nurse at regular
intervals before the birth. Finally, speech analysis was used to ensure that
the mother's voice and the voices of the other woman were sufficiently
comparable.

It was already well known that babies have some innate language capacities,
but researchers are only just beginning to understand what these capacities
are and how they work. For example, when a baby hears the "A" sound, he or she
will make the mouth shapes needed to imitate this noise, even if he or she has
never seen it spoken. "This research confirms that the mother is the primary
initiator of language and suggests that there is a neurobiological link
between prenatal language acquisition and motor skills involved in speech,"
Lassonde said. The research was published in Cerebral Cortex and received
funding from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the
Canada Foundation for Innovation, and the Canada Research Chairs programme.

advertisement

* * *

* * *

**Story Source:**

Materials provided by **Universit e de Montreal**. _Note: Content may be
edited for style and length._

* * *

**Journal Reference** :

    
        1. M. Beauchemin, B. Gonzalez-Frankenberger, J. Tremblay, P. Vannasing, E. Martinez-Montes, P. Belin, R. Beland, D. Francoeur, A.-M. Carceller, F. Wallois, M. Lassonde. **Mother and Stranger: An Electrophysiological Study of Voice Processing in Newborns**. _Cerebral Cortex_ , 2010; DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhq242
    

* * *

**Cite This Page** :

    
        * MLA
    * APA
    * Chicago
    

Universite de Montreal. "Mom's voice plays special role in activating
newborn's brain." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 December 2010. .

Universite de Montreal. (2010, December 17). Mom's voice plays special role in
activating newborn's brain. _ScienceDaily_. Retrieved June 6, 2019 from
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/12/101215195234.htm

Universite de Montreal. "Mom's voice plays special role in activating
newborn's brain." ScienceDaily.
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/12/101215195234.htm (accessed June 6,
2019).

advertisement

* * *
    
        * RELATED TOPICS
      * Health & Medicine
        * __Infant's Health
        * __Breastfeeding
        * __Nervous System
        * __Psychology Research
      * Mind & Brain
        * __Parenting
        * __Child Development
        * __Language Acquisition
        * __Infant and Preschool Learning
    

advertisement

* * *
    
        * RELATED TERMS
      * __Psycholinguistics
      * __Language
      * __Maternal bond
      * __Alpha wave
      * __Great Ape language
      * __Sensory neuron
      * __Neocortex (brain)
      * __Laryngitis
    

RELATED STORIES

* * *

##### More Than Just Memories: A New Role for the Hippocampus During Learning

Mar. 6, 2019 혰 Without an intact hippocampus, forming new memories is
impossible. Researchers have found an equally important role for the
hippocampus: feeding information to brain areas responsible for learning. ...
read more __

##### Brain Response to Mom's Voice Differs in Kids With Autism

Feb. 26, 2019 혰 For most children, the sound of their mother's voice triggers
brain activity patterns distinct from those triggered by an unfamiliar voice.
But the unique brain response to mom's voice is ... read more __

##### Watching the Brain During Language Learning

June 29, 2016 혰 For the first time, researchers have captured images of the
brain during the initial hours and days of learning a new language. They use
an artificial language with real structures to show how new ... read more __

##### Brain Activity Shows Infants Are Hardwired to Link Images, Sounds as

They Learn to Speak

Feb. 23, 2015 혰 We are biologically predisposed to link images and sounds to
create language, new research examining electrical brain activity in infants
suggests. These findings reveal that sound symbolism allows ... read more __

FROM AROUND THE WEB

* * *

Below are relevant articles that may interest you. ScienceDaily shares links
with scholarly publications in the TrendMD network and earns revenue from
third-party advertisers, where indicated.

**Print Email** Share

* * *

advertisement

* * *

Most Popular

this week

* * *

HEALTH & MEDICINE

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101143_1_75x50.jpg)Research Confirms Gut-Brain

Connection in Autism

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190603102549_1_75x50.jpg)Brush Your Teeth --

Postpone Alzheimer's

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190520190110_1_75x50.jpg)Anxiety Might Be Alleviated

by Regulating Gut Bacteria

MIND & BRAIN

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530141443_1_75x50.jpg)Circadian Clocks: Body

Parts Respond to Day and Night Independently from Brain, Studies Show

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101120_1_75x50.jpg)Godzilla Is Back and He's

Bigger Than Ever: The Evolutionary Biology of the Monster

##### Among Older Women, 10,000 Steps Per Day Not Needed for Lower Mortality

LIVING & WELL

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529221040_1_75x50.jpg)New Evidence Links Ultra-

Processed Foods With a Range of Health Risks

##### Boy or Girl? It's in the Father's Genes

##### Extroverts Enjoy Four Key Advantages According to Science; Here They Are

advertisement

* * *

Strange & Offbeat

* * *

HEALTH & MEDICINE

##### Improved Human Brain Organoids to Boost Neurological Disease Research

##### Americans Consumer 70,000 Particles of Microplastics Per Year

##### Could Boosting the Gut Microbiome Be the Secret to Healthier Older Age?

MIND & BRAIN

##### ![](/images/2019/06/190605121652_1_75x50.jpg)Was Mona Lisa's Smile a

Lie?

##### Hearing Through Your Fingers: Device That Converts Speech

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190530101120_1_75x50.jpg)Godzilla Is Back and He's

Bigger Than Ever: The Evolutionary Biology of the Monster

LIVING & WELL

##### ![](/images/2019/05/190529094003_1_75x50.jpg)Healthy, Stress-Busting Fat

Found Hidden in Dirt

##### Soft, Social Robot Brings Coziness to Homes, and Classrooms

##### Examining Ethical Issues Surrounding Wearable Brain Devices Marketed to

Consumers

advertisement

* * *

Toggle navigation Menu __ SD

    
        * SD
      * Home Page
      *       * Top Science News
      *       * Latest News
    
    * Home 
      * Home Page
      *       * Top Science News
      *       * Latest News
    * Health 
      * View all the latest **top news** in the health sciences,
    

or browse the topics below:

Health & Medicine

    
            * Allergy
        * Alternative Medicine
        * Birth Control
        * Cancer
        * Diabetes
        * Diseases
        * Heart Disease
        * HIV and AIDS
        * Obesity
        * Stem Cells
        * ... _more topics_
    

Mind & Brain

    
            * ADD and ADHD
        * Addiction
        * Alzheimer's
        * Autism
        * Depression
        * Headaches
        * Intelligence
        * Psychology
        * Relationships
        * Schizophrenia
        * ... _more topics_
    

Living Well

    
            * Parenting
        * Pregnancy
        * Sexual Health
        * Skin Care
        * Men's Health
        * Women's Health
        * Nutrition
        * Diet and Weight Loss
        * Fitness
        * Healthy Aging
        * ... _more topics_
    
    * Tech 
      * View all the latest **top news** in the physical sciences  & technology,
    

or browse the topics below:

Matter & Energy

    
            * Aviation
        * Chemistry
        * Electronics
        * Fossil Fuels
        * Nanotechnology
        * Physics
        * Quantum Physics
        * Solar Energy
        * Technology
        * Wind Energy
        * ... _more topics_
    

Space & Time

    
            * Astronomy
        * Black Holes
        * Dark Matter
        * Extrasolar Planets
        * Mars
        * Moon
        * Solar System
        * Space Telescopes
        * Stars
        * Sun
        * ... _more topics_
    

Computers & Math

    
            * Artificial Intelligence
        * Communications
        * Computer Science
        * Hacking
        * Mathematics
        * Quantum Computers
        * Robotics
        * Software
        * Video Games
        * Virtual Reality
        * ... _more topics_
    
    * Enviro 
      * View all the latest **top news** in the environmental sciences,
    

or browse the topics below:

Plants & Animals

    
            * Agriculture and Food
        * Animals
        * Biology
        * Biotechnology
        * Endangered Animals
        * Extinction
        * Genetically Modified
        * Microbes and More
        * New Species
        * Zoology
        * ... _more topics_
    

Earth & Climate

    
            * Climate
        * Earthquakes
        * Environment
        * Geography
        * Geology
        * Global Warming
        * Hurricanes
        * Ozone Holes
        * Pollution
        * Weather
        * ... _more topics_
    

Fossils & Ruins

    
            * Ancient Civilizations
        * Anthropology
        * Archaeology
        * Dinosaurs
        * Early Humans
        * Early Mammals
        * Evolution
        * Lost Treasures
        * Origin of Life
        * Paleontology
        * ... _more topics_
    
    * Society 
      * View all the latest **top news** in the social sciences  & education,
    

or browse the topics below:

Science & Society

    
            * Arts & Culture
        * Consumerism
        * Economics
        * Political Science
        * Privacy Issues
        * Public Health
        * Racial Disparity
        * Religion
        * Sports
        * World Development
        * ... _more topics_
    

Business & Industry

    
            * Biotechnology & Bioengineering
        * Computers & Internet
        * Energy & Resources
        * Engineering
        * Medical Technology
        * Pharmaceuticals
        * Transportation
        * ... _more topics_
    

Education & Learning

    
            * Animal Learning & Intelligence
        * Creativity
        * Educational Psychology
        * Educational Technology
        * Infant & Preschool Learning
        * Learning Disorders
        * STEM Education
        * ... _more topics_
    
    * Quirky 
      * Top News
      *       * Human Quirks
      * Odd Creatures
      * Bizarre Things
      * Weird World
    

__

Free Subscriptions

* * *

Get the latest science news with ScienceDaily's free email newsletters,
updated daily and weekly. Or view hourly updated newsfeeds in your RSS reader:

    
        * __Email Newsletters
    * __RSS Feeds
    

Follow Us

* * *

Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:

    
        * __Facebook
    * __Twitter
    * __Google+
    * __LinkedIn
    

Have Feedback?

* * *

Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and
negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions?

    
        * __Leave Feedback
    * __Contact Us
    

About This Site | Staff | Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy |
Editorial Policy | Terms of Use

Copyright 2019 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights
controlled by their respective owners.

Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide
medical or other professional advice.

Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its
staff, its contributors, or its partners.

Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral
programs, where indicated.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

