

Skip to main content

____ Menu

![Your

fertility](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/logo.png)

Understanding how to improve your chance of having a baby

__

Submit ____

    
        * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/instagram.svg)
    * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/facebook.svg)
    * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/twitter.svg)
    

## Main navigation

    
        * For everyone __
    

__Back

### What can improve your chances of having a baby?

    
          * Age
      * Timing
      * Weight
      * Lifestyle
        * Alcohol
        * Smoking
        * Caffeine
        * Chemicals in our environment
        * Nutrition and supplements
        * Lubricants
        * Medications and drugs
        * Oral health
    
      * Health & medical
        * Cancer treatment
        * Complementary and alternative therapies
        * Diabetes
        * Endometriosis
        * Gender diversity and fertility
        * Healthy sperm
        * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
        * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
    

I want to have a baby  
one day in the future

I want to have a baby  
soon

I have been trying to  
have a baby for a while

    
        * General resources __
    

__Back

### General resources

    
          * Fact sheets
      * Videos
      * Interactive tools
        * Healthy conception tool
        * Ovulation calculator
        * Pre-conception checklists
        * Test your fertility knowledge
        * Quit for fertility
    
    * For professionals
    * Latest news __
    

__Back

### Latest news

    
          * Your Fertility Monthly
      * Latest Articles
      * Media Releases
    
    * About us
    

### Fertility Factors:

## Sticky Menu

    
        * Age
    * Timing
    * Weight
    * Lifestyle
    * Health & Medical
    

#### Share

    
        * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/twitter.svg)
    * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/facebook.svg)
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

Back to Top __

    
        * Home
    * For everyone
    * Getting the timing right
    

# Getting the timing right

Apart from being healthy, what else can help you get pregnant?

Sex of course - at the right time!

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/sites/default/files/2018-09/Timing%204%20980.jpg)

### Main points

    
        * A woman can only get pregnant during the ‘fertile window’ in the menstrual cycle.
    * There are a few ways to work out when you’re ovulating.
    * Your chance of getting pregnant is dramatically increased if you have sex on the day of ovulation, or two days before that.
    

### Related links

    
        * __Use the ovulation calculator to work out your fertile window
    * __Four things you didn’t know about periods
    * __What can improve your chance of having a baby?
    

### On this page:

    
        * When are you more likely to conceive?
    * Myth busting
    * Facts about timing
    * How to know when you’re ovulating
    * Ovulation Calculator
    * Working out when you're ovulating and most fertile
    * What are the chances?
    * When does preconception health begin
    * References
    

__

Other factors

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/temp/calendar.svg)
Timing

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/temp/cake.svg)
Age

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/temp/fruits.svg)
Lifestyle & Environment

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/temp/heartrate.svg)
Health & Medical

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/temp/scale.svg)
Weight

    
        * Additional resources
    

#### Subscribe to our newsletter

Yes, Sign me up

## When are you more likely to conceive?

We’re talking about the 'fertile window’ – the days in a woman’s menstrual
cycle when pregnancy is possible. The ‘fertile window’ depends on the length
of the menstrual cycle, which varies among women.

The ‘fertile window’ is the day an egg is released from the ovary (ovulation)
and the five days beforehand. Having sex (intercourse) during this time gives
you the best chance of getting pregnant.

## Myth busting

MYTH

A woman can get pregnant any time of the month.

FACT

A woman can only get pregnant on a few days during her menstrual cycle.

## Why?

Because eggs and sperm only live for a short time:

    
        * Sperm live for around five days. 
    * Eggs can only be fertilised for around 24 hours (one day) after being released from the ovary.
    

Eggs and sperm need to come together at the right time for fertilisation to
happen to create an embryo.

    
        * ## Facts about timing
    

Ovulation is when a mature egg is released from the ovary. The egg then moves
down the fallopian tube where it can be fertilised. If sperm are in the
fallopian tube when the egg is released, there is a good chance that the egg
will be fertilised, creating an embryo, which can grow into a baby.

Pregnancy is technically only possible if you have sex during the five days
before ovulation or on the day of ovulation. But the most fertile days are
**the three days leading up to and including ovulation.** Having sex during
this time gives you the best chance of getting pregnant.

By 12-24 hours after ovulation, a woman is no longer able to get pregnant
during that menstrual cycle because the egg is no longer in the fallopian
tube.

There’s almost no chance of getting pregnant if you have sex before or after
the fertile window (but if you’re not trying to get pregnant, don’t rely on
this – contraception is your best option!).

    
        * ## How to know when you’re ovulating
    

Knowing when you ovulate can help you plan for sex at the right time and
improve your chance of getting pregnant. You can keep track of your menstrual
cycles on a chart, in a diary, or on a free period-tracker app on your
smartphone.

To work out the length of your menstrual cycle, record the first day you start
bleeding (first day of your period). This is day 1. The last day of your cycle
is the day before your next period begins.

    
        * What is a ‘menstrual cycle’ and a ‘period’?
    

Some people think the ‘menstrual cycle’ and a ‘period’ are the same thing.

**A period** is when you bleed (or menstruate).

**A menstrual cycle** starts on the day when a period starts (day 1) and ends
the day before the next period. A cycle’s length is considered normal if it’s
between 21 and 35 days. They can vary between women and from one cycle to the
next.

    
        * Working out your ‘average’ menstrual cycle length
    

If your menstrual cycles are different lengths (most women’s cycles are) you
can work out your average cycle length.

The number of days in a woman’s menstrual cycle can vary month to month.
Periods are not always regular. It can be useful to work out an ‘average’
cycle length, based on the length of three menstrual cycles, to estimate when
you’re most likely to be ovulating.

If you add the number of days in three cycles and divide the total number by
three, it gives you your average cycle length.

**Example**

Sarah tracked her last three menstrual cycles by counting the time from the
first day of one period, to the day before the next period.

Cycle 1 was 28 days; Cycle 2 was 32 days; Cycle 3 was 27 days

28 + 32 + 27 = 87

87 divided by 3 = 29

So the average length of Sarah’s menstrual cycles is 29 days.

    
        * Working out your most fertile days
    

When you know your average menstrual cycle length, you can work out when you
ovulate.

Ovulation happens about 14 days before your period starts.

    
          * If your average menstrual cycle is 28 days, you ovulate around day 14, and your most fertile days are days 12, 13 and 14.
      * If your average menstrual cycle is 35 days ovulation happens around day 21 and your most fertile days are days 19,20 and 21.
      * If you have shorter cycles, say 21 days, ovulation happens around day 7 and your most fertile days are days 5, 6 and 7.
    

Your most fertile days are **the three days leading up to and including the
day of ovulation**.

Some women have very irregular cycles or find it difficult to work out an
average cycle length. This can make it hard to work out when ovulation
happens. If it’s all too hard, having sex every 2-3 days covers all bases and
improves your chance of getting pregnant.

##

## Ovulation Calculator

What day did you your most recent period start?

__

Number of days in your cycle __ Please select 20 Days 21 Days 22 Days 23 Days
24 Days 25 Days 26 Days 27 Days 28 Days 29 Days 30 Days 31 Days 32 Days 33
Days 34 Days 35 Days 36 Days 37 Days 38 Days 39 Days 40 Days 41 Days 42 Days
43 Days 44 Days 45 Days

Submit

Redo __

Your ovulation day

Most fertile time

    
        * ## Other ways to work out when you ovulate
    

This ovulation calculator can help you work out your most fertile time. These
are the days you are most likely to get pregnant.

It can also estimate your due date if you do become pregnant during your next
fertile days.

Others ways to help you work out when you're ovulating:

    
        * Notice changes in vaginal mucus
    

A few days before ovulation, you may notice your vaginal mucus becomes clear,
slick and slippery, and feels a bit like egg white.

This is a sign that ovulation is about to happen. It’s the best time to have
sex, as sperm travel more easily in this kind of mucus.

    
        * Use an ovulation predictor kit
    

You can use a predictor kit from a supermarket or pharmacy, to test your urine
for signs of ovulation. If you start testing your urine a few days before the
day you next expect to ovulate, a positive result means you are going to
ovulate within the next 24 to 36 hours (one to two days).

## Getting the timing right

If you're trying to get pregnant, timing is everything. Dr Karin Hammarberg
explains how to work out when you are ovulating and the right time to have sex
to improve your chance of pregnancy.

![](/sites/default/files/2018-08/karin%20hammarberg_0.jpg) __

####

    
        * ## What are the chances?
    

Having sex as close as possible to the time of ovulation increases the chance
of pregnancy.

If a woman has sex six or more days before she ovulates, the chance she will
get pregnant is virtually zero.

If she has sex five days before she ovulates, her probability of pregnancy is
about 10 percent.

If she has sex on the day of ovulation, or the two days before, the chance of
getting pregnant is around 30 percent.

These are average figures and depend on a woman’s age.

## When does preconception health begin?

Professor Sarah Robertson, Director of Robinson Research Institute, University
of Adelaide, highlights the key time before pregnancy that your health is most
important to ensure your child has the best start to life.

![](/sites/default/files/2018-08/Sarah%20Robertson_1.jpg) __

####

## How to know you are ovulating

Kerry Hampton, a registered nurse and fertility specialist, discusses the
importance of fertility awareness, and how to determine your fertile window to
improve your chances of conceiving.

![](/sites/default/files/2018-08/Kerry%20Hampton_0.png) __

####

    
        * ##
    
    * References
    
      * American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Optimizing natural fertility, https://www.reproductivefacts.org/news-and-publications/patient-fact-sheets-and-booklets/documents/fact-sheets-and-info-booklets/optimizing-natural-fertility/
      * Berglund Scherwitzl, et al. (2015). Identification and prediction of the fertile window using Natural Cycles. The European Journal of Contraception and Reproductive Health Care, 20(5), 403-408. doi:10.3109/13625187.2014.988210 
      * Ecochard, R., et al. (2015). Self-identification of the clinical fertile window and the ovulation period. Fertility and Sterility, 103(5), 1319-1325.e1313. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.01.031
      * Pfeifer, S., et al. (2017). Optimizing natural fertility: a committee opinion. Fertility and Sterility, 107(1), 52-58. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2016.09.029 
      * Stanford, J. B. (2015). Revisiting the fertile window. Fertility and Sterility, 103(5), 1152-1153. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.02.015
      * Stanford, et al. (2002). Timing intercourse to achieve pregnancy: current evidence. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 100(6), 1333-1341.
      * Stephenson, J., et al. (2018). Before the beginning: nutrition and lifestyle in the preconception period and its importance for future health. The Lancet, 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30311-8 doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30311-8
      * Vélez, M. Pet al. (2015). Female exposure to phenols and phthalates and time to pregnancy: the Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Chemicals (MIREC) Study. Fertility and Sterility. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.01.005 
      * Verón, G. L., et al. (2018). Impact of age, clinical conditions, and lifestyle on routine semen parameters and sperm kinematics. Fertility and Sterility, 110(1), 68-75.e64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2018.03.016
      * Waylen, A. Let al. (2009). Effects of cigarette smoking upon clinical outcomes of assisted reproduction: a meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update, 15(1), 31-44.
      * Zenzes, M. T. (2000). Smoking and reproduction: gene damage to human gametes and embryos. Hum Reprod Update, 6(2), 122-131.
    

Page created on: 28/08/2018 | Last updated: 06/06/2019

## Looking for more?

![](/sites/default/files/2018-08/Timing%20175%20x%20150_0.jpg)

#### Fact sheet: Understanding ovulation and the fertile window

When you want to have a baby you can improve your chance of getting pregnant
if you know about ovulation and the ‘fertile window’ in the menstrual cycle.

![](/sites/default/files/2019-03/Thinking_about_having_a%20baby%20V2_2.jpg)

#### Thinking about having a baby?

What men and women can do to increase their chance of getting pregnant and
having a healthy baby.

### Useful links:

#### __Pre-conception checklists

#### __Healthy conception tool

![](/sites/default/files/2018-09/Lifestyle%201%20480%20x%20320.jpg)

## What's next?

Find out how a more healthy lifestyle increases your chance of pregnancy and
having a healthy baby.

Find out more

## Sign up to our newsletter - it's free!

Stay up to date with Your Fertility Monthly - the latest information on
improving your chance of becoming pregnant and having a healthy baby.

Email Address

![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/logo.png)

## Footer Menu Right

    
        * For everyone
    * General resources
    * For professionals
    * Latest news
    * About us
    * Contact us
    * Privacy
    * Disclaimer
    * Editorial policy
    

Copyright © 2018 Fertility Coalition. Information provided on this website is
not a substitute for medical advice.

    
        * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/instagram.svg)
    * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/facebook.svg)
    * ![](https://www.yourfertility.org.au/themes/custom/yourfertility/assets/img/icons/twitter.svg)
    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa *[ c.]:
circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa

