

![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-masthead-

logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWto get home delivery

    
        * ![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
    * News
    * Sports
    * Life
    * Money
    * Tech
    * Travel
    * Opinion
    * Weather
    

Icon

    
          * Humidity
      * Precip.
      * Winds
    

Open settings

Settings

Enter City Name

Cancel

Set

Close settings

Full Forecast

    
        * Crosswords
    * Investigations
    * Newsletters
    * Humankind
    * Apps
    * Best-Selling Books
    * Cartoons
    * Classifieds
    * Corrections
    * Interactives
    * Job Network
    * Moonlighting
    * Newsstand
    * News tips
    * Photo galleries
    * Podcasts
    * Policing the USA
    * Scores
    * Storytellers Project
    * Thanksgiving
    * Washington
    * Video
    * VRtually There
    * More
    
      * News
      * Sports
      * Life
      * Money
      * Tech
      * Travel
      * Opinion
      * Weather
      * Crosswords
      * Investigations
      * Newsletters
      * Humankind
      * Apps
      * Best-Selling Books
      * Cartoons
      * Classifieds
      * Corrections
      * Interactives
      * Job Network
      * Moonlighting
      * Newsstand
      * News tips
      * Photo galleries
      * Podcasts
      * Policing the USA
      * Scores
      * Storytellers Project
      * Thanksgiving
      * Washington
      * Video
      * VRtually There
    
    * search
    
    *     * Subscribe
    * salutation
    
      * Manage Account
      * Access e-Edition
      * Newsletters
      * Pay Bill
      * Report Delivery Issues
      * Pause Delivery
      * Help Center
      * Sign Out
    

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### Doctors say abortions do sometimes save women's lives

Abortions are sometimes needed to save the lives of pregnant women, several
medical experts said Friday in response to comments from Illinois Rep. Joe
Walsh.

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

Doctors say abortions do sometimes save women's lives Abortions are sometimes
needed to save the lives of pregnant women, several medical experts said
Friday in response to comments from Illinois Rep. Joe Walsh. Check out this
story on USATODAY.com: http://usat.ly/RdhPqd

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Nation's Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

# Doctors say abortions do sometimes save women's lives

Kim Painter, Special for USA TODAY Published 7:31 p.m. ET Oct. 19, 2012 |
Updated 1:24 p.m. ET Oct. 22, 2012

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

## Abortions are sometimes needed to save the lives of pregnant women, several

medical experts said in response to comments from Rep. Joe Walsh.

![Roe v. Wade anniversary](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/media/USATODAY/GenericImages/2012/10/19/gty-137610463-4_3.jpg?width=534&height=401&fit=crop)

Pro-life activists gather on Jan. 23 near the U.S. Supreme Court in
Washington, D.C. Activists on both sides marked the anniversary of the Roe v.
Wade decision.(Photo: Brendan Hoffman, Getty Images)

### Story Highlights

    
        * Some medical experts counter Rep. Joe Walsh's statement
    * OB-GYN group says abortions may be necessary to save mother's life
    * Walsh backed off his statement, citing "very rare circumstances"
    

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Abortions are sometimes needed to save the lives or health of pregnant women,
several medical experts said Friday, countering comments that were made and
then partially retracted by Illinois Rep. Joe Walsh. Even a leading group
opposing abortion, the National Right to Life Committee, issued a statement
saying that its position is "to allow abortion if necessary to prevent the
death of the mother."

Walsh, who is seeking reelection, told reporters Thursday that "advances in
science and technology," had eliminated any need for abortions to save the
lives or health of women and said, "'Health of the mother' has become a tool
for abortions anytime, for any reason." On Friday, he backed off the statement
somewhat, saying there are "very rare circumstances" in which the procedure is
necessary to save a woman's life.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists issued a statement
saying: "Abortions are necessary in a number of circumstances to save the life
of a woman or to preserve her health. Unfortunately, pregnancy is not a risk-
free life event."

Conditions that might lead to ending a pregnancy to save a woman's life
include severe infections, heart failure and severe cases of preeclampsia, a
condition in which a woman develops very high blood pressure and is at risk
for stroke, says Erika Levi, a obstetrician and gynecologist at the University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

"There are certain cases where ending the pregnancy is the only option, cases
where it would be putting the mother's life at risk to continue the
pregnancy," she says.

![Joe Walsh](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/media/USATODAY/GenericImages/2012/10/19/ap-illinois-congress-8th-

district-4_3.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

U.S. Rep. Joe Walsh, R-Ill., waits for the start of a televised debate against
challenger Democrat Tammy Duckworth on Thursday in Chicago. (Photo: Charles
Rex Arbogast, AP)

**STORY:** GOP rep backtracks on abortion comments

When a pregnancy must be ended before a fetus is viable, "the result is an
abortion," says Vanessa Cullins, Vice President for External Medical Affairs
for Planned Parenthood Federation of America. But she says there also are
cases after viability in which an abortion is safer than an induced childbirth
or surgical delivery.

Cecily Kellogg, 44, a writer who lives near Philadelphia, says that was the
situation she faced when she was nearly six months pregnant with twin boys in
2004 and developed severe preeclampsia. One fetus had already died and "my
liver had shut down, my kidneys had shut down and they were expecting me to
start seizing at any minute," she says. The doctors said they had to quickly
dilate her cervix and perform an abortion to save her. "I fought it," she
says. "But they told me I would die — that it was either me and my son or just
my son."

She says it was a "horrible experience," but the right thing to do. She and
her husband had a daughter in 2006. Her story is at her blog.

The National Right to Life Committee would not elaborate on its brief
statement saying abortions should be allowed if they are needed to save
women's lives, said communications official Jessica Rogers. A more absolute
view is expressed by the American Life League, a group opposing abortion which
has a statement at its web site signed by 481 doctors who agree that: "There
is never a situation in the law or in the ethical practice of medicine where a
preborn child's life need be intentionally destroyed. ... A physician must do
everything possible to save the lives of both of his patients, mother and
child. He must never intend the death of either."

NEWSLETTERS

Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox

We're sorry, but something went wrong

Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001.

Delivery:

Invalid email address

Thank you! You're almost signed up for

Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration.

More newsletters![](https://staticassets.gannettdigital.com/gci-static-

assets/assets/global/static-web/right-arrow@2x.png)

Cassing Hammond, an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at
Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, says cases in which doctors
must decide whether it is safe for a pregnant woman to deliver a fetus in a
medical crisis are complex and outside the expertise of doctors who do not
perform the procedures. He says he sees many such cases.

Most abortions are not for health reasons. The non-profit Guttmacher Institute
says three-quarters of women having abortions say they can't afford a child,
and an equal number say having a baby would interfere with work, school and
the ability to care for others, including existing children. A study published
in Guttmacher's International Family Planning Perspectives in 1998 said risk
to a woman's health was the main reason for 2.8% of U.S. abortions in 1987-88.

_Note: An earlier version of this story incorrectly referred to Cassing
Hammond as "she." Hammond is male. We apologize for the error._

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/RdhPqd

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

