

__

![ERLC

Logo](//d1nwfrzxhi18dp.cloudfront.net/sites/568acb9172bf4aa9c4000006/theme/images/erlc-

logo-abbr-color.svg?1bc270b385e7a6afe68789203b183a1f)![ERLC

Logo](https://dncqdsevn7j5.cloudfront.net/images/dynamic/W1siZnUiLCJodHRwczovL2Qxbndmcnp4aGkxOGRwLmNsb3VkZnJvbnQubmV0L3NpdGVzLzU2OGFjYjkxNzJiZjRhYTljNDAwMDAwNi90aGVtZS9pbWFnZXMvZXJsY19sb2dvX2Jhbm5lcl82MDAucG5nIl0sWyJwIiwidGh1bWIiLCI0MDB4Il1d/erlc_logo_banner_600.png?sha=41887da66c1a700d)

Donate
![](//d1nwfrzxhi18dp.cloudfront.net/sites/568acb9172bf4aa9c4000006/theme/images/dots.png?775dd5c71c2a380b42af0683d70e9434)
____ Toggle navigation

#### About

    
        * Russell Moore
    * Staff
    * Leadership Council
    * Press Room
    * Public Policy
    * Internships
    * Employment
    * Speaking Request
    * FAQs
    * Contact Us
    

#### Initiatives

    
        * Psalm 139 Project
    * Stand for Life
    * Leland House Press
    * Global Hunger Relief
    * Research Institute
    * ERLC Academy
    

#### Events

    
        * Sexual Abuse and the Southern Baptist Convention 
    * 2019 ERLC National Conference
    

#### Resources

    
        * Latest
    * Trending
    * Articles
    * Interviews
    * Light Magazine
    

#### Store

    
        * Recently Added
    * By Title
    * By Author
    * By Topic
    
    * browse by: 
    * Articles
      * All Resources
      * Articles
      * Book Reviews
      * Bulletin Inserts
      * Event Messages
      * Forms
      * Interviews
      * Issue Briefs
      * Light Magazine Issues
      * Media Appearances
      * Panel Discussions
      * Podcasts
      * Policy Briefs
      * Press Interviews
      * Press Releases
      * Products
      * Statements
      * Video Explainers
      * White Papers
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Topics
      * Author
      * Date
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
      * Series
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Author
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Date
      * Topic
      * Media Type
    * Sort By:
      * Conference
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Tag
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Author
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Author
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Recent
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
    * Sort By:
      * Tag
      * Recent
      * Title
      * Author
      * Date
      * Topic
      * Media Type
    

Donate

Article

# What does it mean to be made in God's image?

By David Closson

May 4, 2016

    
        * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    * __
    

The Christian faith and worldview is predicated on a set of nonnegotiable
truths. One of these is that human life is inherently valuable. Christians
have articulated and acted upon this transcendent understanding of human
dignity throughout history, whether opposing infanticide and child
abandonment, fighting against chattel slavery or engaging in civil
disobedience to protest segregation. The powerful idea that every single
person has inherent value is rooted in the image of God, a doctrine expressed
in the opening chapter of Genesis.

Although "image of God" has become ubiquitous in Christian literature and
conversation in recent years, it has not been robustly defined. Perhaps this
is due to the lack of agreement throughout church history on what exactly
constitutes image of God, which no doubt stems from the fact that Scripture
declares but does not elaborate on the axiom in detail.

But much can and should be said. The fact that human beings are created in
God's image shapes the Christian worldview and affects how we see God, the
world and one another. It informs how we understand the rest of the Bible's
story and provides a theological foundation for ethics and engagement. In
short, a proper understanding of the image of God should animate everything we
do, and as a result, we should endeavor to define it biblically; this will
enable us to then survey what issues Christians should care about.

**Different understandings of the image of God**

Throughout church history, there has been universal agreement that image of
God is a significant theological concept. But debate has abounded regarding
what the image fundamentally refers to.

Some have argued in favor of a structural view that believes man's ontological
(the nature of being) qualities, such as rationality and cognitive capacity,
constitute the image of God. These qualities distinguish man from the rest of
creation. Early church leaders, such as Irenaeus and Augustine, as well as
John Calvin, held variants of this view.

Another position is the relational view that stresses the importance of man's
relationships. Emil Brunner and Karl Barth advocated this approach, where
being made in God's image fundamentally entails living in relationship with
God and others.

A third view is the functional or "vice-regency" position that posits man's
derivative authority to rule on behalf of God defines the image. Unlike the
rest of creation, it is man that functions as God's chief representative in
the world. This view stresses the command to exercise dominion (Gen. 1:26-28).

**The image of God and Ancient Near Eastern culture**

It is evident in Genesis 1 that the Bible is content with simply asserting
that man is somehow like God. Further elaboration is not provided. Why is
this? As Bruce Ware has noted, technical terminology in speaking or writing is
usually introduced and not explained in contexts where the audience is already
familiar with specialized language. It seems fair to assume Moses was
operating with this expectation. Therefore, considering Genesis 1 in light of
the Ancient Near Eastern (ANE) usage of image of God might be helpful.

A seminal study on ANE images is David J.A. Clines' _The Image of God in Man_.
Clines argues that ANE literature contains three commonalities in accounts
that utilize image symbolism. First, a deity imputes a substance to an earthly
king, enabling him to represent the divine. Second, the empowered king
represents the deity by ruling as vice-regent. Third, only the king is ever
given this privilege.

Applying this to Genesis, it is reasonable that Moses had this background in
mind. First, God breathed into Adam the breath of life. Divine empowerment was
requisite to function as God's image. Second, man is tasked with exercising
dominion and ruling as God's vice-regent. Clines' third characteristic,
however, does not apply. The Bible surprises us at this point by affirming
that everyone bears God's image. Clines' reconstruction of the ANE background
is helpful and may account for why Moses did not furnish a more precise
definition. His original readers would have had a framework to interpret image
language and its connotations.

Through the lens of the ANE background, it is clear that certain aspects of
the structural, relational and functional perspectives provide a holistic
understanding of what it means to be made in the image of God (i.e., the
structural serves the purpose of the functional carried out in relationship).

The image of God, therefore, includes both who man is and what he does.
Ontological capacities and functionality are inseparably tied because the
human person as a created whole is the image of God.

Man is like a statue erected by an ancient king--as the statue bore the image
of the king and signified rulership, man bears God's image in the cosmic
temple of the world, representing his authority and dominion. Man is the
visible representation of the invisible God. If one wants to know what God
looks like, simply look at man, the crowning jewel of creation and the only
creature made in God's image and likeness.

**The image of God and cultural engagement**

One of the tragic results of sin is that man no longer properly images God;
the remnants of the image have been marred. The relationship with our Creator
is broken, and redemptive history bears witness to man's inability to obey and
honor God.

But the glorious truth of the New Testament is that restoration is possible
through Christ, the perfect image of God (Col. 1:15), whose redeeming work
restores the image to repentant sinners and establishes them as co-heirs with
Christ.

In this light, the Biblical understanding of man's creation in God's image has
stunning implications for Christian ethics. Not only is everyone created in
God's image, but every human being is a potential future ruler of the
universe.

C.S. Lewis poignantly remarked: "It is a serious thing . . . to remember that
the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day be a
creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship."

In the new creation, God will once again set up his image bearers. But this
time, God's vice-regents will be perfect because of their union with Christ.
Paradoxically, the new creation has already begun. It was inaugurated when
Jesus was raised from the dead and will be consummated when he returns.

And as Christians waiting patiently for this day, we will endeavor to treat
people made in God's image with dignity and respect irrespective of gender,
race, age, nationality or economic status because we remember our King's words
that as we did for "the least of these my brothers, you did also to me" (Matt.
25:40).

Thus, we will care for those caught in the vice grip of poverty. We will fight
against human trafficking. We will uphold the dignity of the elderly and
disabled. We will advocate on behalf of immigrants. We will work for religious
liberty and conscience freedom. We will stand for marriage. We will promote
racial reconciliation. And we will fight the culture of death in all its ugly
forms.

We will do all this out of love for God and concern for those that bear his
sacred image.

_Join us on January 18 -20, 2018, for Evangelicals for Life 2018. Keep an eye
out here for more information. _

![](https://dncqdsevn7j5.cloudfront.net/images/dynamic/W1siZnUiLCJodHRwczovL2Qxbndmcnp4aGkxOGRwLmNsb3VkZnJvbnQubmV0L3VwbG9hZHMvcmVzb3VyY2VfbGlicmFyeS9ncm91cGluZy9wcm9tb19pbWFnZS8xMzMxL0RhdmlkX0Nsb3Nzb24uanBnIl0sWyJwIiwidGh1bWIiLCIxMDB4MTAwIl1d/David_Closson.jpg?sha=73eb521873756571)

#### David Closson

David Closson is a student pursuing his Ph. D at SBTS. He works as a research
assistant for the ERLC and is currently a leader to the israel journey
program. Read More

## Related Resources

Sanctity of Life

### How pregnancy resource centers empower moms to choose life

By Eric Mayo

Human Dignity

### What human dignity has to do with criminal justice reform

By David Closson

Politics

### 4 reasons Christians should care about politics

By David Closson

Sanctity of Life

### Pro-Life Activism in Ireland: An Interview with Keith and Kristyn Getty

By Russell Moore and Keith and Kristyn Getty

Show More

    
        * Home __
    * Resource Library __
    * Articles __
    * What does it mean to be made in God's image?
    

## Initiatives

    
        * Stand for Life
    * Psalm 139 Project
    * Global Hunger Relief
    * Research Institute
    

## Nashville

901 Commerce Street, Suite 550  
Nashville, Tennessee 37203  
Phone: (615) 244-2495  
Fax: (615) 242-0065

## Washington

505 Second St., N.E.  
Washington, DC 20002  
Phone: (202) 547-8105  
Fax: (202) 547-8165

* * *

ERLC (C) 2019, All rights reserved. Site by Mere. Disclaimer on links.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

