

Skip to main content Accessibility help

We use cookies to distinguish you from other users and to provide you with a
better experience on our websites. Close this message to accept cookies or
find out how to manage your cookie settings.

![Close cookie message](/core/cambridge-

core/public/images/icn_circle__btn_close_white.svg)

You are using a web browser we do not support. To improve your experience
please try one of the following options:

                
                                * Chrome (latest version)
                * Firefox (latest version)
                

![Close unsupported browser message](/core/cambridge-

core/public/images/icn_circle__btn_close_white.svg)

Cancel

Log in

×

×

![](/core/cambridge-core/public/images/logo_core.png)

Home

Only search content I have access to

                
                                    *         * Home
                    * Log in
                    * Register
                    * Browse subjects
                    * What we publish
                    * Services
                    * About Cambridge Core
                    * Cart
                
                    * ![]()
                    *         * Access provided by
                      * AMS/Kaist Digital Sci Lib 
                      * Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology (KAIST) 
                      * Manage institution login
                      * Logged in as:
                      * AMS/Kaist Digital Sci Lib 
                      * Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology (KAIST) 
                      * Manage institution login
                    *         *         * Register
                    * Register
                    * Log in
                    *         * Cart
                
                      * < Back to search results
                      * Home
                      * Journals
                      * Philosophy
                      * Volume 54 Issue 210
                      * What is so Wrong with Killing P...
                      * English | Français
                

Philosophy

![Royal Institute of Philosophy](/core/services/aop-file-

manager/file/575fdec55dfe6c11236bb8b5)

Article

                
                                      * Article
                      * Metrics
                      *           *           *           *             *           *             * Aa
                        * Aa
                      *           *           *           *           *             *           * Cited by 10
                      * Cited by
                
                        * ![Crossref logo](https://assets.crossref.org/logo/crossref-logo-100.png) 10
                
                        * ![Google Scholar logo](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a9/Google_Scholar_logo_2015.PNG)
                

Crossref Citations

![Crossref logo](https://assets.crossref.org/logo/crossref-logo-100.png)

##### This article has been cited by the following publications. This list is

generated based on data provided by CrossRef.

* * *

Tyner, James A. 2018. _Famine, violence, and the intentional politics of
letting die_. Political Geography, Vol. 62, Issue. , p. 199.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Tyner, James A and Will, Rachel 2015. _Nature and post-conflict violence:
water management under the Communist Party of Kampuchea, 1975-1979_.
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, Vol. 40, Issue. 3, p.
362.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Soto, Carlos 2013. _Killing, wrongness, and equality_. Philosophical Studies,
Vol. 164, Issue. 2, p. 543.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Lippert-Rasmussen, Kasper 2013. _International Encyclopedia of Ethics_.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Pleasants, Nigel 2009. _Wittgenstein and Basic Moral Certainty_. Philosophia,
Vol. 37, Issue. 4, p. 669.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Pleasants, Nigel 2008. _Wittgenstein, Ethics and Basic Moral Certainty_.
Inquiry, Vol. 51, Issue. 3, p. 241.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Lippert‐Rasmussen, Kasper 2007. _Why Killing Some People Is More Seriously
Wrong than Killing Others_. Ethics, Vol. 117, Issue. 4, p. 716.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Lane, Robert 2003. _Why I Was Never a Zygote_. The Southern Journal of
Philosophy, Vol. 41, Issue. 1, p. 63.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Mitchell, David R. 1985. _Ethical and Legal Issues in Providing Medical
Treatment for Seriously Ill Handicapped Persons_. Australia and New Zealand
Journal of Developmental Disabilities, Vol. 11, Issue. 4, p. 245.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Hull, John M. 1980. _The value of the individual child and the Christian
faith_. British Journal of Educational Studies, Vol. 28, Issue. 3, p. 199.

                
                                        * CrossRef
                        * OpenURL query 
                        * Google Scholar
                

* * *

Google Scholar Citations

View all Google Scholar citations for this article.

Scopus Citations

View all citations for this article on Scopus

×

                
                                      * Get access
                

Add to cart £20.00 Added An error has occurred,  
please try again later.

Check if you have access via personal or institutional login

Log in Register Recommend to librarian

Check library catalogue

                
                                      * Volume 54, Issue 210 
                      * October 1979 , pp. 515-528
                

# What is so Wrong with Killing People?

                
                                      * Robert Young (a1)
                
                        * **(a1)**
                

La Trobe University

                
                                      *             * DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031819100063531
                        * Published online:  30 January 2009
                

## Extract

If killing another human being is morally wrong on at least some occasions (as
it clearly is), what precisely makes it wrong on those occasions? I have
framed the question thus to indicate that I shall not be considering the view
that killing another human being is always and everywhere morally wrong. I
take it as read that there are at least some morally justifiable killings (for
instance, in self-defence where no other means of disarming one's attacker is
available). Once it is clear what is wrong with killing on some occasions it
should become possible to explain why it is not wrong on others. My immediate
concern is with the killing of another human being, and with applying my
answer to cases of voluntary and non-voluntary euthanasia, but light will be
shed on whether and, if so, why it is wrong to kill oneself, to kill unborn
human beings, and to kill non-human animals especially those whose life has
most in common with the life of human beings.

Export citation

## Copyright

COPYRIGHT: © The Royal Institute of Philosophy 1979

## References

Hide All

1 I have tried to elaborate on them in ‘Dispensing with Moral Rights’,
_Political Theory_ 5 (1977).

2 ‘A Defence of Abortion and Infanticide’ as revised and reprinted in The
Problem of Abortion, Feinberg, J. (ed.) (Belmont, Calif.: 1973), 51–91. For
critical discussion see Benn, S., ‘Abortion, Infanticide and Respect for
Persons’, ibid., 92–104, and Brody, B., Abortion and the Sanctity of Human
Life: a Philosophical View (Cambridge, Mass, and London: 1976), 85ff.

3 See Smart, J. J. C. and Williams, B., Utilitarianism: For and Against
(Cambridge: 1973), 98. Bennett, J.'s ‘Whatever the Consequences’, Analysis 26
(1965–1966), 83–102, is relevant to Williams's remarks and to the more recent
discussion of similar matters in Harris, J., ‘The Survival Lottery’,
Philosophy 50 (1975), 81–87 and the replies by Morillo, Carolyn, ‘As Sure as
Shooting’, Philosophy 51 (1976), 80–89, and Singer, Peter, ‘Utility and the
Survival Lottery’, Philosophy 52 (1977), 218–222.

4 Nozick, R., Anarchy, State and Utopia (New York: 1974), 34–35.

5 They apply also to the question of whether an innocent threat or an innocent
shield of a threat may morally permissibly defend himself or herself. It
should be noticed that the case of the innocent fat man is so devised as to
preclude his taking self-defensive action. This is deliberate, and is intended
to limit the factors that one has to cope with in deciding which actions are
morally permitted.

6 Cf. Wasserstrom, Richard, ‘On the Morality of War: A Preliminary Inquiry’,
in War and Morality, Wasserstrom, (ed.) (Belmont, Calif.: 1970).

7 Cf. Thompson, D. F., ‘The Means of Dealing with Criminals: Social Science
and Social Philosophy’, Philosophy of the Social Sciences 5 (1975), 1–16.

8 For some of the debate see e.g. Van den Haag, E., ‘On Deterrence and the
Death Penalty’, Ethics 78 (1968), 280–288; Bedau, H. A. ‘The Death Penalty as
a Deterrent: Argument and Evidence’, Ethics 80 (1970), 205–217; and their
rejoinders and replies in _Ethics_ 81 (1971), 74–76. For an interesting
presentation of it see also Conway, D. ‘Capital Punishment and Deterrence:
Some Considerations in Dialogue Form’, Philosophy and Public Affairs 2 (1972),
431–443.

9 In _Philosophy of Law_ he admits exceptions such as the mother who commits
infanticide, the soldier who kills a fellow soldier in a duel and so on.

10 For a contemporary retributivist's view on the latter see Kleinig, J.,
Punishment and Desert (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoft 1973) 123ff.

11 Cf. Dworkin, G., ‘Paternalism’, The Monist 56 (1972), 64–84; Carter, R.,
‘Justifying Paternalism’, Canadian Journal of Philosophy 7 (1977), 133–145.

12 _Vide_ the much publicized Karen Quinlan case. The original judgment by
Justice Muir of the Supreme Court of New Jersey refusing Karen's father's
request, which had the support of the Catholic authorities, to authorize the
discontinuance of all extraordinary means of sustaining Karen's life processes
is reprinted in Social Ethics: Morality and Social Policy, Mappes, T. and
Zembaty, J. (eds) (New York: McGraw Hill 1977), 37–42. A debate between James
Rachels and Tom Beauchamp on the moral significance of the killing-letting die
distinction is published in the same volume, pp. 62–75.

13 I have discussed these matters in my ‘Voluntary and Nonvoluntary
Euthanasia’, _The Monist_ 59 (1976), 264–283.

14 Cf. Sumner, L. W., ‘A Matter of Life and Death’, Noûs 10 (1976), 145–171
(esp. p. 163).

15 The pros and cons are well brought out in Moral Problems in Medicine,
Gorovitz, S. et al. (eds) (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1976) in the
section on ‘Birth Defects’.

16 If my discussion of the wrongness of killing certain animals was to the
point, it will also serve to undermine the contention frequently made in
discussions of abortion that once the issue of the _humanity_ of the foetus is
settled so too is that of the justifiability of abortion.

17 I am grateful to John Campbell, John Kleinig, Bruce Langtry and Peter
Singer for helpful criticisms of an earlier draft of this paper.

Recommend this journal

Email your librarian or administrator to recommend adding this journal to your
organisation's collection.

Philosophy

                
                                      * ISSN: 0031-8191
                      *           * EISSN: 1469-817X
                      *           * URL: /core/journals/philosophy
                      * Your name *  Please enter your name
                

Your email address * Please enter a valid email address

Who would you like to send this to? *

Select organisation

A recommendation email will be sent to the administrator(s) of the selected
organisation(s)

                
                                      * AMS/Kaist Digital Sci Lib 
                      * Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology (KAIST)
                

Optional message

## CAPTCHA *

Skip to the audio challenge

Cancel

Send

×

## Metrics

### Full text views

Full text views reflects the number of PDF downloads, PDFs sent to Google
Drive, Dropbox and Kindle and HTML full text views.

Total number of HTML views: 0

Total number of PDF views: 0 *

![](/core/system/public/img/ajax_loader_gray_256.gif)Loading metrics...

### Abstract views

Abstract views reflect the number of visits to the article landing page.

Total abstract views: 0 *

![](/core/system/public/img/ajax_loader_gray_256.gif)Loading metrics...

          * Views captured on Cambridge Core between . This data will be updated every 24 hours.

Usage data cannot currently be displayed

                
                                      * Librarians
                      * Authors
                      * Publishing partners
                      * Agents
                      * Corporates
                
                      * Additional Information
                
                        * Accessibility
                        * Our blog
                        * News
                        * Contact and help
                        * Cambridge Core legal notices
                        * Feedback
                        * Sitemap
                

Join us online

                
                                        *             *             *             *           * Legal Information
                
                        * ![Cambridge University Press](/core/cambridge-core/public/images/cambridge_logo.png)
                
                        * Rights & Permissions
                        * Copyright
                        * Privacy Notice
                        * Terms of use
                        * Cookies Policy
                        * (C) Cambridge University Press 2019
                        * Back to top
                
                      * (C) Cambridge University Press 2019
                      * Back to top
                

#

Cancel

Confirm

×

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

