
                
                                      * Home
                      * Surprising Science
                      * Personal Growth
                      * Mind & Brain
                      * Sex & Relationships
                      * Technology & Innovation
                      * Culture & Religion
                      * Politics & Current Affairs
                      * Videos
                      * Think Again Podcasts
                      * Big Think Edge
                      * Sponsored by Pfizer
                      * Sponsored by Charles Koch Foundation
                      * Sponsored by the Institute for Humane Studies
                      * Sponsored by Lumina Foundation
                      * Sponsored by Northwell Health
                

![](https://assets.rbl.ms/18799551/2000x.png)
![](https://assets.rbl.ms/18794643/2000x.png)![](https://assets.rbl.ms/18794643/2000x.png)

Discover

Big Think Edge  
For You

Big Think Edge  
For Business

Preview an Edge video

PopularSurprising SciencePersonal GrowthMind & BrainSex &
RelationshipsTechnology & InnovationCulture & ReligionPolitics & Current
Affairs

Follow Us

Video

Trending

Sponsored by Charles Koch Foundation

## Criminal reform: Why wake-up calls are windows of opportunity

Sponsored by the Institute for Humane Studies

## Self-command: Learn this powerful thinking tool

Politics & Current Affairs

## Sexual Mores in America

See All Videos >

Podcast

Newsletters

JOIN PREMIUM

SIGN IN

## Subscribe to our Surprising Science newsletter

Surprising Science>

![A DNA helix](https://assets.rbl.ms/19567490/2000x.jpg)

# Can Computers Be Conscious?

##

By studying the neural networks in the brain, scientists have constructed
computer-based models that mirror the brain's complex biological networks.

Max Miller

28 September, 2010

Computers have seem "mind-like" to people since they were invented in 1950s.
In the early days they were widely called "electronic brains" for their
ability to process information. But the similarity between computers and
brains isn't just superficial: at their most fundamental levels, computers and
brains process data in a similar binary fashion. Whereas computers use zeros
and ones to store and manipulate data, the neurons in our brains transmit
information in binary, on/off spikes known as action potentials. This basic
similarity is what underlies the burgeoning field of computational
neuroscience, which hopes to understand how neuronal networks give rise to
processes like memory and facial recognition so that they might be replicated
in intelligent machines.

* * *

But artificial intelligence has progressed slower than many had initially
hoped. Yes, AI may have solved the game of checkers, but this is a far cry
from being able to simulate consciousness. The central problem remains: we
have no real understanding of how the brain gives rise to the mind, of how
neurons and action potentials create consciousness.

Instead of trying to build thinking machines from the ground up, several major
projects have recently turned to a new approach: replicating virtual brains
through reverse-engineering. By studying the neural networks in the brain,
scientists have constructed computer-based models that mirror the brain's
complex biological networks. In turn, they can then run experiments on these
these brain-like computers in order to learn about how the brain thinks.

Henry Markram is the South African neuroscientist who heads the Blue Brain
Project at the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne in Switzerland. For 15
years, Markram and his team collected data from the neocortexes of rats'
brains with the hopes of integrating it into a 3D model. If they could
accurately recreate the behaviors and structures of a biological brain, their
computer simulation should shed light both normal cognition and disorders like
depression and schizophrenia. In its trial stages the project successfully
recreated a single neocortical column of a two-week old rat, which contains
about 10,000 neurons. Of course, this sample is infinitesimally small compared
to the 100 billion neurons in a human brain. But this project is all a matter
of scaling. "Technologically, in terms of computers and techniques to acquire
data, it will be possible to build a model of the human brain within 10
years," Markram told Discover magazine last year.

But will this full-scale model teach us how to re-create consciousness, or
perhaps even become conscious itself? "It’s really difficult to say how much
detail is needed for consciousness to emerge," said Markram. "I do believe
that consciousness is an emergent phenomenon. It’s like a shift from a liquid
to a gas ... It’s like a machine that has to run fast enough and suddenly it’s
flying." In other words, they can't know for sure until the model is finished.

Even if the model can learn and reason, that doesn't guarantee that it will be
a truly intelligent being. Many people studying AI have equated problem-
solving with thinking, but thinking is different from reasoning, says Yale
computer scientist David Gelernter. To demonstrate this, he points to
daydreaming and free association. "Free association is a kind of thinking
also. My mind doesn’t shut off, but I’m certainly not solving problems; I’m
wandering around."

There is general agreement that to be creative is to have the ability to
invent new analogies. To connect two things that are not obviously related,
but once you have made the connection, you can see, yeah, there is a
relationship and other people can see the relationship too and creativity
flows from that.

Now, we know that the invention of analogy has to do with not highly focused
analytic problem-solving thought. Creating analogy means connecting thoughts,
letting your mind drift essentially from one thought to another.

"The field of Artificial Intelligence had studied only the very top end of the
spectrum and still tends to study only the very top end," says Gelernter. "It
tends to say, what is thinking? It’s this highly focused, wide awake, alert,
problem-solving state of mind. But not only is that not the whole story, but
the problem—the biggest unsolved problem that has tended to haunt philosophy
of mind, cognitive psychology, and AI—is creativity."

The general consensus is that creativity is the ability to invent new
analogies, to connect two things that are not obviously related. And this
invention of analogy relies not on analytic problem-solving thought but on
letting your mind drift from one thought to another in a sort of free-
associative state, says Gelernter. "Creativity doesn't operate when your focus
is high," Gelernter writes in an essay for Edge. "Only when your thoughts have
started to drift is creativity possible. We find creative solutions to a
problem when it lingers at the back of our minds, not when it monopolizes
attention by standing at the front."

So how can computers create new analogies? The answer probably has something
to do with emotion, says Gelernter. "Emotion is what allows us to take two
thoughts or ideas that seem very different and connect them together, because
emotion is a tremendously subtle kind of code or tag that can be attached to a
very complicated scene." We tend to think of emotions in discrete terms, like
happy, sad, and angry, but they're really much more subtle than that. "If I
say, 'What is your emotion on the first really warm day in April or March when
you go out and you don’t need a coat and you can smell the flowers blooming
and there may be remnants of snow but you know it’s not going to snow anymore
and there’s a certain springiness in the air, what do you feel?''" Gelernter
asks. "It’s not that you feel happy exactly. There are a million kinds of
happiness. It’s a particular shade of emotion." Though there may not be an
exact word to describe this nuanced emotion, the mind can recognize it and can
connect two very different scenes that may have inspired the same emotion.

The other difficulty with emotion—and the reason why computers won't ever be
able to experience emotions the way humans do—is that they are produced by an
interaction between the brain and the body working together. "When you feel
happy, your body feels a certain way, your mind notices, and the resonance
between body and mind produces an emotion," Gelernter explains. Until
computers can simulate this experience, they will never be truly intelligent.

**Takeaway**

The field of artificial intelligence has made only modest gains in recent
decades, but new reverse-engineering projects hope to recreate virtual models
of the brain. These computer simulations might help cure mental disorders as
well as shed light on cognition and consciousness. Henry Markram's Blue Brain
Project has so far only recreated one neocortical column of a rat's brain, but
Markram believes a full human brain could be simulated within 10 years.

**More Resources**

—Henry Markram's TED talk on the Blue Brain Project

—Information on the FACETS project, another project to simulate the brain's
neuron networks

* * *

![](https://assets.rbl.ms/19208560/210x.jpg)

Northwell Health

Northwell Health

## 3D printing might save your life one day. It's transforming medicine and

health care.

##

What can 3D printing do for medicine? The "sky is the limit," says Northwell
Health researcher Dr. Todd Goldstein.

Big Think

29 April, 2019

Northwell Health

Sponsored by Northwell Health

                
                                      * Medical professionals are currently using 3D printers to create prosthetics and patient-specific organ models that doctors can use to prepare for surgery. 
                      * Eventually, scientists hope to print patient-specific organs that can be transplanted safely into the human body. 
                      * Northwell Health, New York State's largest health care provider, is pioneering 3D printing in medicine in three key ways.
                

Keep reading Show less

health care health science technology future human body medical research
medicine

* * *

## Dogs mirror stress levels of their owners

##

The owner's personality was the most important factor in examining the stress-
hormone relationship between pet and owner.

Stephen Johnson

06 June, 2019

Photo credit: Xan Griffin on Unsplash

Surprising Science

                
                                      * A new study found that dogs and their owners show similar levels of the stress hormone cortisol over time.
                      * The dog-owner cortisol relationship seems to be related to the owner's personality, as measured by the Big 5 model.
                      * Ultimately, dog owners needn't worry that they're stressing out their pet; not all cortisol indicates "bad" stress."
                

Keep reading Show less

psychology animals

* * *

## D-Day 75 years on: Harrowing letters & stories from soldiers

##

Sobering accounts from one of the most pivotal battles in world history.

Stephen Johnson

05 June, 2019

_Getty Images_

Politics & Current Affairs

                
                                      * On June 6, 1944, Allied forces began the invasion of France.
                      * World leaders of Allied countries met in England on Wednesday for a memorial service.
                      * A handful of surviving D-Day veterans were honored at the event; their average age is 96.
                

Keep reading Show less

military government europe war united states

* * *

## New insights into ​hikikomori​ — people who withdraw from society for

months or years on end

##

What causes people to retreat into their homes indefinitely?

Emma Young

06 June, 2019

Mind & Brain

Hikikomori is a dark term that describes people who stay holed up in their
homes, or even just their bedrooms, isolated from everyone except their
family, for many months or years.

Keep reading Show less

mental health introvert depression fear asia psychology

* * *

![smarter faster](https://assets.rbl.ms/18794611/2000x.png)

Big think's weekly newsletter.

Get **smarter faster** from the comfort of your inbox.

See our newsletter privacy policy here

![](https://assets.rbl.ms/18326201/2000x.png)

Most Popular

popular

## Iceland is officially worshiping Norse Gods again

## Why a V-shaped plane may make a whole lot of sense

Technology & Innovation

## The value of owning more books than you can read

Personal Growth

## Walmart sued over how it markets homeopathic products

Politics & Current Affairs

## New research shows that sleep helps determine your personality

Surprising Science

## How to become a millionaire

Technology & Innovation

Most Recent

Surprising Science

## Dogs mirror stress levels of their owners

## German circus uses 3D holograms instead of real animals

Technology & Innovation

## Are we confusing money with well-being? New Zealand's leaders believe so.

Politics & Current Affairs

## 5 new female-led companies achieve billion-dollar status

Technology & Innovation

## Criminal reform: Why wake-up calls are windows of opportunity

Sponsored by Charles Koch Foundation

## YouTube sides with conservative Steven Crowder amid policy updates

Politics & Current Affairs

Big think's weekly newsletter.

Get **smarter faster** from the comfort of your inbox.

See our newsletter privacy policy here

![](https://assets.rbl.ms/18326201/2000x.png)

(C) Copyright 2007-2019 & BIG THINK, BIG THINK EDGE,  
SMARTER FASTER trademarks owned by The Big Think, Inc. All rights reserved.

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=30385878&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-s6bb-mNmSf8L8.gif)

![](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=966777&fmt=gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

