

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

                
                                      * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4181515/img/28977)
                      * Skip to main content
                      * Skip to navigation
                      * Resources
                        * All Resources
                        * Chemicals & Bioassays
                          * BioSystems
                          * PubChem BioAssay
                          * PubChem Compound
                          * PubChem Structure Search
                          * PubChem Substance
                          * All Chemicals & Bioassays Resources...
                        * DNA & RNA
                          * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
                          * BLAST (Stand-alone)
                          * E-Utilities
                          * GenBank
                          * GenBank: BankIt
                          * GenBank: Sequin
                          * GenBank: tbl2asn
                          * Genome Workbench
                          * Influenza Virus
                          * Nucleotide Database
                          * PopSet
                          * Primer-BLAST
                          * ProSplign
                          * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
                          * RefSeqGene
                          * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
                          * Splign
                          * Trace Archive
                          * UniGene
                          * All DNA & RNA Resources...
                        * Data & Software
                          * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
                          * BLAST (Stand-alone)
                          * Cn3D
                          * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
                          * E-Utilities
                          * GenBank: BankIt
                          * GenBank: Sequin
                          * GenBank: tbl2asn
                          * Genome ProtMap
                          * Genome Workbench
                          * Primer-BLAST
                          * ProSplign
                          * PubChem Structure Search
                          * SNP Submission Tool
                          * Splign
                          * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
                          * All Data & Software Resources...
                        * Domains & Structures
                          * BioSystems
                          * Cn3D
                          * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
                          * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
                          * Structure (Molecular Modeling Database)
                          * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
                          * All Domains & Structures Resources...
                        * Genes & Expression
                          * BioSystems
                          * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
                          * E-Utilities
                          * Gene
                          * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Database 
                          * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Datasets
                          * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Profiles
                          * Genome Workbench
                          * HomoloGene
                          * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
                          * RefSeqGene
                          * UniGene
                          * All Genes & Expression Resources...
                        * Genetics & Medicine
                          * Bookshelf
                          * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
                          * Genetic Testing Registry
                          * Influenza Virus
                          * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
                          * PubMed
                          * PubMed Central (PMC)
                          * PubMed Clinical Queries
                          * RefSeqGene
                          * All Genetics & Medicine Resources...
                        * Genomes & Maps
                          * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
                          * GenBank: tbl2asn
                          * Genome
                          * Genome Project
                          * Genome Data Viewer (GDV)
                          * Genome ProtMap
                          * Genome Workbench
                          * Influenza Virus
                          * Nucleotide Database
                          * PopSet
                          * ProSplign
                          * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
                          * Splign
                          * Trace Archive
                          * All Genomes & Maps Resources...
                        * Homology
                          * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
                          * BLAST (Stand-alone)
                          * BLAST Link (BLink)
                          * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
                          * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
                          * Genome ProtMap
                          * HomoloGene
                          * Protein Clusters
                          * All Homology Resources...
                        * Literature
                          * Bookshelf
                          * E-Utilities
                          * Journals in NCBI Databases
                          * MeSH Database
                          * NCBI Handbook
                          * NCBI Help Manual
                          * NCBI News & Blog
                          * PubMed
                          * PubMed Central (PMC)
                          * PubMed Clinical Queries
                          * All Literature Resources...
                        * Proteins
                          * BioSystems
                          * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
                          * BLAST (Stand-alone)
                          * BLAST Link (BLink)
                          * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
                          * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
                          * E-Utilities
                          * ProSplign
                          * Protein Clusters
                          * Protein Database
                          * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
                          * All Proteins Resources...
                        * Sequence Analysis
                          * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
                          * BLAST (Stand-alone)
                          * BLAST Link (BLink)
                          * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
                          * Genome ProtMap
                          * Genome Workbench
                          * Influenza Virus
                          * Primer-BLAST
                          * ProSplign
                          * Splign
                          * All Sequence Analysis Resources...
                        * Taxonomy
                          * Taxonomy
                          * Taxonomy Browser
                          * Taxonomy Common Tree
                          * All Taxonomy Resources...
                        * Training & Tutorials
                          * NCBI Education Page
                          * NCBI Handbook
                          * NCBI Help Manual
                          * NCBI News & Blog
                          * All Training & Tutorials Resources...
                        * Variation
                          * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
                          * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
                          * Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP)
                          * SNP Submission Tool
                          * All Variation Resources...
                      * How To
                        * All How To
                        * Chemicals & Bioassays
                        * DNA & RNA
                        * Data & Software
                        * Domains & Structures
                        * Genes & Expression
                        * Genetics & Medicine
                        * Genomes & Maps
                        * Homology
                        * Literature
                        * Proteins
                        * Sequence Analysis
                        * Taxonomy
                        * Training & Tutorials
                        * Variation
                      * About NCBI Accesskeys
                

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PubMed

US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health

Search databaseAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

                
                                      * Advanced
                      * Help
                

## Result Filters

                
                                      * Format: Abstract
                

Format

                
                                      * Summary
                      * Summary (text)
                      * Abstract
                      * Abstract (text)
                      * MEDLINE
                      * XML
                      * PMID List
                

Apply

#### Send to

Choose Destination

                
                                      * File
                      * Clipboard
                      * Collections
                      * E-mail
                      * Order
                      * My Bibliography
                      * Citation manager
                
                      * FormatSummary (text)Abstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListCSV
                

Create File

                
                                      * 1 selected item: 8765248
                      * FormatSummarySummary (text)AbstractAbstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListMeSH and Other Data
                      * E-mail
                      * Subject
                      * Additional text
                      * E-mail
                

Didn't get the message? Find out why...

Add to Clipboard

Add to Collections

Order articles

Add to My Bibliography

Generate a file for use with external citation management software.

Create File

Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996 Aug;175(2):320-4; discussion 324-5.

# Rape-related pregnancy: estimates and descriptive characteristics from a

national sample of women.

Holmes MM1, Resnick HS, Kilpatrick DG, Best CL.

### Author information

1

                
                                Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425-2233, USA.
                

### Abstract

#### OBJECTIVE:

We attempted to determine the national rape-related pregnancy rate and provide
descriptive characteristics of pregnancies that result from rape.

#### STUDY DESIGN:

A national probability sample of 4008 adult American women took part in a
3-year longitudinal survey that assessed the prevalence and incidence of rape
and related physical and mental health outcomes.

#### RESULTS:

The national rape-related pregnancy rate is 5.0% per rape among victims of
reproductive age (aged 12 to 45); among adult women an estimated 32,101
pregnancies result from rape each year. Among 34 cases of rape-related
pregnancy, the majority occurred among adolescents and resulted from assault
by a known, often related perpetrator. Only 11.7% of these victims received
immediate medical attention after the assault, and 47.1% received no medical
attention related to the rape. A total 32.4% of these victims did not discover
they were pregnant until they had already entered the second trimester; 32.2%
opted to keep the infant whereas 50% underwent abortion and 5.9% placed the
infant for adoption; an additional 11.8% had spontaneous abortion.

#### CONCLUSIONS:

Rape-related pregnancy occurs with significant frequency. It is a cause of
many unwanted pregnancies and is closely linked with family and domestic
violence. As we address the epidemic of unintended pregnancies in the United
States, greater attention and effort should be aimed at preventing and
identifying unwanted pregnancies that result from sexual victimization.

PMID:

                
                                8765248
                
                 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
                

Share

### Publication type, MeSH terms, Grant support

#### Publication type

                
                                      * Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
                

#### MeSH terms

                
                                      * Abortion, Induced
                      * Adolescent
                      * Adoption
                      * Adult
                      * Child
                      * Female
                      * Humans
                      * Incidence
                      * Longitudinal Studies
                      * Middle Aged
                      * Pregnancy*
                      * Pregnancy Rate
                      * Pregnancy, Unwanted
                      * Prevalence
                      * Rape*
                      * United States
                

#### Grant support

                
                                      * R01DA05220/DA/NIDA NIH HHS/United States
                

### LinkOut - more resources

#### Full Text Sources

                
                                      * Elsevier Science
                      * Ovid Technologies, Inc.
                

#### Medical

                
                                      * Pregnancy - Genetic Alliance
                      * Pregnancy - MedlinePlus Health Information
                
                      * ## Supplemental Content
                

### Full text links

![Icon for Elsevier

Science](//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/corehtml/query/egifs/https:--linkinghub.elsevier.com-

ihub-images-PubMedLink.gif)

![Loading ... ](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4185393/img/3631476)

You are here: NCBI > Literature > PubMed

Support Center
![](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_app=entrez&ncbi_db=pubmed&ncbi_pdid=abstract&ncbi_phid=CE8A06D7CF9ABA91000000000851050B)

## Simple NCBI Directory

                
                                      * ### Getting Started
                
                      * NCBI Education
                      * NCBI Help Manual
                      * NCBI Handbook
                      * Training & Tutorials
                      * Submit Data
                      * ### Resources
                
                      * Chemicals & Bioassays
                      * Data & Software
                      * DNA & RNA
                      * Domains & Structures
                      * Genes & Expression
                      * Genetics & Medicine
                      * Genomes & Maps
                      * Homology
                      * Literature
                      * Proteins
                      * Sequence Analysis
                      * Taxonomy
                      * Variation
                      * ### Popular
                
                      * PubMed
                      * Bookshelf
                      * PubMed Central
                      * BLAST
                      * Nucleotide
                      * Genome
                      * SNP
                      * Gene
                      * Protein
                      * PubChem
                      * ### Featured
                
                      * Genetic Testing Registry
                      * GenBank
                      * Reference Sequences
                      * Gene Expression Omnibus
                      * Genome Data Viewer
                      * Human Genome
                      * Mouse Genome
                      * Influenza Virus
                      * Primer-BLAST
                      * Sequence Read Archive
                      * ### NCBI Information
                
                      * About NCBI
                      * Research at NCBI
                      * NCBI News & Blog
                      * NCBI FTP Site
                      * NCBI on Facebook
                      * NCBI on Twitter
                      * NCBI on YouTube
                      * Privacy Policy
                

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

