

# Embryo

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

## Part of a series on

Human growth  
and development  
![Views of a Foetus in the Womb

detail.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2a/Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg/100px-

Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg)  
Stages  
* Zygote * Embryo * Fetus 
                
                                      * Infant
                      * Toddler
                
                      * Child
                      * Preadolescent
                      * Adolescent
                
                      * Young adult
                      * Middle adult
                      * Old adult
                

Biological milestones  
* Fertilization * Pregnancy * Childbirth * Walking * Language acquisition * Puberty * Menopause * Ageing * Death  
Development and psychology  
* Pre- and perinatal * Infant and child * Adolescent * Youth * Young adult * Adult * Maturity 

Developmental stage theories

                
                                      * Attachment
                      * Ecological
                      * Psychosocial
                      * Psychosexual development
                      * Moral
                      * Cognitive
                      * Cultural-historical
                      * Evolutionary  
                      * ![Psi2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6c/Psi2.svg/16px-Psi2.svg.png) Psychology portal
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

For other uses, see Embryo (disambiguation).

## _Embryo_

![Embryo 7 weeks after

conception.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Embryo_7_weeks_after_conception.jpg/250px-

Embryo_7_weeks_after_conception.jpg)

A human embryo, seven weeks old  
or nine weeks' gestational age

Identifiers  
MeSH| D004622  
TE| E1.0.2.6.4.0.8  
FMA| 69068  
**_Anatomical terminology_**

[edit on Wikidata]

An **embryo** is an early stage of development of a multicellular diploid
eukaryotic organism. In general, in organisms that reproduce sexually, an
embryo develops from a zygote, the single cell resulting from the
fertilization of the female egg cell by the male sperm cell. The zygote
possesses half the DNA from each of its two parents. In plants, animals, and
some protists, the zygote will begin to divide by mitosis to produce a
multicellular organism. The result of this process is an embryo.

In human pregnancy, a developing fetus is considered as an embryo until the
ninth week, fertilization age, or eleventh-week gestational age. After this
time the embryo is referred to as a fetus.[1]

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Etymology
                      * 2 Development
                        * 2.1 Plant embryos
                      * 3 Research and technology
                        * 3.1 Fossilized embryos
                      * 4 Miscarriage and abortion
                      * 5 See also
                      * 6 Notes
                      * 7 External links
                

## Etymology[edit]

First attested in English in the mid-14c., the word _embryon_ derives from
Medieval Latin _embryo_ , itself from Greek ἔμβρυον ( _embruon_ ), lit. "young
one",[2] which is the neuter of ἔμβρυος ( _embruos_ ), lit. "growing in",[3]
from ἐν ( _en_ ), "in"[4] and βρύω ( _bruō_ ), "swell, be full";[5] the proper
Latinized form of the Greek term would be _embryum_.

## Development[edit]

See also: Human embryogenesis and Prenatal development

![File:Embryonic development of a salamander, filmed in the

1920s.ogv](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/Embryonic_development_of_a_salamander%2C_filmed_in_the_1920s.ogv/220px

--Embryonic_development_of_a_salamander%2C_filmed_in_the_1920s.ogv.jpg)Play
media

Embryonic development of salamander, circa the 1920s

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2d/Wrinkledfrog_embryos.jpg/220px-

Wrinkledfrog_embryos.jpg)

Embryos (and one tadpole) of the wrinkled frog ( _Rana rugosa_ )

In animals, the development of the zygote into an embryo proceeds through
specific recognizable stages of blastula, gastrula, and organogenesis. The
blastula stage typically features a fluid-filled cavity, the blastocoel,
surrounded by a sphere or sheet of cells, also called blastomeres. In a
placental mammal, an ovum is fertilized in a fallopian tube through which it
travels into the uterus. An embryo is called a fetus at a more advanced stage
of development and up until birth or hatching. In humans, this is from the
eleventh week of gestation. However, animals which develop in eggs outside the
mother's body, are usually referred to as embryos throughout development; e.g.
one would refer to a chick embryo, not a "chick fetus", even at later stages.

During gastrulation the cells of the blastula undergo coordinated processes of
cell division, invasion, and/or migration to form two (diploblastic) or three
(triploblastic) tissue layers. In triploblastic organisms, the three germ
layers are called endoderm, ectoderm, and mesoderm. The position and
arrangement of the germ layers are highly species-specific, however, depending
on the type of embryo produced. In vertebrates, a special population of
embryonic cells called the neural crest has been proposed as a "fourth germ
layer", and is thought to have been an important novelty in the evolution of
head structures.

During organogenesis, molecular and cellular interactions between germ layers,
combined with the cells' developmental potential, or competence to respond,
prompt the further differentiation of organ-specific cell types.[ _citation
needed_ ] For example, in neurogenesis, a subpopulation of ectoderm cells is
set aside to become the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves. Modern
developmental biology is extensively probing the molecular basis for every
type of organogenesis, including angiogenesis (formation of new blood vessels
from pre-existing ones), chondrogenesis (cartilage), myogenesis (muscle),
osteogenesis (bone), and many others.

### Plant embryos[edit]

Further information: Sporophyte

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/03/Ginkgo_embryo_and_gametophyte.jpg/220px-

Ginkgo_embryo_and_gametophyte.jpg)

The inside of a _Ginkgo_ seed, showing the embryo

In botany, a seed plant _embryo_ is part of a seed, consisting of precursor
tissues for the leaves, stem (see **hypocotyl** ), and root (see **radicle**
), as well as one or more **cotyledons**. Once the embryo begins to
germinate—grow out from the seed—it is called a **seedling** (plantlet).

Bryophytes and ferns also produce an embryo, but do not produce seeds. In
these plants, the embryo begins its existence attached to the inside of the
archegonium on a parental gametophyte from which the egg cell was generated.
The inner wall of the archegonium lies in close contact with the "foot" of the
developing embryo; this "foot" consists of a bulbous mass of cells at the base
of the embryo which may receive nutrition from its parent gametophyte. The
structure and development of the rest of the embryo varies by group of plants.
As the embryo has expanded beyond the enclosing archegonium, it is no longer
termed an embryo.

## Research and technology[edit]

Embryos are used in various fields of research and in techniques of assisted
reproductive technology. An egg may be fertilized in vitro and the resulting
embryo may be frozen for later use. The potential of embryonic stem cell
research, reproductive cloning, and germline engineering are currently being
explored. Prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation diagnosis enables testing
embryos for diseases or conditions.

Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources is a practice in which animal
germplasms, such as embryos are collected and stored at low temperatures with
the intent of conserving the genetic material.

The embryos of _Arabidopsis thaliana_ have been used as a model to understand
gene activation, patterning, and organogenesis of seed plants.[6]

In regards to research using human embryos, the ethics and legalities of this
application continue to be debated.[7][8][9]

Researchers from MERLN Institute and the Hubrecht Institute in the Netherlands
managed to grow samples of synthetic rodent embryoids, combining certain types
of stem cells. This method may assist scientists to understand the very first
moments of the process of the birth of a new life, which, in turn, can lead to
the emergence of new effective methods to combat infertility and other genetic
diseases.[10]

### Fossilized embryos[edit]

Main article: Fossil embryos

Fossilized animal embryos are known from the Precambrian, and are found in
great numbers during the Cambrian period. Even fossilized dinosaur embryos
have been discovered.[11]

## Miscarriage and abortion[edit]

See also: Miscarriage and Abortion

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0b/Human_Embryo_-

_Approximately_8_weeks_estimated_gestational_age.jpg/220px-Human_Embryo_-

_Approximately_8_weeks_estimated_gestational_age.jpg)

A complete spontaneous abortion at about 6 weeks from conception, i.e. 8 weeks
from LMP

Some embryos do not survive to the next stage of development. When this
happens naturally, it is called spontaneous abortion or miscarriage.[12] There
are many reasons why this may occur. The most common natural cause of
miscarriage is chromosomal abnormality in animals[13] or genetic load in
plants.[14]

In species which produce multiple embryos at the same time, miscarriage or
abortion of some embryos can provide the remaining embryos with a greater
share of maternal resources. This can also disturb the pregnancy, causing harm
to the second embryo. Genetic strains which miscarry their embryos are the
source of commercial seedless fruits.

Abortion is the process of artificially (non-naturally) removing the embryo
through deliberate pharmaceutical or surgical methods.

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * In vitro fertilisation
                      * Plant embryogenesis
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Prenatal development
                      * Proembryo
                

## Notes[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** "embryo". _Mayo_. Archived from the original on 20 February 2016. Retrieved  21 February 2016.
                      2. **^** ἔμβρυον Archived 2013-05-31 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, _A Greek-English Lexicon_ , on Perseus
                      3. **^** ἔμβρυος Archived 2013-05-31 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, _A Greek-English Lexicon_ , on Perseus
                      4. **^** ἐν Archived 2013-05-31 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, _A Greek-English Lexicon_ , on Perseus
                      5. **^** βρύω Archived 2013-05-31 at the Wayback Machine, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, _A Greek-English Lexicon_ , on Perseus
                      6. **^** Boscá, S; Knauer, S; Laux, T (2011). "Embryonic development in Arabidopsis thaliana: from the zygote division to the shoot meristem". _Frontiers in Plant Science_. **2** : 93. doi:10.3389/fpls.2011.00093. PMC 3355580. PMID 22639618.
                      7. **^** Freedman, Jeri. "America Debates Stem Cell Research." New York, NY: The Rosen Publishing Group, 2008.
                      8. **^** Sandel, Michael J. "The Case Against Perfection." Michael J. Sandel, 2007.
                      9. **^** Zavos, Panayiotis. "Reproductive Cloning is Moral." Ed. James Woodward. The Ethics of Human Cloning: At Issue. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven, 2005. 14–24.
                      10. **^** "Scientists grow synthetic mouse embryos from stem cells" Archived 2018-05-08 at the Wayback Machine New Atlas, May 4, 2018
                      11. **^** Morelle, Rebecca. "Dinosaur embryo fossils reveal life inside the egg". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 8 August 2015.
                      12. **^** miscarriage "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-05-12. Retrieved 2016-05-15.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
                      13. **^** Conrad Stöppler, Melissa. Shiel Jr., William C. (ed.). "Miscarriage (Spontaneous Abortion)". _MedicineNet.com_. Archived from the original on 2004-08-29. Retrieved  2009-04-07.
                      14. **^** Kärkkäinen, Katri; Savolainen, Outi; Koski, Veikko (1999). "Why do plants abort so many developing seeds: bad offspring or bad maternal genotypes?". _Evolutionary Ecology_. **13** (3): 305–317. doi:10.1023/A:1006746900736.
                

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to
_**Embryology**_.  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Embryo**_  
---|---  
* UNSW Embryology - Educational website * A Comparative Embryology Gallery * 4-H Embryology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Extension in Lancaster County * Video with embryo of a small-spotted catshark inside the egg on YouTube Preceded by  
Zygote | **Animal development**  
Embryo | Succeeded by  
Fetus, Hatchling, Larva  
---|---|--- 
                
                                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Botany

* * *

History of botany

Subdisciplines|

                
                                      * Plant systematics
                      * Ethnobotany
                      * Paleobotany
                      * Plant anatomy
                      * Plant ecology
                      * Phytogeography
                        * Geobotany
                        * Flora
                      * Phytochemistry
                      * Plant pathology
                      * Bryology
                      * Phycology
                      * Floristics
                      * Dendrology
                

Plant groups|

                
                                      * Algae
                      * Archaeplastida
                      * Bryophyte
                      * Non-vascular plants
                      * Vascular plants
                      * Spermatophytes
                      * Pteridophyte
                      * Gymnosperm
                      * Angiosperm
                

Plant morphology  
(glossary)

|

| Plant cells|

                
                                      * Cell wall
                      * Phragmoplast
                      * Plastid
                      * Plasmodesma
                      * Vacuole
                

---|---  
Tissues|

                
                                      * Meristem
                      * Vascular tissue
                        * Vascular bundle
                      * Ground tissue
                        * Mesophyll
                      * Cork
                      * Wood
                      * Storage organs
                

Vegetative|

                
                                      * Root
                      * Rhizoid
                      * Bulb
                      * Rhizome
                      * Shoot
                        * Stem
                        * Leaf
                          * Petiole
                          * Cataphyll
                        * Bud
                        * Sessility
                

Reproductive  
(Flower)|

                
                                      * Flower development
                      * Inflorescence
                        * Umbel
                        * Raceme
                        * Bract
                        * Pedicellate
                      * Flower
                        * Whorl
                        * Floral symmetry
                        * Floral diagram
                        * Floral formula
                      * Receptacle
                      * Hypanthium (Floral cup)
                      * Perianth
                        * Tepal
                        * Petal
                        * Sepal
                      * Sporophyll
                      * Gynoecium
                        * Ovary
                          * Ovule
                        * Stigma
                      * Archegonium
                      * Androecium
                        * Stamen
                        * Staminode
                        * Pollen
                        * Tapetum
                      * Gynandrium
                      * Gametophyte
                      * Sporophyte
                      * Plant embryo
                      * Fruit
                        * Fruit anatomy
                        * Berry
                        * Capsule
                        * Seed
                          * Seed dispersal
                          * Endosperm
                

Surface structures|

                
                                      * Epicuticular wax
                      * Plant cuticle
                      * Epidermis
                      * Stoma
                      * Nectary
                      * Trichome
                      * Prickle
                
                      * Plant physiology
                      * Materials
                

|

                
                                      * Nutrition
                      * Photosynthesis
                        * Chlorophyll
                      * Plant hormone
                      * Transpiration
                      * Turgor pressure
                      * Bulk flow
                      * Aleurone
                      * Phytomelanin
                      * Sugar
                      * Sap
                      * Starch
                      * Cellulose
                

Plant growth and habit|

                
                                      * Secondary growth
                      * Woody plants
                      * Herbaceous plants
                      * Habit
                        * Vines
                          * Lianas
                        * Shrubs
                          * Subshrubs
                        * Trees
                        * Succulent plants
                

Reproduction

                
                                      * Evolution
                      * Ecology
                

|

                
                                      * Alternation of generations
                      * Sporangium
                        * Spore
                        * Microsporangia
                          * Microspore
                        * Megasporangium
                          * Megaspore
                      * Pollination
                        * Artificial
                        * Pollinators
                        * Pollen tube
                        * Self
                      * Double fertilization
                      * Germination
                      * Evolutionary development
                      * Evolutionary history
                        * timeline
                

Plant taxonomy|

                
                                      * History of plant systematics
                      * Herbarium
                      * Biological classification
                      * Botanical nomenclature
                        * Botanical name
                        * Correct name
                        * Author citation
                        * International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN)
                        * International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP)
                      * Taxonomic rank
                      * International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
                      * Plant taxonomy systems
                      * Cultivated plant taxonomy
                        * Citrus taxonomy
                        * cultigen
                          * cultivar
                          * Group
                          * grex
                

Practice|

                
                                      * Agronomy
                      * Floriculture
                      * Forestry
                      * Horticulture
                
                      * Lists
                      * Related topics
                

|

                
                                      * Botanical terms
                      * Botanists
                        * by author abbreviation
                      * Botanical expedition
                
                      * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png)**Category**
                      * ![Rose Amber Flush 20070601.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/Rose_Amber_Flush_20070601.jpg/16px-Rose_Amber_Flush_20070601.jpg) **Portal**
                      * ![WikiProject](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/People_icon.svg/16px-People_icon.svg.png)**WikiProject**
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Human embryogenesis in the first three weeks

* * *

Week 1|

                
                                      * Fertilization
                      * Oocyte activation
                      * Zygote
                      * Cleavage
                      * Blastomere
                      * Morula
                      * Blastocoele
                      * Blastocyst
                      * Inner cell mass
                      * Trophoblast
                

Week 2  
(Bilaminar)|

                
                                      * Hypoblast
                      * Epiblast
                

Week 3  
(Trilaminar)|

| Germ layers|

                
                                      * Archenteron/Primitive streak
                        * Primitive pit
                        * Primitive knot/Blastopore
                        * Primitive groove
                      * Gastrula
                        * Gastrulation
                      * Regional specification
                      * Embryonic disc
                

---|---  
Ectoderm|

                
                                      * Surface ectoderm
                      * Neuroectoderm
                      * Somatopleuric mesenchyme
                      * Neurulation
                      * Neural crest
                

Endoderm|

                
                                      * Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme
                

Mesoderm|

                
                                      * Axial mesoderm
                      * Paraxial
                        * Somite
                        * Somitomere
                      * Intermediate
                      * Lateral plate
                        * Intraembryonic coelom
                        * Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme
                        * Somatopleuric mesenchyme
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Development of the human body

* * *

Before birth|

                
                                      * Development
                      * Embryo
                      * Fetus
                      * Gestational age
                

Birth and after|

                
                                      * Birth
                      * Child development
                        * stages
                        * Puberty
                      * Adult development
                      * Ageing
                      * Senescence
                      * Death
                

Phases|

                
                                      * Infant
                      * Toddler
                      * Early childhood
                      * Childhood
                        * Child
                      * Preadolescence
                      * Adolescence
                      * Adulthood
                      * Middle age
                      * Old age
                

Social and legal|

                
                                      * Minor
                      * Age of majority
                

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

                
                                      * GND: 4014555-4
                      * TE: E1.0.2.6.4.0.8
                

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Embryo&oldid=898870198"

Categories:

                
                                      * Embryology
                      * Developmental biology
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Webarchive template wayback links
                      * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
                      * Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2007
                      * Commons category link is locally defined
                      * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
                      * Wikipedia articles with TE identifiers
                      * Articles containing video clips
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                      * Wikiquote
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Afrikaans
                      * العربية
                      * ܐܪܡܝܐ
                      * Asturianu
                      * Avañe'ẽ
                      * Azərbaycanca
                      * Bân-lâm-gú
                      * Беларуская
                      * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
                      * Български
                      * Bosanski
                      * Català
                      * Cebuano
                      * Čeština
                      * Dansk
                      * Deutsch
                      * Eesti
                      * Ελληνικά
                      * Español
                      * Esperanto
                      * Euskara
                      * فارسی
                      * Français
                      * Gaeilge
                      * Galego
                      * 한국어
                      * Հայերեն
                      * हिन्दी
                      * Hrvatski
                      * Ido
                      * Bahasa Indonesia
                      * Íslenska
                      * Italiano
                      * Jawa
                      * ಕನ್ನಡ
                      * ქართული
                      * Қазақша
                      * Kreyòl ayisyen
                      * Кыргызча
                      * Latina
                      * Latviešu
                      * Lëtzebuergesch
                      * Lietuvių
                      * Magyar
                      * മലയാളം
                      * मराठी
                      * Bahasa Melayu
                      * Nederlands
                      * 日本語
                      * Norsk
                      * Occitan
                      * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
                      * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
                      * Piemontèis
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Română
                      * Русский
                      * Scots
                      * Simple English
                      * Slovenčina
                      * Slovenščina
                      * کوردی
                      * Српски / srpski
                      * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                      * Basa Sunda
                      * Suomi
                      * Svenska
                      * Tagalog
                      * தமிழ்
                      * ไทย
                      * Тоҷикӣ
                      * Türkçe
                      * Українська
                      * اردو
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * Winaray
                      * 吴语
                      * 粵語
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 26 May 2019, at 13:01 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

