

DONATE

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * ![Bubble](/assets/bubble-c81ac2a45d4e9a924cdb4026b07d2b47c0e9a4f212cc50eb0c27d2707af7b3eb.png) Community 
                      * |
                      * Create an Account
                      * |
                      * Log In
                

Breastcancer.org ![Breastcancer.org](/assets/logo-bco-

print-64e3a3bd70d403bcddfd7c365c31800f692ef8d6d545548c978b812b69ed1e22.png)

                
                                      * About Us
                      * |
                      * Podcast
                      * |
                      * En Español
                      * Donate
                

Menu

                
                                      * Home
                      * Symptoms & Diagnosis
                      * Treatment & Side Effects
                      * Day-to-Day Matters
                      * Lower Your Risk
                      * Get Involved
                

Search Breastcancer.org

Home -> Research News -> If Genomic Analysis Is Done, Genes of Both Cancer
Tumor and Normal Tissue Need to Be Analyzed

# If Genomic Analysis Is Done, Genes of Both Cancer Tumor and Normal Tissue

Need to Be Analyzed

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

__Save as Favorite

__Sign in to receive recommendations (Learn more)

                
                                      * **Topic:** Screening and Testing
                      * **Tags:** Genetic Testing
                

A genome is a living thing's complete set of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid),
including all of its genes. Genes are particles in cells, contained in
chromosomes, and made of DNA. DNA contains the instructions for building
proteins. And proteins control the structure and function of all the cells
that make up your body.

DNA can change or be damaged over time. These abnormal changes in DNA are
called genetic mutations. Some DNA changes are harmless, but others can cause
disease. Cancer cells are "born" when abnormal changes in DNA tell cells to
grow faster and behave differently than they should. As these cancer cells
multiply to form a tumor, they continue to change - becoming more and more
different from each other. As a cancer grows, new and different types of
breast cancer cells are created within that same cancer. The mixture of cells
that builds up over time becomes more and more complex. So even though every
cell of a cancer is related to the same original "parent" cell, all the cells
that make up a cancer are not the same. The idea that different kinds of cells
make up one cancer is called "tumor heterogeneity."

By the time a breast cancer tumor is 1 centimeter (less than half an inch) in
size, the millions of cells that make up the lump are very different from each
other. And each cancer has its own genetic identity, or fingerprint, created
by the DNA in its cells. So two people with breast cancer who are the same
age, height, weight, and ethnicity, and who have similar medical histories,
almost surely have two very different cancers. The only thing the cancers have
in common is that they started from a breast tissue cell.

Genomic analysis is a relatively new way to look for unique genetic mutations
in cancer tumors. Genomic analysis means researchers map out (called
sequencing) the genome of a cancer tumor to look for mutations that may allow
a cancer to be treated with a medicine that specifically targets that mutation
- a targeted therapy medicine.

For example, some breast cancers are HER2-positive. This is because of a
mutation that makes too many copies of the _HER2_ gene. The targeted therapy
Herceptin (chemical name: trastuzumab) works by attaching to HER2 receptors
and blocking them from receiving growth signals. Herceptin is not effective on
HER2-negative cancers - cancers that don't have that particular mutation.

A study strongly suggests that cancer tumor genomes should be compared to
genomes from noncancerous tissue from the patient so doctors can be sure any
mutations found are unique to the cancer.

The study was published in the April 15, 2015 issue of _Science Translational
Medicine_. Read the abstract of "Personalized genomic analyses for cancer
mutation discovery and interpretation."

"Increasingly, hospitals and companies are beginning to sequence patients'
tumors in an attempt to personalize therapy," said Victor Velculescu, M.D.,
Ph.D., professor of oncology and pathology and co-director of the Cancer
Biology Program at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, who was
the lead author of the study. "However, many are not sequencing each person's
normal tissue to filter out non-cancer-related changes and to really
understand what is occurring in the tumor."

In the study, the researchers analyzed the genomes of both cancer tumor and
normal tissue from 815 people with 15 different types of cancer. When they
looked only at genomic results from the cancer tumors, they found a number of
mutations. But when they compared the genomic results from the cancer tumors
to the genomic results from the normal tissue, they found that many of the
mutations were also in the normal tissue. This means that these mutations are
not suitable for targeted therapy treatment.

Not all genetic mutations in a cancer tumor are directly related to the
cancer. Some mutations are what researchers call germline changes. Germline
mutations are changes in genes inherited from your parents and are in all your
DNA (your entire genome). These germline changes differ from person to person
and are part of what makes each person unique. Other genetic mutations aren't
inherited and can happen during your life. Some mutations happen during cell
division, when DNA gets duplicated. Other mutations are caused when DNA gets
damaged by environmental factors, including UV radiation and chemicals.

Most genetic mutations aren't harmful, but some can cause diseases, such as
cancer.

The researchers said that only by comparing the genome of a person's cancer
tumor with the person's normal tissue can doctors know which genetic changes
are more likely to be cancer-related as well as which targeted therapies are
likely to work.

Right now, genomic analysis isn't commonly done on all cancer tumors. But as
the technology becomes more available and less expensive, it's likely that
more doctors will use it. Stay tuned to Breastcancer.org for the latest news
on genomic sequencing and how it may affect breast cancer treatment decisions.

* * *

Was this article helpful? Yes / No

Was this article helpful?

* * *

* * *

_Published on April 17, 2015 at 7:43 AM_

## Email Updates

Stay informed about current research, online events, and more.

Read our privacy policy

![Supportpeopleyellow banner

mini](/system/settings/donate_banner_ens/000/000/001/sized/SupportPeopleYELLOW_Banner_Mini.jpg?1546357373)

Back to Top

Breastcancer.org is a registered 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization dedicated to
providing information and community to those touched by this disease.
Breastcancer.org’s EIN is 23-3082851. Learn more about our commitment to
providing complete, accurate, and private breast cancer information.

Breastcancer.org 120 East Lancaster Avenue, Suite 201 Ardmore, PA 19003  
(C) 2019 Breastcancer.org - All rights reserved.

![](/assets/charity-navigator.png)

Learn more about our commitment to your privacy.

                
                                      *  
                      *  
                      *
                

* * *
                
                                      * FAQ
                      * Site Map
                      * About Us
                      * Donate
                      * Policies
                      * Privacy Statement
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Pictures of Breast Cancer
                      * Press Room
                      * Contact Us
                      * About Us
                      * Press Room
                      * Policies
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

