

![Page protected with pending

changes](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/b7/Pending-protection-

shackle.svg/20px-Pending-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# One-child policy

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

![Changes must be reviewed before being displayed on this

page.](/w/extensions/FlaggedRevs/frontend/modules/img/doc-

magnify.png)![show/hide

details](/w/extensions/FlaggedRevs/frontend/modules/img/arrow-down.png)

This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on _1 June 2019_.

Jump to navigation Jump to search

population control policy which was used by the People's Republic of China

* * *

One-child policy  
![Jiayuguan-066.JPG](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/32/Jiayuguan-066.JPG/220px-

Jiayuguan-066.JPG)

A Chinese mother and son at a market in Jiayuguan, Gansu

Simplified Chinese| 独生子女政策  
Traditional Chinese| 獨生子女政策  
| Transcriptions

* * *

Standard Mandarin  
Hanyu Pinyin| Dúshēng zǐnǚ zhèngcè

China's **one-child policy** was part of a birth planning program designed to
control the size of its population. Distinct from the family planning policies
of most other countries (which focus on providing contraceptive options to
help women have the number of children they want), it set a limit on the
number of children parents could have, the world's most extreme example of
population planning. It was introduced in 1979 (after a decade-long two-child
policy),[1] modified in the mid 1980s to allow rural parents a second child if
the first was a daughter, and then lasted three more decades before being
eliminated at the end of 2015. The policy also allowed exceptions for some
other groups, including ethnic minorities. The term **one-child policy** is
thus a misnomer, because for nearly 30 of the 36 years that it existed
(1979–2015) about half of all parents in China were allowed to have a second
child.

Provincial governments could, and did, require the use of contraception,
sterilizations and abortions to ensure compliance, and imposed enormous fines
for violations. Local and national governments created commissions to raise
awareness and carry out registration and inspection work. China also rewards
families with only one child. From 1982 onwards, in accordance with the
instructions on further family planning issued by the CPC central committee
and the state council in that year, regulations awarded 5 yuan per month for
only children. Parents who had one child would also get a “one-child glory
certificate”.[2]

According to the Chinese government, 400 million births were prevented,
starting from 1970, a decade before the start of the one child policy. Some
scholars have disputed this claim, with Martin King Whyte and Wang _et al_
contending that the policy had little effect on population growth or the size
of the total population.[3][4][5] China has been compared to countries with
similar socioeconomic development like Thailand and Iran, along with the
Indian states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, which achieved similar declines of
fertility without a one-child policy.[6] However, a recent demographic study
challenged these scholars by showing that China's low fertility was achieved
two or three decades earlier than would be expected given its level of
development, and that more than 500 million births were prevented between 1970
and 2015 (a calculation based on an alternative model of fertility decline
proposed by the scholars themselves),[4] some 400 million of which may have
been due to one-child restrictions.[7] In addition, by 2060 China's birth
planning policies may have averted as many as 1 billion people in China when
one adds in all the eliminated descendants of the births originally averted by
the policies.[8][9] Although 76% of Chinese people said that they supported
the policy in a 2008 survey, it was controversial outside of China.[10]

Effective from January 2016, the national birth planning policy became a
universal two-child policy that allowed each couple to have two children.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ca/ChinaDemography_since1950.svg/220px-

ChinaDemography_since1950.svg.png)

China's population since 1950

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Background
                      * 2 History
                        * 2.1 Enforcement
                          * 2.1.1 Financial
                          * 2.1.2 Mandatory contraception and sterilization
                        * 2.2 Relaxation
                        * 2.3 Abolition
                      * 3 Administration
                      * 4 Effects
                        * 4.1 Fertility reduction: Debates over the roles of policy vs. socio-economic change
                        * 4.2 Disparity in sex ratio at birth
                        * 4.3 Education
                        * 4.4 Adoption and abandonment
                        * 4.5 Twins
                        * 4.6 Quality of life for women
                        * 4.7 Healthcare improvements
                        * 4.8 "Four-two-one" problem
                        * 4.9 Unregistered children
                        * 4.10 Potential social problems
                        * 4.11 Birth tourism
                        * 4.12 Sex-selective abortion
                      * 5 Criticism
                        * 5.1 Statement of the effect of the policy on birth reduction
                        * 5.2 Unequal enforcement
                        * 5.3 Human rights violations
                        * 5.4 Effect on infanticide rates
                      * 6 In popular culture
                      * 7 See also
                      * 8 References
                      * 9 Further reading
                      * 10 External links
                

## Background[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1e/Birth_rate_in_China.svg/220px-

Birth_rate_in_China.svg.png)

Birth rate in China

During the period of Mao Zedong's leadership in China, the birth rate fell
from 37 per thousand to 20 per thousand.[11] Infant mortality declined from
227 per thousand births in 1949 to 53 per thousand in 1981, and life
expectancy dramatically increased from around 35 years in 1948 to 66 years in
1976.[11][12] Until the 1960s, the government encouraged families to have as
many children as possible[13] because of Mao's belief that population growth
empowered the country, preventing the emergence of family planning programs
earlier in China's development.[14] The population grew from around 540
million in 1949 to 940 million in 1976.[15] Beginning in 1970, citizens were
encouraged to marry at later ages and have only two children.[1]

Although the fertility rate began to decline, the Chinese government observed
the global debate over a possible overpopulation catastrophe suggested by
organizations such as Club of Rome and Sierra Club. It thus began to encourage
one-child families in 1978, and then announced in 1979 its intention to
advocate for one-child families. In 1980, the central government organized a
meeting in Chengdu to discuss the speed and scope of one-child
restrictions.[1]

One participant at the Chengdu meeting had read two influential books about
population concerns, _The Limits to Growth_ and _A Blueprint for Survival_
while visiting Europe in 1979. That official, Song Jian, along with several
associates, determined that the ideal population of China was 700 million, and
that a universal one-child policy for all would be required to meet that
goal.[16] Moreover, Song and his group showed that if fertility rates remained
constant at 3 births per woman, China's population would surpass 3 billion by
2060 and 4 billion by 2080.[1] In spite of some criticism inside the party,
the plan (also referred to as the Family Planning Policy[17]) was formally
implemented as a temporary measure on 18 September 1980.[18][19][20][21] The
plan called for families to have one child each in order to curb a then-
surging population and alleviate social, economic, and environmental problems
in China.[22][23]

Although a recent and often-repeated interpretation by Greenhalgh claims that
Song Jian was the central architect of the one-child policy and that he
"hijacked" the population policymaking process,[24] that claim has been
refuted by several leading scholars, including Liang Zhongtang, a leading
internal critic of one-child restrictions and an eye-witness at the
discussions in Chengdu.[25] In the words of Wang et al., "the idea of the one-
child policy came from leaders within the Party, not from scientists who
offered evidence to support it”[3] Central officials had already decided in
1979 to advocate for one-child restrictions before knowing of Song's work and,
upon learning of his work in 1980, already seemed sympathetic to his
position.[26] Moreover, even if Song's work convinced them to proceed with
universal one-child restrictions in 1980, the policy was loosened to a
"1.5"-child policy just five years later, and it is that policy which has been
misnomered since as the "one-child policy." Thus, it is misleading to suggest
that Song Jian was either the inventor or architect of the policy.

## History[edit]

The one-child policy was originally designed to be a "One-Generation
Policy."[27] It was enforced at the provincial level and enforcement varied;
some provinces had more relaxed restrictions. The one-child limit was most
strictly enforced in densely populated urban areas.[28]

Beginning in 1980, the official policy granted local officials the flexibility
to make exceptions and allow second children in the case of "practical
difficulties" (such as cases in which the father was a disabled serviceman) or
when both parents were single children,[29] and some provinces had other
exemptions worked into their policies as well. In most areas, families were
allowed to apply to have a second child if their first-born was a
daughter.[30][31] Furthermore, families with children with disabilities have
different policies and families whose first child suffers from physical
disability, mental illness, or intellectual disability were allowed to have
more children.[32] However, second children were sometimes subject to birth
spacing (usually 3 or 4 years). Children born in overseas countries were not
counted under the policy if they did not obtain Chinese citizenship. Chinese
citizens returning from abroad were allowed to have a second child.[33]
Sichuan province allowed exemptions for couples of certain backgrounds.[34] By
one estimate there were at least 22 ways in which parents could qualify for
exceptions to the law towards the end of the one-child policy's existence.[35]
As of 2007, only 36% of the population were subjected to a strict one-child
limit. 53% were permitted to have a second child if their first was a
daughter; 9.6% of Chinese couples were permitted two children regardless of
their gender; and 1.6% – mainly Tibetans – had no limit at all.[36]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/db/Danshan_Nongguang_Village_Bulletin_board.jpg/220px-

Danshan_Nongguang_Village_Bulletin_board.jpg)

The Danshan, Sichuan Province Nongchang Village people Public Affairs Bulletin
Board in September 2005 noted that RMB 25,000 in social compensation fees were
owed in 2005. Thus far 11,500 RMB had been collected, so another 13,500 RMB
had to be collected.

Following the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, a new exception to the regulations was
announced in Sichuan for parents who had lost children in the
earthquake.[37][38] Similar exceptions had previously been made for parents of
severely disabled or deceased children.[39] People have also tried to evade
the policy by giving birth to a second child in Hong Kong, but at least for
Guangdong residents, the one-child policy was also enforced if the birth was
given in Hong Kong or abroad.[40]

In accordance with China's affirmative action policies towards ethnic
minorities, all non-Han ethnic groups are subjected to different laws and were
usually allowed to have two children in urban areas, and three or four in
rural areas. Han Chinese living in rural towns were also permitted to have two
children.[41] Because of couples such as these, as well as who simply pay a
fine (or "social maintenance fee") to have more children,[42] the overall
fertility rate of mainland China was close to 1.4 children per woman as of
2011[update].[43]

On 6 January 2010, the former national population and family planning
commission issued the "national population development" 12th five-year
plan.[44]

### Enforcement[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e4/China_1982_happy_family_with_one_child.jpg/220px-

China_1982_happy_family_with_one_child.jpg)

Chinese One-Child Policy propaganda from 1982

#### Financial[edit]

The Family Planning Policy was enforced through a financial penalty in the
form of the "social child-raising fee", sometimes called a "family planning
fine" in the West, which was collected as a fraction of either the annual
disposable income of city dwellers or of the annual cash income of peasants,
in the year of the child's birth.[45] For instance, in Guangdong, the fee was
between 3 and 6 annual incomes for incomes below the per capita income of the
district, plus 1 to 2 times the annual income exceeding the average. The
family was required to pay the fine.[46]

#### Mandatory contraception and sterilization[edit]

As part of the policy, women were required to have a contraceptive
intrauterine device (IUD) surgically installed after having a first child, and
to be sterilized by tubal ligation after having a second child. From 1980 to
2014, 324 million Chinese women were fitted with IUDs in this way and 108
million were sterilized. Women who refused these procedures – which many
resented – could lose their government employment and their children could
lose access to education or health services. The IUDs installed in this way
were modified such that they could not be removed manually, but only through
surgery.

In 2016, following the abolition of the one-child policy, the Chinese
government announced that IUD removals would now be paid for by the
government.[47]

### Relaxation[edit]

In 2013, Deputy Director Wang Peian of the National Health and Family Planning
Commission said that "China's population will not grow substantially in the
short term".[48] A survey by the commission found that only about half of
eligible couples wish to have two children, mostly because of the cost of
living impact of a second child.[49]

In November 2013, following the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of
the Chinese Communist Party, China announced the decision to relax the one-
child policy. Under the new policy, families could have two children if one
parent, rather than both parents, was an only child.[50][51] This mainly
applied to urban couples, since there were very few rural only children due to
long-standing exceptions to the policy for rural couples.[52] Zhejiang, one of
the most affluent provinces, became the first area to implement this "relaxed
policy" in January 2014,[53] and 29 out of the 31 provinces had implemented it
by July 2014,[54] with the exceptions of Xinjiang and Tibet. Under this
policy, approximately 11 million couples in China are allowed to have a second
child; however, only "nearly one million" couples applied to have a second
child in 2014,[55] less than half the expected number of 2 million per
year.[54] By May 2014, 241,000 out of 271,000 applications had been approved.
Officials of China's National Health and Family Planning Commission claimed
that this outcome was expected, and that "second-child policy" would continue
progressing with a good start.[56]

In 2016, 433 births and 211 deaths were recorded in Wulipu, Hubei. The birth
rate was 8.9% and death rate was 4.3% resulting in a natural population
increase of 4.6%.[57] In the results of a separate survey published by the
Shayang County government, Wulipu's population had increased from 48,044 to
48,132 during a survey period. 424 children were born during the survey period
resulting in a birth rate of 8.82%. During the same period, 63 people died,
resulting in death rate of 1.31%. Of the births in the survey, 406 (95.75%)
were in compliance with the family planning policy of China. 312 (73.58%) of
the births were the firstborn in the family. (All of these births were in
compliance with the family planning policy of China.) Among the firstborn
children, 157 were female. 107 (25.24%) of the births were the second-born
child in the family. 90 of these births were in compliance with the family
planning policy of China. Among the second-born children, 47 were female. Five
(1.18%) of the births surveyed were neither the firstborn nor second-born
child in the family. Four of these births were in compliance with the family
planning policy of China. Among the children born who were neither firstborn
nor second-born, two were female.[58]

### Abolition[edit]

See also: Two-child policy § China

In October 2015, the Chinese news agency Xinhua announced plans of the
government to abolish the one-child policy, now allowing all families to have
two children, citing from a communiqué issued by the Communist Party "to
improve the balanced development of population" - an apparent reference to the
country's female-to-male sex ratio - and to deal with an aging population
according to the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation.[22][59][60][61][62][63][64][65] The new law took effect on 1
January 2016 after it was passed in the standing committee of the National
People's Congress on 27 December 2015.[66][67]

The rationale for the abolition was summarized by former _Wall Street Journal_
reporter Mei Fong: "The reason China is doing this right now is because they
have too many men, too many old people, and too few young people. They have
this huge crushing demographic crisis as a result of the one-child policy. And
if people don't start having more children, they're going to have a vastly
diminished workforce to support a huge aging population."[68] China's ratio is
about five working adults to one retiree; the huge retiree community must be
supported, and that will dampen future growth, according to Fong.

Since the citizens of China are living longer and having fewer children, the
growth of the population imbalance is expected to continue, as reported by the
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation which referred to a United Nations
projections forecast that "China will lose 67 million working-age people by
2030, while simultaneously doubling the number of elderly. That could put
immense pressure on the economy and government resources."[22] The longer term
outlook is also pessimistic, based on an estimate by the Chinese Academy of
Social Sciences, revealed by Cai Fang, deputy director. "By 2050, one-third of
the country will be aged 60 years or older, and there will be fewer workers
supporting each retired person."[69]

Although many critics of China's reproductive restrictions approve of the
policy's abolition, Amnesty International said that the move to the two-child
policy would not end forced sterilizations, forced abortions, or government
control over birth permits.[70][71] Others also stated that the abolition is
not a sign of the relaxation of authoritarian control in China. A reporter for
CNN said, "It was not a sign that the party will suddenly start respecting
personal freedoms more than it has in the past. No, this is a case of the
party adjusting policy to conditions. ... The new policy, raising the limit to
two children per couple, preserves the state's role."[72][73]

The abolition may not achieve a significant benefit, as the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation analysis indicated: "Repealing the one-child policy
may not spur a huge baby boom, however, in part because fertility rates are
believed to be declining even without the policy's enforcement. Previous
easings of the one-child policy have spurred fewer births than expected, and
many people among China's younger generations see smaller family sizes as
ideal."[22] The CNN reporter adds that China's new prosperity is also a factor
in the declining[69] birth rate, saying, "Couples naturally decide to have
fewer children as they move from the fields into the cities, become more
educated, and when women establish careers outside the home."[72]

The Chinese government had expected the abolishing of the one-child rule would
lead to an increase in births to about 21.9 million births in 2018. The actual
number of births was 15.2 million - the lowest birth rate since 1961.[74]

## Administration[edit]

The one-child policy was managed by the National Population and Family
Planning Commission under the central government since 1981. The Ministry of
Health of the People's Republic of China and the National Health and Family
Planning Commission were made defunct and a new single agency National Health
and Family Planning Commission took over national health and family planning
policies in 2013. The agency reports to the State Council.

The policy was enforced at the provincial level through fines that were
imposed based on the income of the family and other factors. "Population and
Family Planning Commissions" existed at every level of government to raise
awareness and carry out registration and inspection work.[75]

## Effects[edit]

### Fertility reduction: Debates over the roles of policy vs. socio-economic

change[edit]

Further information: Demographics of China and Demographic transition

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3e/China_Pop_Pyramid_Forecast.gif)

_The progression of China'spopulation pyramid_ , International Futures.

The fertility rate in China continued its fall from 2.8 births per woman in
1979 (already a sharp reduction from more than five births per woman in the
early 1970s) to 1.5 by the mid 1990s. Some scholars claim that this decline is
similar to that observed in other places that had no one-child restrictions,
such as Thailand as well as Indian states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, a claim
designed to support the argument that China's fertility might have fallen to
such levels anyway without draconian fertility restrictions.[3][76][6][77]

According to a 2017 study in the Journal of Economic Perspectives, "the one-
child policy accelerated the already-occurring drop in fertility for a few
years, but in the longer term, economic development played a more fundamental
role in leading to and maintaining China's low fertility level.".[78] However,
a more recent study found that China's fertility decline to very low levels by
the mid 1990s was far more impressive given its lower level of socio-economic
development at that time;[9] even after taking rapid economic development into
account, China's fertility restrictions likely averted over 500 million births
between 1970 and 2015, with the portion caused by one-child restrictions
possibly totaling 400 million.[7] Fertility restrictions also had other
unintended consequences, such as a deficit of 40 million female babies. Most
of this deficit was due to sex-selective abortion as well as the 1.5 child
stopping rule, which required rural parents to stop childbearing if their
first born was a son.[79] Another consequence was the acceleration of the
aging of China's population.[80][81]

### Disparity in sex ratio at birth[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ae/Sex_ratio_at_birth_in_mainland_China.png/220px-

Sex_ratio_at_birth_in_mainland_China.png)

The sex ratio at birth in People's Republic of China, males per 100 females,
1980–2010.

Further information: Missing women and Missing women of China

The sex ratio of a newborn infant (between male and female births) in mainland
China reached 117:100, and stabilized between 2000 and 2013, about 10% higher
than the baseline, which ranges between 103:100 and 107:100. It had risen from
108:100 in 1981—at the boundary of the natural baseline—to 111:100 in
1990.[82] According to a report by the National Population and Family Planning
Commission, there will be 30 million more men than women in 2020, potentially
leading to social instability, and courtship-motivated emigration.[83]

The disparity in the gender ratio at birth increases dramatically after the
first birth, for which the ratios remained steadily within the natural
baseline over the 20 year interval between 1980 and 1999. Thus, a large
majority of couples appear to accept the outcome of the first pregnancy,
whether it is a boy or a girl. If the first child is a girl, and they are able
to have a second child, then a couple may take extraordinary steps to assure
that the second child is a boy. If a couple already has two or more boys, the
sex ratio of higher parity births swings decidedly in a feminine direction.
This demographic evidence indicates that while families highly value having
male offspring, a secondary norm of having a girl or having some balance in
the sexes of children often comes into play. Zeng 1993 reported a study based
on the 1990 census in which they found sex ratios of just 65 or 70 boys per
100 girls for births in families that already had two or more boys.[84] A
study by Anderson & Silver (1995) found a similar pattern among both Han and
non-Han nationalities in Xinjiang Province: a strong preference for girls in
high parity births in families that had already borne two or more boys.[85]
This tendency to favour girls in high parity births to couples who had already
borne sons was later also noted by Coale and Banister, who suggested as well
that once a couple had achieved its goal for the number of males, it was also
much more likely to engage in "stopping behavior", i.e., to stop having more
children.[86]

The long-term disparity has led to a significant gender imbalance or skewing
of the sex ratio. As reported by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, China
has between 32 million and 36 million more males than would be expected
naturally, and this has led to social problems. "Because of a traditional
preference for baby boys over girls, the one-child policy is often cited as
the cause of China's skewed sex ratio ... Even the government acknowledges the
problem and has expressed concern about the tens of millions of young men who
won't be able to find brides and may turn to kidnapping women, sex
trafficking, other forms of crime or social unrest."[22] The situation will
not improve in the near future. According to the Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences, there will be 24 million more men than women of marriageable age by
2020.[87]

### Education[edit]

According to a 2017 study in the Journal of Economic Perspectives, "existing
studies indicate either a modest or minimal effect of the fertility change
induced by the one-child policy on children education".[78]

### Adoption and abandonment[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4e/PRC_family_planning_don%27t_abandon_girls.jpg/220px-

PRC_family_planning_don%27t_abandon_girls.jpg)

A roadside sign in rural Sichuan: "It is forbidden to discriminate against,
mistreat or abandon baby girls."

For parents who had "unauthorized" births or who wanted a son but had a
daughter, giving up the child for adoption was a kind of strategy to avoid
penalties under one-child restrictions. In fact, "out adoption" was not
uncommon in China even before birth planning. In the 1980s, adoptions of
daughters accounted for slightly above half of the so-called "missing girls,"
as out-adopted daughters often went unreported in censuses and survey and
adoptive parents were not penalized for violating birth quotas [88] However,
in 1991, a central decree attempted to close off this loophole by raising
penalties and levying those penalties on any household that had an
"unauthorized" child, including those that had adopted children.[89] This
closing of the adoption loophole resulted in the abandonment of some two
million Chinese children (mostly daughters),[9] many of who ended up in
orphanages, some 120,000 of whom would be adopted by international parents.

The peak wave of abandonment occurred in the 1990s, with a smaller wave after
2000.[89] Around the same time, poor care and high mortality rates in some
state orphanages generated intense international pressure for reform.[90][91]

After 2005, the number of international adoptions declined, due both to
falling birth rates and the related increase in demand for adoptions by
Chinese parents themselves. In an interview with National Public Radio on 30
October 2015, Adam Pertman,[92] president and CEO of the National Center on
Adoption and Permanency, indicated that "the infant girls of yesteryear have
not been available, if you will, for five, seven years. China has been ...
trying to keep the girls within the country ... And the consequence is that,
today, rather than those young girls who used to be available – primarily
girls – today, it's older children, children with special needs, children in
sibling groups. It's very, very different."[93]

### Twins[edit]

Since there are no penalties for multiple births, it is believed that an
increasing number of couples are turning to fertility medicines to induce the
conception of twins. According to a 2006 _China Daily_ report, the number of
twins born per year was estimated to have doubled. [ _timeframe?_ ][94]

### Quality of life for women[edit]

Some sources state that the one-child policy has played a major role in
improving the quality of life for women in China.[ _citation needed_ ]
Proponents of this view hold that with the one-child policy, gender equality
started to be emphasized in China and women had the same opportunity to be
educated as men.[ _citation needed_ ] For thousands of years, girls have held
a lower status in Chinese households. However, the one-child policy's limit on
the number of children has prompted parents of women to start investing money
in their well-being. As a result of being an only child, women have increased
opportunity to receive an education, and support to get better jobs. One of
the side effects of the one-child policy is to have liberated women from heavy
duties in terms of taking care of many children and the family in the past;
instead women had a lot of spare time for themselves to pursue their career or
hobbies. The other major "side effect" of the one child policy is that the
traditional concepts of gender roles between men and women have weakened.
Being one and the only "chance" the parents have, women are expected to
compete with peer men for better educational resources or career
opportunities. Especially in cities where one-child policy was much more
regulated and enforced, expectations on women to succeed in life are no less
than on men. Recent data has shown that the proportion of women attending
college is higher than that of men. The policy also has a positive effect of
the policy fines at 10 to 19 years of age on the likelihood of completing
senior high school in women of Han ethnicity. At the same time, the one-child
policy reduces the economic burden for each family. The condition for each
family has become better. As a result, women also have much more freedom
within the family.They are supported by their family to pursue their life
achievements.[95]

### Healthcare improvements[edit]

It is reported that the focus of China on population planning helps provide a
better health service for women and a reduction in the risks of death and
injury associated with pregnancy. At family planning offices, women receive
free contraception and pre-natal classes that contributed to the policy's
success in two respects. First, the average Chinese household expends fewer
resources, both in terms of time and money, on children, which gives many
Chinese people more money with which to invest. Second, since Chinese adults
can no longer rely on children to care for them in their old age, there is an
impetus to save money for the future.[96]

### "Four-two-one" problem[edit]

![A white sign with two lines of red Chinese characters and a smaller one

beneath them on a background of white

tile](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f8/One_child_policy.jpg/220px-

One_child_policy.jpg)

A government sign in Tangshan Township: "For a prosperous, powerful nation and
a happy family, please practice family planning."

As the first generation of law-enforced only-children came of age for becoming
parents themselves, one adult child was left with having to provide support
for his or her two parents and four grandparents.[97][98] Called the "4-2-1
Problem", this leaves the older generations with increased chances of
dependency on retirement funds or charity in order to receive support. If not
for personal savings, pensions, or state welfare, most senior citizens would
be left entirely dependent upon their very small family or neighbours for
assistance. If, for any reason, the single child is unable to care for their
older adult relatives, the oldest generations would face a lack of resources
and necessities. In response to such an issue, by 2007, all provinces in the
nation except Henan had adopted a new policy allowing couples to have two
children if both parents were only children themselves;[99][ _not in citation
given_ ][100] Henan followed in 2011.[101]

### Unregistered children[edit]

Further information: Heihaizi

Heihaizi (Chinese: 黑孩子; pinyin: _hēiháizi_ ) or "black child" is a term
denoting children born outside the one-child policy, or generally children who
are not registered in the Chinese national household registration system.

Being excluded from the family register means they do not possess a Hukou,
which is "an identifying document, similar in some ways to the American social
security card."[102] In this respect they do not legally exist and as a result
cannot access most public services, such as education and health care, and do
not receive protection under the law.[103][104][105]

### Potential social problems[edit]

See also: Shidu (bereavement), a social phenomenon denoting the loss of an
only child

Some parents may over-indulge their only child. The media referred to the
indulged children in one-child families as "little emperors".[106] Since the
1990s, some people have worried that this will result in a higher tendency
toward poor social communication and cooperation skills amongst the new
generation, as they have no siblings at home. No social studies have
investigated the ratio of these so-called "over-indulged" children and to what
extent they are indulged. With the first generation of children born under the
policy (which initially became a requirement for most couples with first
children born starting in 1979 and extending into the 1980s) reaching
adulthood, such worries were reduced.[107]

However, the "little emperor syndrome" and additional expressions, describing
the generation of Chinese singletons are very abundant in the Chinese media,
Chinese academia and popular discussions. Being over-indulged, lacking self-
discipline and having no adaptive capabilities are traits that are highly
associated with Chinese singletons.[108]

Some 30 delegates called on the government in the Chinese People's Political
Consultative Conference in March 2007 to abolish the one-child rule, citing
"social problems and personality disorders in young people". One statement
read, "It is not healthy for children to play only with their parents and be
spoiled by them: it is not right to limit the number to two children per
family, either."[109] The proposal was prepared by Ye Tingfang, a professor at
the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, who suggested that the government at
least restore the previous rule that allowed couples to have up to two
children. According to a scholar, "The one-child limit is too extreme. It
violates nature's law. And in the long run, this will lead to mother nature's
revenge."[109][110]

### Birth tourism[edit]

Reports surfaced of Chinese women giving birth to their second child overseas,
a practice known as birth tourism. Many went to Hong Kong, which is exempt
from the one-child policy. Likewise, a Hong Kong passport differs from China
mainland passport by providing additional advantages. Recently though, the
Hong Kong government has drastically reduced the quota of births set for non-
local women in public hospitals. As a result, fees for delivering babies there
have surged. As further admission cuts or a total ban on non-local births in
Hong Kong are being considered, mainland agencies that arrange for expectant
mothers to give birth overseas are predicting a surge in those going to North
America.[111][ _unreliable source?_ ]

As the United States practises birthright citizenship, all children born in
the US will automatically have US citizenship. The closest US location from
China is Saipan in the Northern Mariana Islands, a US dependency in the
western Pacific Ocean that allows Chinese visitors without visa restrictions.
As of 2012, the island was experiencing an upswing in Chinese births, since
birth tourism there had become cheaper than to Hong Kong. This option is used
by relatively affluent Chinese who often have secondary motives as well,
wishing their children to be able to leave mainland China when they grow older
or bring their parents to the US. Canada, compared to US, is less achievable
as their government denies many visa requests.[112][113]

### Sex-selective abortion[edit]

Due to the preference in Rural Chinese society to give birth to a son,[114]
pre-natal sex determination and sex-selective abortions are illegal in
China.[115] Often argued as one of the key factors in the imbalanced sex-ratio
in China, as excess female infant mortality and underreporting of female
births cannot solely explain this gender disparity.[116] Researchers have
found that the gender of the firstborn child in rural parts of China impact
whether or not the mother will seek an ultrasound for the second child. 40% of
women with a firstborn son seek an ultrasound for their second pregnancy,
versus 70% of women with firstborn daughters. This clearly depicts a desire
for women to birth a son if one has not yet been birthed.[117] In response to
this, the Chinese government made sex-selective abortions illegal in
2005.[117]

## Criticism[edit]

The policy is controversial outside China for many reasons, including
accusations of human rights abuses in the implementation of the policy, as
well as concerns about negative social consequences.[118]

### Statement of the effect of the policy on birth reduction[edit]

The Chinese government, quoting Zhai Zhenwu, director of Renmin University's
School of Sociology and Population in Beijing, estimates that 400 million
births were prevented by the one-child policy as of 2011, while some
demographers challenge that number, putting the figure at perhaps half that
level, according to CNN.[119] Zhai clarified that the 400 million estimate
referred not just to the one-child policy, but includes births prevented by
predecessor policies implemented one decade before, stating that "there are
many different numbers out there but it doesn't change the basic fact that the
policy prevented a really large number of births".[120]

This claim is disputed by Wang Feng, director of the Brookings-Tsinghua Center
for Public Policy, and Cai Yong from the Carolina Population Center at
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill[120] Wang claims that "Thailand and
China have had almost identical fertility trajectories since the mid 1980s",
and "Thailand does not have a one-child policy."[120] China's Health Ministry
has also disclosed that at least 336 million abortions were performed on
account of the policy.[121]

According to a report by the US Embassy, scholarship published by Chinese
scholars and their presentations at the October 1997 Beijing conference of the
International Union for the Scientific Study of Population seemed to suggest
that market-based incentives or increasing voluntariness is not morally better
but that it is in the end more effective.[122] In 1988, Zeng Yi and Professor
T. Paul Schultz of Yale University discussed the effect of the transformation
to the market on Chinese fertility, arguing that the introduction of the
contract responsibility system in agriculture during the early 1980s weakened
family planning controls during that period.[123] Zeng contended that the "big
cooking pot" system of the People's Communes had insulated people from the
costs of having many children. By the late 1980s, economic costs and
incentives created by the contract system were already reducing the number of
children farmers wanted.

A long-term experiment in a county in Shanxi, in which the family planning law
was suspended, suggested that families would not have many more children even
if the law were abolished.[35] A 2003 review of the policy-making process
behind the adoption of the one-child policy shows that less intrusive options,
including those that emphasized delay and spacing of births, were known but
not fully considered by China's political leaders.[124]

### Unequal enforcement[edit]

Corrupted government officials and especially wealthy individuals have often
been able to violate the policy in spite of fines.[125] Filmmaker Zhang Yimou
had three children and was subsequently fined 7.48 million yuan ($1.2
million).[126] For example, between 2000 and 2005, as many as 1,968 officials
in Hunan province were found to be violating the policy, according to the
provincial family planning commission; also exposed by the commission were 21
national and local lawmakers, 24 political advisors, 112 entrepreneurs and 6
senior intellectuals.[125]

Some of the offending officials did not face penalties,[125] although the
government did respond by raising fines and calling on local officials to
"expose the celebrities and high-income people who violate the family planning
policy and have more than one child".[125] Also, people who lived in the rural
areas of China were allowed to have two children without punishment, although
the family is required to wait a couple of years before having another
child.[127]

### Human rights violations[edit]

Further information: Human rights in China

The one-child policy has been challenged for violating a human right to
determine the size of one's own proper family. According to a 1968
proclamation of the International Conference on Human Rights, "Parents have a
basic human right to determine freely and responsibly the number and the
spacing of their children."[128][129]

According to the UK newspaper _The Daily Telegraph_ , a quota of 20,000
abortions and sterilizations was set for Huaiji County, Guangdong in one year
due to reported disregard of the one-child policy. According to the article
local officials were being pressured into purchasing portable ultrasound
devices to identify abortion candidates in remote villages. The article also
reported that women as far along as 8.5 months pregnant were forced to abort,
usually by an injection of saline solution.[130] A 1993 book by social
scientist Steven W. Mosher reported that women in their ninth month of
pregnancy, or already in labour, were having their children killed whilst in
the birth canal or immediately after birth.[131]

According to a 2005 news report by Australian Broadcasting Corporation
correspondent John Taylor, China outlawed the use of physical force to make a
woman submit to an abortion or sterilization in 2002 but ineffectively
enforces the measure.[132] In 2012, Feng Jianmei, a villager from Shaanxi
province was forced into an abortion by local officials after her family
refused to pay the fine for having a second child. Chinese authorities have
since apologized and two officials were fired, while five others were
sanctioned.[133]

In the past, China promoted eugenics as part of its population planning
policies, but the government has backed away from such policies, as evidenced
by China's ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, which compels the nation to significantly reform its genetic
testing laws.[134] Recent[ _when?_ ] research has also emphasized the
necessity of understanding a myriad of complex social relations that affect
the meaning of informed consent in China.[135] Furthermore, in 2003, China
revised its marriage registration regulations and couples no longer have to
submit to a pre-marital physical or genetic examination before being granted a
marriage license.[136]

The United Nations Population Fund's (UNFPA) support for family planning in
China, which has been associated with the One-Child policy in the United
States, led the United States Congress to pull out of the UNFPA during the
Reagan administration,[137] and again under George W. Bush's presidency,
citing human rights abuses[138] and stating that the right to "found a family"
was protected under the Preamble in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.[139] President Obama resumed U.S. government financial support for the
UNFPA shortly after taking office in 2009, intending to "work collaboratively
to reduce poverty, improve the health of women and children, prevent HIV/AIDS
and provide family planning assistance to women in 154 countries".[140][141]

### Effect on infanticide rates[edit]

Sex-selected abortion, abandonment, and infanticide are illegal in China.
Nevertheless, the United States Department of State,[142] the Parliament of
the United Kingdom,[143] and the human rights organization Amnesty
International[144] have all declared that infanticide still
exists.[145][146][147] A writer for the Georgetown Journal of International
Affairs wrote, "The 'one-child' policy has also led to what Amartya Sen first
called 'Missing Women', or the 100 million girls 'missing' from the
populations of China (and other developing countries) as a result of female
infanticide, abandonment, and neglect".[148]

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation offered the following summary as to the
long term effects of sex-selective abortion and abandonment of female infants:

> Multiple research studies have also found that sex-selective abortion –
where a woman undergoes an ultrasound to determine the sex of her baby, and
then aborts it if it's a girl – was widespread for years, particularly for
second or subsequent children. Millions of female fetuses have been aborted
since the 1970s. China outlawed sex selective abortions in 2005, but the law
is tough to enforce because of the difficulty of proving why a couple decided
to have an abortion. The abandonment, and killing, of baby girls has also been
reported, though recent research studies say it has become rare, in part due
to strict criminal prohibitions.[22]

Anthropologist G. William Skinner at the University of California, Davis and
Chinese researcher Yuan Jianhua have claimed that infanticide was fairly
common in China before the 1990s.[149]

## In popular culture[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/b4/Ambox_important.svg/40px-

Ambox_important.svg.png)

|

This section **appears to containtrivial, minor, or unrelated references to
popular culture**. Please reorganize this content to explain the subject's
impact on popular culture, using references to reliable sources, rather than
simply listing appearances. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
_( March 2019)_

---|---  
* Ball, David (2002). _China Run_. Simon  & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-74322743-8. A novel about an American woman who travels to China to adopt an orphan of the one-child policy, only to find herself a fugitive when the Chinese government informs her that she has been given "the wrong baby". * The prevention of a state-imposed abortion during labor to conform with the one child policy is a key plot point in Tom Clancy's novel _The Bear and the Dragon_. * The difficulties of implementing the one-child policy are dramatized in Mo Yan's novel _Frog_ (2009; English translation by Howard Goldblatt, 2015). * Avoiding the family-planning enforcers is at the heart of Ma Jian's novel _The Dark Road_ (translated by Flora Drew, 2013). * Novelist Lu Min writes about her own family's experience with the One Child Policy in her essay "A Second Pregnancy, 1980" (translated by Helen Wang, 2015).[150] * Xue, Xinran (2015). _Buy Me the Sky_. Rider (imprint). ISBN 978-1-8460-4471-7. Tells the stories of the children brought up under China's one-child policy and the effect that has had on their lives, families and ability to deal with life's challenges. * Fong, Mei (2016). _One Child: The Story of China's Most Radical Experiment._ Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 9780544275393.

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * ![flag](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg/32px-Flag_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China.svg.png)China portal
                
                      * Shidu (bereavement), denoting the loss of an only child
                      * Two-child policy
                      * _The Dying Rooms_
                

**General:**

                
                                      * Abortion in China
                      * Demographics of China
                      * Human population planning
                      * List of countries and dependencies by population
                      * Human overpopulation
                

## References[edit]

                
                                      1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Scharping, Thomas (2003). _Birth control in China 1949–2000: Population policy and demographic development_. London: Routledge.
                      2. **^** "Chinaâ€™s One-Child Policy: Urban and Rural Pressures, Anxieties, and Problems". _World Report News_. Retrieved  22 January 2019.
                      3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Feng, Wang; Yong, Cai; Gu, Baochang (2012). "Population, Policy, and Politics: How Will History Judge China's One-Child Policy?" (PDF). _Population and Development Review_. **38** : 115–29. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2013.00555.x.
                      4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Whyte, Martin K.; Wang, Feng; Cai, Yong (2015). "Challenging Myths about China's One-Child Policy" (PDF). _The China Journal_.
                      5. **^** Li, Hongbin; Zhang, Junsen (2006). "How effective is the one-child policy in China?" (PDF). _Working Paper Series_. doi:10.1920/wp.cem.2006.1606.
                      6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sen, Amartya (June 2012). "Population: Delusion and Reality" (PDF). Richard R Guzmán.
                      7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Daniel Goodkind. 2017. The Astonishing Population Averted by China's Birth Restrictions: Estimates, Nightmares, and Reprogrammed Ambitions. Demography 54: 1375-1399 doi: 10.1007/s13524-017-0595-x
                      8. **^** "Analysis of China's one-child policy sparks uproar". 18 October 2017.
                      9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Goodkind, Daniel (2018). "If Science Had Come First: A Billion Person Fable for the Ages". _Demography_. **55** (2): 743–768. doi:10.1007/s13524-018-0661-z. PMID 29623609.
                      10. **^** "The Chinese Celebrate Their Roaring Economy, As They Struggle With Its Costs". Retrieved  9 December 2015.
                      11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bergaglio, Maristella. "Population Growth in China: The Basic Characteristics of China's Demographic Transition" (PDF). _Global Geografia_. IT.
                      12. **^** "World Development Indicators". _Google Public Data Explorer_. World Bank. 1 July 2009. Retrieved  4 October 2013.
                      13. **^** Mann, Jim (7 June 1992). "The Physics of Revenge: When Dr. Lu Gang's American Dream Died, Six People Died With It". _The Los Angeles Times Magazine_. Retrieved  14 July 2012.
                      14. **^** Potts, M. (19 August 2006). "China's one child policy". _BMJ_. **333** (7564): 361–62. doi:10.1136/bmj.38938.412593.80. PMC 1550444. PMID 16916810.
                      15. **^** "Total population, CBR, CDR, NIR and TFR of China (1949–2000)". _China Daily_. Retrieved  4 October 2013.
                      16. **^** Zubrin, Robert (2012). _Radical Environmentalists, Criminal Pseudo-Scientists, and the Fatal Cult of Antihumanism_. The New Atlantis. 2646. ISBN 978-1-59403476-3.
                      17. **^** _Family Planning in China_, Embassy of the People's Republic of China in Lithuania; Information Office of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, August 1995, Section III paragraph 2 , retrieved 27 October 2014
                      18. **^** "Experts challenge China's 1-child population claim". _Boston.com_. 27 October 2011.
                      19. **^** Zhu, W X (1 June 2003). "The One Child Family Policy". _Archives of Disease in Childhood_. **88** (6): 463–64. doi:10.1136/adc.88.6.463. PMC 1763112. PMID 12765905.
                      20. **^** "East and Southeast Asia: China". _CIA World Factbook_.
                      21. **^** Coale, Ansley J. (March 1981). "Population Trends, Population Policy, and Population Studies in China" (PDF). _Population and Development Review_. **7** (1): 85–97. doi:10.2307/1972766. JSTOR 1972766. Coale shows detailed birth and death data up to 1979, and gives a cultural background to the famine in 1959–61.
                      22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _Five things to know about China's one-child policy_, CA: CBC.
                      23. **^** da Silva, Pascal Rocha (2006). "La politique de l'enfant unique en République populaire de Chine" [The politics of one child in the People's Republic of China] (PDF) (in French). University of Geneva: 22–28.
                      24. **^** Greenhalgh, Susan (2008). _Just One Child: Science and Policy in Deng's China_. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. Dust Jacket.
                      25. **^** Mara, Hvistendahl (2010). "Has China outgrown the one-child policy?" (329). Science.
                      26. **^** Tien, H.Y. (1991). _China's Strategic Demographic Initiative_. New York: Praeger.
                      27. **^** Fong, Vanessa L. (2004). _Only Hope: Coming of Age Under China's One-Child Policy_. Stanford University Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-80475330-2.
                      28. **^** "Status of Population and Family Planning Program in China by Province". Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012.
                      29. **^** Scheuer, James (4 January 1987). "America, the U.N. and China's Family Planning (Opinion)". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  27 October 2008.
                      30. **^** "Most people free to have more child". _China Daily_. 11 July 2007. Retrieved  31 July 2009.
                      31. **^** Hu, Huiting (18 October 2002). "Family Planning Law and China's Birth Control Situation". _China Daily_. Retrieved  2 March 2009.
                      32. **^** "China's Only Child". _NOVA_. 14 February 1984. PBS. Retrieved  13 October 2009.
                      33. **^** Qiang, Guo (28 December 2006). "Are the rich challenging family planning policy?". _China Daily_.
                      34. **^** _29th session of the standing committee of the 8th People's Congress of Sichuan Province_ (rev ed.), United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 17 October 1997, Articles 11–13, archived from the original on 6 July 2008 , retrieved 31 October 2008
                      35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wong, Edward (22 July 2012). "Reports of Forced Abortions Fuel Push to End Chinese Law". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  23 July 2012.
                      36. **^** Callick, Rowan (24 January 2007). "China relaxes its one-child policy". _The Australian_.
                      37. **^** Jacobs, Andrew Jacobs (27 May 2008). "One-Child Policy Lifted for Quake Victims' Parents". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  28 May 2008.
                      38. **^** "Baby offer for earthquake parents". BBC. Retrieved  31 October 2008.
                      39. **^** "China Amends Child Policy for Some Quake Victims". _Morning Edition_. NPR.
                      40. **^** Tan, Kenneth (9 February 2012). "Hong Kong to issue blanket ban on mothers from the mainland?". Shanghaiist. Retrieved 4 October 2013.
                      41. **^** Yardley, Jim (11 May 2008). "China Sticking With One-Child Policy". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  20 November 2008.
                      42. **^** "New rich challenge family planning policy". _Xinhua_. 14 December 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007.
                      43. **^** "The most surprising demographic crisis". _The Economist_. 5 May 2011. Retrieved  25 February 2013.
                      44. **^** "从"一胎化"到"全面二孩" ——40年我国人口政策变化与政协声音".
                      45. **^** Summary of Family Planning notice on how FP fines are collected
                      46. **^** "Heavy Fine for Violators of One-Child Policy". CN. Retrieved  4 October 2013.
                      47. **^** Wee, Sui-lee (7 January 2017). "After One-Child Policy, Outrage at China's Offer to Remove IUDs". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  8 January 2017.
                      48. **^** Burkitt, Laurie (17 November 2013), "China to Move Slowly on One-Child Law Reform", _The Wall Street Journal_ (online ed.) , retrieved 5 December 2013.
                      49. **^** Levin, Dan (25 February 2014). "Many in China Can Now Have a Second Child, but Say No". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  26 February 2014.
                      50. **^** _China reforms: One-child policy to be relaxed_, UK: BBC, 15 November 2013 , retrieved 5 December 2013.
                      51. **^** "Why is China relaxing its one-child policy?". _The Economist_. The Economist. 27 January 2015. Retrieved  27 January 2015.
                      52. **^** "Xinhua Insight: Heated discussion over loosening of one-child policy". _Xinhua net_. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015.
                      53. **^** "Eastern Chinese province first to ease one-child policy". _Reuters_. 17 January 2014.
                      54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _China daily_, February 2014.
                      55. **^** "1 mln Chinese couples apply to have second child". _China daily_.
                      56. **^** Wang, Yamei (2014). "11 million couples qualify for a second child". _Xinhua News_. Archived from the original on 14 September 2014. Retrieved  10 December 2014.
                      57. **^** 五里铺镇 (in Chinese). Shayang County People's Government. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "五里铺镇{...}2016年出生人口433人，死亡211人，人口出生率8.9‰，死亡率4.3‰，自然增长率4.6‰。"
                      58. **^** 沙洋县全员人口相关数据统计表 (in Chinese). Shayang County People's Government. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "地区 总 人 口 出 生 总 数 一 孩 二 孩 多 孩 死 亡 期 初 期 末 人 数 出生率‰ 符合政策生育人数 符合政策生育% 人 数 符合政策生育人数 其中：女孩人数 一孩率% 人 数 符合政策生育人数 其中：女孩人数 二孩率% 人 数 符合政策生育人数 其中：女孩人数 多孩率% 人 数 死亡率‰{...}五里铺镇 48044 48132 424 8.82 406 95.75 312 312 157 73.58 107 90 47 25.24 5 4 2 1.18 63 1.31"
                      59. **^** "China to abolish decades-old one-child policy". Al Jazeera English. 29 October 2015. Retrieved  30 October 2015.
                      60. **^** Jiang, Steven; Hanna, Jason (29 October 2015). "China says it will end one-child policy". CNN. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
                      61. **^** "Beschluss der Kommunistischen Partei: China beendet Ein-Kind-Politik" (in German). DE: Tagesschau. 29 October 2015. Retrieved  29 October 2015.
                      62. **^** "China to end one-child policy and allow two". _BBC News_.
                      63. **^** "China to allow two children for all couples". Xinhua. 29 October 2015.
                      64. **^** Phillips, Tom. "China ends one-child policy after 35 years". _The Guardian_.
                      65. **^** "The 'model' example of China's one child policy". _BBC News_.
                      66. **^** "Top legislature amends law to allow all couples to have two children". Xinhua News Agency. 27 December 2015.
                      67. **^** "China formally abolishes decades-old one-child policy". International Business Times. 27 December 2015.
                      68. **^** Fong, Mei (15 October 2015), "China one-child policy", _National Geographic_.
                      69. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _China daily_, December 2014.
                      70. **^** "China ends one-child policy — but critics warn new two-child policy won't end forced abortions". The Raw Story. 29 October 2015. Retrieved  29 October 2015.
                      71. **^** "China: Reform of one-child policy not enough". _www.amnesty.org_.
                      72. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ghitis (29 October 2015), _China: one-child policy_, CNN.
                      73. **^** "China's one-child calamity". 5 November 2015.
                      74. **^** Leng, Sidney (21 January 2019). "China's birth rate falls to its lowest rate since 1961". _South China Morning Post_. Retrieved  22 January 2019.
                      75. **^** Dewey, Arthur E (16 December 2004). "One-Child Policy in China". Senior State Department. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011.
                      76. **^** Sen, Amartya. "Population Policy: Authoritarianism versus Cooperation" (PDF). BR: Universidade de Campinas. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 June 2016.
                      77. **^** Cai, Yong (September 2010). "China's Below-Replacement Fertility: Government Policy or Socioeconomic Development?" (PDF). _Population and Development Review_. **36** (3): 419–40. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2010.00341.x. PMID 20882701. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2015.
                      78. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Zhang, Junsen (1 February 2017). "The Evolution of China's One-Child Policy and Its Effects on Family Outcomes". _Journal of Economic Perspectives_. **31** (1): 141–160. doi:10.1257/jep.31.1.141. ISSN 0895-3309.
                      79. **^** Goodkind, Daniel (2015). "The claim that China's fertility restrictions contributed to the use of prenatal sex selection: A sceptical reappraisal". _Population Studies_. **69** (3): 269–273. doi:10.1080/00324728.2015.1103565. PMID 26585182.
                      80. **^** Li, Shiyu; Lin, Shuanglin (2016). "Population aging and China's social security reforms". _Journal of Policy Modeling_. **38** : 65–95. doi:10.1016/j.jpolmod.2015.10.001.
                      81. **^** Nie, Jing-Bao (7 November 2016). "Erosion of Eldercare in China: a Socio-Ethical Inquiry in Aging, Elderly Suicide and the Government's Responsibilities in the Context of the One-Child Policy". _Ageing International_. **41** (4): 350–365. doi:10.1007/s12126-016-9261-7.
                      82. **^** Wei, Chen (2005). "Sex Ratios at Birth in China" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2006. Retrieved 2 March 2009.
                      83. **^** "Chinese facing shortage of wives". BBC. 12 January 2007. Retrieved  12 January 2007.
                      84. **^** Zeng, Yi; et al. (1993), "Causes and Implications of the Recent Increase in the Reported Sex Ratio at Birth in China", _Population and Development Review_ , **19** (June): 283–302, doi:10.2307/2938438, JSTOR 2938438.
                      85. **^** Anderson, Barbara A; Silver, Brian D (1995), "Ethnic Differences in Fertility and Sex Ratios at Birth in China: Evidence from Xinjiang", _Population Studies_ , **49** (July): 211–26, doi:10.1080/0032472031000148476.
                      86. **^** Coale, Ansley J; Banister, Judith (December 1996). "Five decades of missing females in China". _Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society_. **140** (4): 421–450. JSTOR 987286. Also printed as  Coale, Ansley J.; Banister, Judith (August 1994). "Five decades of missing females in China". _Demography_. **31** (3): 459–79. doi:10.2307/2061752. JSTOR 2061752. PMID 7828766.
                      87. **^** "Online dating a path to marriage for young, busy Chinese", _Beijing today_ , October 2015.
                      88. **^** Johansson, Sten; Nygren, Olga (1991). "The missing girls of China: a new demographic account". _Population and Development Review_. **17** (1): 35–51. doi:10.2307/1972351. JSTOR 1972351.
                      89. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Johnson, Kay Ann (2016). _China's hidden children: Abandonment, adoption, and the human costs of the one- child policy_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                      90. **^** _Death by Default: A Policy of Fatal Neglect in China's State Orphanages_. New York: Human Rights Watch/Asia. 1996. ISBN 978-1-56432-163-3.
                      91. **^** "Chinese Orphanages: A Follow-up" (PDF). Human Rights Watch/Asia. March 1996.
                      92. **^** _Adam Pertman_, National center on adoption & permanency.
                      93. **^** _How China's one-child policy transformed US attitudes on adoption_, NPR, 30 October 2015.
                      94. **^** "China: Drug bid to beat child ban". _China Daily_. Associated Press. 14 February 2006. Retrieved  11 November 2008.
                      95. **^** "How China's one-child policy overhauled the status and prospects of girls like me". _The Daily Telegraph_. Retrieved  18 February 2016.
                      96. **^** Naughton, Barry (2007). _The Chinese Economy: Transitions and Growth_. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0262640640.
                      97. **^** 李雯 [Li Wen] (5 April 2008). "四二一"家庭，路在何方？ ['Four-two-one families', where is the road going?] (in Chinese). 云南日报网 [Yunnan Daily Online]. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 31 January 2011.
                      98. **^** 四二一"家庭真的是问题吗？ [Are 'four-two-one' families really a problem?] (in Chinese). 中国人口学会网 [China Population Association Online]. 10 October 2010. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 31 January 2011.
                      99. **^** "Rethinking China's one-child policy". CBC. 28 October 2009. Retrieved  11 June 2010.
                      100. **^** 计生委新闻发言人:11%以上人口可生两个孩子 [Spokesperson of the one-child policy committee: 11% or more of the population may have two children] (in Chinese). Sina. 10 July 2007. Retrieved 7 November 2008.
                      101. **^** "China's most populous province amends family-planning policy". _People's Daily Online_. 25 November 2011.
                      102. **^** Gluckman, Ron (19 December 2013). "The Ghosts of China's One-Child Policy". Vocativ. Retrieved 3 May 2018.
                      103. **^** 黒核子～一人っ子政策の大失敗 [Black Children - The Failure of One Child Policy] (in Japanese). Retrieved 10 July 2010.
                      104. **^** "One Child Policy - Laogai Research Foundation (LRF)". _Laogai Research Foundation_. Archived from the original on 31 October 2010. Retrieved  13 July 2010.
                      105. **^** Li, Shuzhuo; Zhang, Yexia; Feldman, Marcus W (2010). "Birth Registration in China: Practices, Problems and Policies". _Population Research and Policy Review_. **29** (3): 297–317. doi:10.1007/s11113-009-9141-x. PMC 2990197. PMID 21113384.
                      106. **^** Ross, S. R. J. (2012). _AQA GCSE Geography A_. Cheltenham: Nelson Thornes. p. 182. ISBN 978-1-4085-1708-6.
                      107. **^** Deane, Daniela (26 July 1992). "The Little Emperors". _The Los Angeles Times_. p. 16.
                      108. **^** "Chinese Singletons – Basic 'Spoiled' Related Vocabulary". _Thinking Chinese_. 11 November 2010.
                      109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Consultative Conference: 'The government must end the one-child rule '". IT: AsiaNews. 16 March 2007.
                      110. **^** "Advisors say it's time to change one-child policy". Shanghai Daily. 15 March 2007.
                      111. **^** 談天說地 (in Chinese). review33. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 4 October 2013.
                      112. **^** Eugenio, Haidée V. "Birth tourism on the upswing". _Saipan Tribune_. Archived from the original on 16 May 2012.
                      113. **^** Eugenio, Haidée V. "Many Chinese giving birth in CNMI trying to get around one child policy". _Saipan Tribune_. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012.
                      114. **^** Hardee, Karen, Gu Baochang, and Xie Zhenming. 2000. "Holding up more than half the sky:Fertility control and women's empowerment in China,"paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America, 23–25 March, Los Angeles
                      115. **^** Junhong, Chu, June 2001, "Prenatal Sex Determination and Sex-Selective Abortion in Rural Central China," Population and Development Review, Vol. 27, Iss. 2, p. 262.
                      116. **^** Hesketh, Therese . Lu, Li. Xing, Zhu Wei, Sept 2005, "The Effect of China's One-Child Family Policy After 25 Years, The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 353, Iss. 11.
                      117. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Junhong, Chu (2001). "Prenatal Sex Determination and Sex-Selective Abortion in Rural Central China". _Population and Development Review_. **27** (2): 259–81
                      118. **^** Hvistendahl, Mara (17 September 2010). "Has China Outgrown The One-Child Policy?". _Science_. **329** (5998): 1458–61. doi:10.1126/science.329.5998.1458. PMID 20847244.
                      119. **^** Some demographers challenge that number, putting the figure at perhaps half that level.
                      120. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Experts challenge China's 1-child population claim".
                      121. **^** "336 million abortions under China's one-child policy". _Telegraph.co.uk_. 15 March 2013.
                      122. **^** "PRC Family Planning: The Market Weakens Controls But Encourages Voluntary Limits". U.S. Embassy in Beijing. June 1988. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013.
                      123. **^** PRC journal _Social Sciences in China_ [Zhongguo, January 1988] [ _full citation needed_ ]
                      124. **^** Greenhalgh, Susan (2003). "Science, Modernity, and the Making of China's One-Child Policy" (PDF). _Population and Development Review_. **29** (June): 163–196. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2003.00163.x. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2013.
                      125. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Over 1,900 officials breach birth policy in C. China". _Xinhua_. 8 July 2007. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved  11 November 2008. "But heavy fines and exposures seemed to hardly stop the celebrities and rich people, as there are still many people, who can afford the heavy penalties, insist on having multiple kids, the Hunan commission spokesman said ... Three officials ... who were all found to have kept extramarital mistresses, were all convicted for charges such as embezzlement and taking bribes, but they were not punished for having more than one child."
                      126. **^** "China: Filmmaker Zhang Yimou fined $1M for breach of one-child policy - CNN.com". _CNN_. Retrieved  3 January 2016.
                      127. **^** chan, peggy (2005). _Cultures of the world China_. New York: Marshall Cavendish International.
                      128. **^** Freedman, Lynn P.; Isaacs, Stephen L. (January – February 1993). "Human Rights and Reproductive Choice" (PDF). _Studies in Family Planning_. **24** (1): 18–30. doi:10.2307/2939211. JSTOR 2939211. PMID 8475521. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 8 December 2007.
                      129. **^** "Proclamation of Teheran". International Conference on Human Rights. 1968. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007. Retrieved  8 November 2007.
                      130. **^** McElroy, Damien (8 April 2001). "Chinese region 'must conduct 20,000 abortions'". _The Telegraph_. London.
                      131. **^** Mosher, Steven W. (July 1993). _A Mother's Ordeal_. Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-15-162662-5.
                      132. **^** Taylor, John (8 February 2005). "China – One Child Policy". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 1 July 2008.
                      133. **^** "Father in forced abortion case wants charges filed". _My Way News_. Associated Press. 6 July 2012.
                      134. **^** (subscription required) "Implications of China's Ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities". _China: An International Journal_.
                      135. **^** Sleeboom-Faulkner, Margaret Elizabeth (1 June 2011). "Genetic testing, governance, and the family in the People's Republic of China". _Social Science & Medicine_. **72** (11): 1802–9. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.03.052. PMID 20627498.
                      136. **^** "Marriage Law of the People's Republic of China" (PDF). _Australia: Refugee Review Tribunal_.
                      137. **^** Moore, Stephen (9 May 1999). "Don't Fund UNFPA Population Control". CATO Institute.
                      138. **^** McElroy, Damien (3 February 2002). "China is furious as Bush halts UN 'abortion' funds". _The Telegraph_. London.
                      139. **^** Siv, Sichan (21 January 2003). "United Nations Fund for Population Activities in China". U.S. Department of State.
                      140. **^** "UNFPA Welcomes Restoration of U.S. Funding". _UNFPA News_. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 9 July 2014. Retrieved  24 January 2019.
                      141. **^** Rizvi, Haider (12 March 2009). "Obama Sets New Course at the U.N." _IPS News_. Inter Press Agency.
                      142. **^** Associated Press. "US State Department position". Archived from the original on 26 February 2007.
                      143. **^** "Human Rights in China and Tibet". Parliament of the United Kingdom.
                      144. **^** Amnesty International. "Violence Against Women – an introduction to the campaign". Archived from the original on 9 October 2006.
                      145. **^** Mosher, Steve (1986). "Steve Mosher's China report". _The Interim_.
                      146. **^** "Case Study: Female Infanticide". _Gendercide Watch_. 2000.
                      147. **^** "Infanticide Statistics: Infanticide in China". _All Girls Allowed_. 2010.
                      148. **^** Steffensen, Jennifer. "Georgetown Journal's Guide to the 'One-Child' Policy". Retrieved 30 September 2013.
                      149. **^** Lubman, Sarah (15 March 2000). "Experts Allege Infanticide In China — 'Missing' Girls Killed, Abandoned, Pair Say". _San Jose Mercury News_. CA.
                      150. **^** "A Second Pregnancy, 1980", _Paper republic_.
                

## Further reading[edit]

                
                                      * _Better 10 Graves Than One Extra Birth: China's Systemic Use of Coercion To Meet Population Quotas_. Washington, DC: Laogai Research Foundation. 2004. ISBN 978-1-931550-92-5.
                      * Fong, Mei (2015). _One Child: The Past and Future of China's Most Radical Experiment_. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-544-27539-3. Interview with Mei on her challenges writing the book.
                      * Hardee-Cleaveland, Karen (1988). _Family Planning in China: Recent Trends, Volume 3_. Center for International Research, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
                      * Goh, Esther C.L. (2011). "China's One-Child Policy and Multiple Caregiving: raising little suns in Xiamen" (PDF). _Journal of International and Global Studies_. New York: Routledge. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 May 2012.
                      * Greenhalgh, Susan (2008). _Just One Child: Science and Policy in Deng's China_ (illustrated ed.). University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25339-1.
                      * Johnson, Kay Ann (2016). _China's Hidden Children: Abandonment, Adoption, and the Human Costs of the One-Child Policy_. University Of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0226352510.
                

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Population
policy in China**_.  
---|---  
* Family Planning in China * Hemminki, Elina; Wu, Zhuochun; Cao, Guiying; Viisainen, Kirsi (2005). "Illegal births and legal abortions – the case of China". _Reprod Health_. **2** : 5. doi:10.1186/1742-4755-2-5. PMC 1215519. PMID 16095526.
                
                                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Health in China

* * *

Healthcare|

                
                                      * Health
                      * Disease surveillance
                      * Healthcare system reform
                      * Women's health
                      * Health informatics
                      * Tobacco Control Association
                      * Barefoot doctor
                      * Patriotic Health Campaign
                      * China Welfare Institute
                      * Hospitals in China
                      * Medical schools
                      * Organ transplantation
                

Medicine and pharmaceutical|

                
                                      * Medicine
                      * Traditional Chinese medicine
                      * Pharmacy
                      * Pharmaceutical industry
                      * Biotechnology
                

Diseases|

                
                                      * Avian influenza
                      * Blue-ear disease
                      * Cardiovascular disease
                      * Chronic diseases
                      * Enterovirus 71 (EV71)
                      * Fujian flu
                      * Hepatitis B
                      * HIV/AIDS
                      * Iodine deficiency
                      * lead poisoning scandal
                      * Leprosy
                      * Mental health
                      * Obesity
                      * Pneumonic plague
                      * SARS (outbreak progress)
                      * Stroke
                      * Swine influenza outbreak
                      * Tuberculosis
                      * Disease-related deaths
                

Government|

                
                                      * National Health Commission
                      * Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
                      * National Medical Products Administration
                      * National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine
                      * _Hong Kong Department of Health_ *
                      * _Macau Secretariat for Social Affairs and Culture_ *
                      * General Administration of Customs
                      * National Healthcare Security Administration
                

Other related issues|

                
                                      * Demographics
                      * Dust storms
                      * Environment
                      * Food safety
                      * Illegal drug trade
                      * Pollution
                      * Poverty
                      * Prostitution
                      * Smoking
                      * Vegetarianism
                      * Violence against doctors in China
                        * Yi Nao
                      * Water supply and sanitation
                

Studies|

                
                                      * China-Cornell-Oxford Project _(The China Study)_
                      * China Health and Nutrition Survey
                      * China Family Panel Studies
                      * China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study
                

          * Of special administrative regions 
                    
                                          * v
                      * t
                      * e
                    

Reproductive health

* * *

Rights|

                
                                      * Compulsory sterilization
                      * Contraceptive security
                      * Genital integrity
                        * Circumcision controversies
                        * Genital modification and mutilation
                        * Intersex
                

Education|

                
                                      * Genetic counseling
                      * Pre-conception counseling
                      * Sex education
                

Planning|

                
                                      * Assisted reproductive technology
                      * Birth control
                      * Childfree/Childlessness
                      * Parenting
                        * Adoption
                        * Childbirth
                        * Foster care
                      * Safe sex
                

Health|

                
                                      * Men's
                      * Women's
                        * Vulvovaginal
                      * Research 
                        * Self-report sexual risk behaviors
                

Pregnancy|

                
                                      * Abortion
                      * Birth spacing
                      * Maternal health
                      * Obstetrics
                      * Options counseling
                      * Pregnancy from rape
                      * Pregnant patients' rights
                      * Prenatal care
                      * Teenage pregnancy
                      * Preteen pregnancy
                      * Unintended pregnancy
                

Medicine|

                
                                      * Andrology
                      * Genitourinary medicine
                      * Gynaecology
                      * Obstetrics and gynaecology
                      * Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
                      * Sexual medicine
                

Disorder|

                
                                      * Disorders of sex development
                      * Infertility
                      * Reproductive system disease
                      * Sexual dysfunction
                      * Sexually transmitted infection
                        * Clinic
                

By country|

                
                                      * China
                      * India
                      * Iran
                      * Ireland
                      * Pakistan
                      * Philippines
                      * Singapore
                      * United Kingdom 
                        * Teen
                      * United States
                        * Teen pregnancy
                        * Birth control
                

History|

                
                                      * Birth control movement in the United States
                      * History of condoms
                      * Social hygiene movement
                      * Timeline of reproductive rights legislation
                

Policy|

                
                                      * One-child policy
                      * Two-child policy
                      * Financial 
                        * Baby bonus
                        * Bachelor tax
                        * Birth credit
                        * Child benefit
                        * Tax on childlessness
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Global human population

* * *

Major topics|

                
                                      * Biocapacity
                      * Optimum population
                      * Overpopulation
                        * Malthusian catastrophe
                      * Population
                      * Population ethics
                      * Population momentum
                      * Sustainable development
                      * Women's reproductive rights
                      * Zero population growth
                

Biological and  
related topics|

                
                                      * Family planning
                        * Pledge two or fewer
                      * Human population planning
                        * One-child policy
                        * Two-child policy
                      * Population biology
                      * Population decline
                      * Population density
                        * Physiological density
                      * Population dynamics
                      * Population growth
                      * Population model
                      * Population pyramid
                      * Projections of population growth
                

Human impact on  
the environment|

                
                                      * Deforestation
                      * Desalination
                      * Desertification
                      * Environmental impact
                        * of agriculture
                        * of aviation
                        * of biodiesel
                        * of concrete
                        * of electricity generation
                        * of the energy industry
                        * of fishing
                        * of irrigation
                        * of mining
                        * of off-roading
                        * of oil shale industry
                        * of palm oil
                        * of paper
                        * of the petroleum industry
                        * of reservoirs
                        * of shipping
                        * of war
                      * Industrialisation
                      * Land degradation
                      * Land reclamation
                      * Overconsumption
                      * Pollution
                      * Quarrying
                      * Urbanization
                        * Loss of green belts
                        * Urban sprawl
                      * Waste
                      * Water scarcity
                        * Overdrafting
                

Population  
ecology

|

                
                                      * Carrying capacity
                      * Deep ecology
                      * Earth's energy budget
                      * Food security
                      * Habitat destruction
                      * I = P × A × T
                      * Kaya identity
                      * Malthusian growth model
                      * Overshoot (population)
                      * World energy consumption
                      * World energy resources
                      * World3 model
                

Literature|

                
                                      * _A Modest Proposal_
                      * _Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc._
                      * _An Essay on the Principle of Population_
                      * "How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
                      * _Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth_
                      * _Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits_
                      * _The Limits to Growth_
                      * _The Population Bomb_
                      * _The Skeptical Environmentalist_
                      * _The Ultimate Resource_
                

Publications|

                
                                      * Population and Environment
                      * Population and Development Review
                

Lists|

                
                                      * Population and housing censuses by country
                      * Metropolitan areas by population
                      * Population milestone babies
                

Events and  
organizations

|

                
                                      * 7 Billion Actions
                      * International Conference on Population and Development
                      * Population Action International
                      * Population Connection
                      * Population Matters
                      * Population Research Institute
                      * United Nations Population Fund
                      * Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
                      * World Population Day
                      * World Population Foundation
                

Related topics|

                
                                      * Classic Maya collapse
                      * Fertility and intelligence
                      * Green Revolution
                      * Holocene extinction
                      * Migration
                
                      * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**
                      * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Human overpopulation
                      * Human activities with impact on the environment
                      * Human migration
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Lists of countries by population statistics

* * *

Global|

                
                                      * Current population
                      * Current population (United Nations)
                

(Sub-)continents|

                
                                      * Africa
                      * Asia
                      * Europe
                      * North America
                        * Caribbean
                      * Oceania
                      * South America
                

Intercontinental|

                
                                      * Americas
                      * Arab world
                      * Commonwealth of Nations
                      * Eurasia
                      * European Union
                      * Islands
                      * Latin America
                      * Middle East
                

Cities/urban regions|

                
                                      * National capitals
                      * Cities proper
                      * Metropolitan areas
                      * Urban areas
                      * Megacities
                      * Megalopolises
                

Past and future|

                
                                      * Past and future population
                      * 0
                      * 1
                      * 1000
                      * 1500
                      * 1600
                      * 1700
                      * 1800
                      * 1900
                      * 1907
                      * 1939
                      * 1989
                      * 2000
                      * 2005
                      * 2010
                      * population milestones
                

Population density|

                
                                      * Current density
                      * Past and future population density
                      * Current real density based on food growing capacity
                

Growth indicators|

                
                                      * Population growth rate
                      * Natural increase
                      * Birth rate
                      * Mortality rate
                      * Fertility rate
                      * Past fertility rate
                

Other  
demographics|

                
                                      * Age at first marriage
                      * Divorce rate
                      * Ethnic and cultural diversity level
                      * Immigrant population
                      * Linguistic diversity
                      * Median age
                      * Age structure
                      * Dependency ratio
                      * Net migration rate
                      * Number of households
                      * Sex ratio
                      * Urban population
                      * Urbanization
                

Health|

                
                                      * Antidepressant consumption
                      * Antiviral medications for pandemic influenza
                      * HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate
                      * Infant and under-five mortality rates
                      * Maternal mortality rate
                      * Life expectancy
                      * Past life expectancy
                      * Percentage suffering from undernourishment
                      * Health expenditure covered by government
                      * Suicide rate
                      * Total health expenditure per capita
                      * Body Mass Index (BMI)
                

Education  
and innovation|

                
                                      * Bloomberg Innovation Index
                      * Education Index
                      * International Innovation Index
                      * Innovation Union Scoreboard
                      * Literacy rate
                      * Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
                      * Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
                      * Student skills
                      * Tertiary education attainment
                      * Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
                      * Women's average years in school
                      * World Intellectual Property Indicators
                

Economic|

                
                                      * Development aid given
                        * Official Development Assistance received
                      * Employment rate
                      * Irrigated land area
                      * Human Development Index
                        * by country
                        * inequality-adjusted
                      * Human Poverty Index
                      * Imports
                      * Income equality
                      * Labour force
                      * Number of millionaires (US dollars)
                      * Number of billionaires (US dollars)
                      * Percentage living in poverty
                      * Public sector
                      * Sen social welfare function
                      * Unemployment rate
                
                      * List of international rankings
                      * List of top international rankings by country
                      * Lists by country
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=One-
child_policy&oldid=899756037"

Categories:

                
                                      * One-child policy
                      * Birth control in China
                      * Human overpopulation
                      * Population ecology
                      * Political controversies in China
                      * 1978 introductions
                      * 1980 introductions
                      * 2015 disestablishments in China
                      * Cold War history of China
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * CS1 French-language sources (fr)
                      * Articles containing Chinese-language text
                      * CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh)
                      * CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh)
                      * CS1 German-language sources (de)
                      * CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja)
                      * CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)
                      * Articles with incomplete citations from October 2013
                      * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
                      * Wikipedia pending changes protected pages
                      * Use dmy dates from March 2019
                      * Articles with short description
                      * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011
                      * All articles containing potentially dated statements
                      * All articles with vague or ambiguous time
                      * Vague or ambiguous time from June 2012
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019
                      * All articles with failed verification
                      * Articles with failed verification from January 2019
                      * Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text
                      * All articles lacking reliable references
                      * Articles lacking reliable references from December 2018
                      * Vague or ambiguous time from October 2013
                      * Articles with trivia sections from March 2019
                      * Commons category link is on Wikidata
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Afrikaans
                      * العربية
                      * Asturianu
                      * Azərbaycanca
                      * Čeština
                      * Cymraeg
                      * Dansk
                      * Deutsch
                      * Eesti
                      * Español
                      * Esperanto
                      * فارسی
                      * Français
                      * Galego
                      * 한국어
                      * हिन्दी
                      * Hrvatski
                      * Bahasa Indonesia
                      * Italiano
                      * עברית
                      * ქართული
                      * Latviešu
                      * Македонски
                      * Bahasa Melayu
                      * Nederlands
                      * नेपाली
                      * 日本語
                      * Norsk
                      * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Română
                      * Русский
                      * සිංහල
                      * Simple English
                      * Slovenščina
                      * Српски / srpski
                      * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                      * Suomi
                      * Svenska
                      * தமிழ்
                      * ไทย
                      * Türkçe
                      * Українська
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * 吴语
                      * 粵語
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 04:15 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

