

* * *

Why Science Can 't Say When a Baby's Life Begins

Sign In

![](/images/cm/failsafe-images/cm-failsafe-subscribe-

button-5-30-18.png)![](/images/cm/failsafe-images/cm-failsafe-subscribe-

button-5-30-18.png)

Subscribe

__

                
                                      * business
                      * culture
                      * gear
                      * ideas
                      * science
                      * security
                      * transportation
                      * photo
                      * video
                      * backchannel
                

Search

                
                                      *  __business
                      *  __culture
                      *  __gear
                      *  __ideas
                      *  __science
                      *  __security
                      *  __transportation
                      *  __photo
                      *  __video
                      *  __backchannel
                

Sign In

                
                                      * Photo
                      * Video
                      * Backchannel
                      * Magazine
                      * Wired Insider
                      * Coupons
                

#### Get Science Newsletter

##### Sign up to receive the latest science news.

__submit

                
                                      * Author: Sarah ZhangSarah Zhang
                
                      * science
                
                      * 10.02.15
                      * 02:25 pm
                

# Why Science Can't Say When a Baby's Life Begins

![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5932316858b0d64bb35d029e/master/w_2000,c_limit/468726168.jpg)

__Getty Images

#### Share

                
                                      *  __
                

share

                
                                      *  __
                

tweet

                
                                      *  __
                

comment

                
                                      *  __
                

email

                
                                      * Author: Sarah ZhangSarah Zhang
                
                      * science
                
                      * 10.02.15
                      * 02:25 pm
                

# Why Science Can't Say When a Baby's Life Begins

![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5932316858b0d64bb35d029e/master/w_2000,c_limit/468726168.jpg)

__Getty Images

Scott Gilbert was walking through the halls of Swarthmore when he saw the
poster, from a campus religious group: “Philosophers and theologians have
argued for centuries about when personhood begins,” it read. “But scientists
know when it begins. It begins at fertilization.” What troubled Gilbert, who
is a developmental biologist, was the assertion that “scientists know.” “I
couldn’t say when personhood begins, but I can say with absolute certainty
scientists don’t have a consensus,” he says.

When life begins is, of course, the central disagreement that fuels the
controversy over abortion. Attacks on abortion rights are now more veiled and
indirect—like secret videos pointing to Planned Parenthood’s fetal tissue
donations, or state legislation that makes operating abortion clinics so
onerous they have to shut down. But make no mistake, the ultimate question is,
when does a fetus become a person—at fertilization, at birth, or somewhere in
between?

Here, modern science offers no clarity. If anything, the past century of
scientific advances have only made the answer more complicated. As scientists
have peered into wombs with ultrasound and looked directly at sperm entering
an egg, they’ve found that all the bright lines they thought existed
dissolving.

### The Quickening

Before ultrasounds and long before _Roe v. Wade_ , it was obvious when life
began. The “quickening,” the first time a woman felt her baby’s kick, was the
moment the baby came alive, the moment it got a soul. When Henry VIII’s wife
felt her quickening, it was cause for celebratory bonfires across London. In
the 19th century, abortion in Britain was legal—until the quickening.

But the importance of the quickening—a concept that had been around since at
least Aristotle—is now a relic. Before a mother can feel her baby kick, at
around 20 weeks, she can already hear its heartbeat and see the blurry outline
of its face with ultrasound. In a 2012 vice presidential debate, Paul Ryan
explained his views on abortion by talking about seeing the bean shape of his
unborn daughter on an ultrasound. He and his wife nicknamed her “Bean.” Ryan
would later sponsor a bill for fetal personhood, which gives full legal rights
to a zygote after fertilization.

In a way, science made possible the argument for fetal personhood. It's only
tenable because people can peer inside the womb, at one time a black box.
Indeed, when American physicians began collecting humans embryos and charting
embryonic development in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, they began
considering fertilization as the beginning of fetal life. Around the same
time, writes historian Sara Dubow in her book _Ourselves Unborn: A History of
the Fetus in Modern America_ , some physicians began to argue that abortion
should be illegal. (Dubow declined to be interviewed for this story, citing
concerns about being misquoted on abortion politics.)

### When Is Fertilization?

The next century of developmental biology made things even more complicated.
With in vitro fertilization—combining sperm and egg in a lab—scientists could
directly observe the process of sperm entering the egg for the first time. It
actually takes place over as long as 24 hours; a series of biochemical changes
need to happen before the sperm can enter. Inside the body, fertilization can
happen hours or even days after insemination, as the sperm travels up the
fallopian tube. This journey also induces changes in the membrane of the
sperm, called capacitation, that ready it to fertilize eggs. (The discovery of
artificial capacitation was key to making in vitro fertilization possible.) As
the fertilization researcher Harvey Florman has said, “Fertilization doesn’t
take place in a moment of passion. It takes place the next day in the
laundromat or the library.”

But even fertilization isn't a clean indicator of anything. The next step is
implantation, when the fertilized egg travels down the fallopian tube and
attaches to the mother’s uterus. “There’s an incredibly high rate of
fertilized eggs that don’t implant,” says Diane Horvath-Cosper, an OB-GYN in
Washington, DC. Estimates run from 50 to 80 percent, and even some implanted
embryos spontaneously abort. The woman might never know she was pregnant.

Assuming that fertilization and implantation all go perfectly, scientists can
reasonably disagree about when personhood begins, says Gilbert. An
embryologist might say gastrulation, which is when an embryo can no longer
divide to form identical twins. A neuroscientist might say when one can
measure brainwaves. As a doctor, Horvath-Cosper says, “I have come to the
conclusion that the pregnant woman gets to decide when it’s a person.”

### The Changing Threshold of Viability

_Roe v. Wade_ allows abortion up to the point a fetus is viable outside the
womb. But that 's not much help, either. When Edward Bell, a neonatologist at
the University of Iowa Children’s Hospital, first began practicing medicine in
the 70s, the line was 26 weeks. “The threshold has decreased by one week for
every decade,” Bell says. “In the 90s we were all confident that 24 weeks was
going to be absolute limit because of the biology.”

But earlier this year, Bell published a paper in the _New England Journal of
Medicine_ showing reasonably good outcomes in preemies born at 22 weeks of
gestational age. Two key technologies have pushed that date: the use of
steroids, which can speed up fetal development, and surfactants that prevent
lungs from collapsing after birth. Still, setting an absolute cutoff for fetal
viability is impossible. “It depends on how you define it. Is it some babies
survive? Half survive? Or most babies survive?” Bell says. At 22 weeks, many
of the babies that survive end up with permanent health problems or
disabilities.

Bell is wary of his research being appropriated by the debate over abortion.
To doctors and scientists, the question of when life begins isn’t a matter of
gathering more evidence. “The science has very little to do with the answer,”
says Gilbert. Every iteration and advance in the lab make the question even
more the purview of philosophers and theologians. And lawyers.

                
                                      * #medicine
                      * #Reproduction
                

#### Most Popular

                
                                      * science
                

##### A Mythical Form of Space Propulsion Finally Gets a Real Test

Author: Daniel OberhausDaniel Oberhaus

                
                                      * security
                

##### Finding a Video Poker Bug Made These Guys Rich--Then Vegas Made Them Pay

Author: Kevin PoulsenKevin Poulsen

                
                                      * security
                

##### Apple's 'Find My' Feature Uses Some Very Clever Cryptography

Author: Andy GreenbergAndy Greenberg

__More Stories

__View Comments

#### Sponsored Stories

Powered By Outbrain

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf1c0672de4df0cd5012524/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_he-jiankui_18332263002305.jpg)
                

Megan Molteni

##### A Study Exposes the Health Risks of Gene-Editing Human Embryos

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf1ba879c2a7c1e3759765b/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_mouse_1143013300.jpg)
                

Rhett Allain

##### The Best Way for a Mouse to Escape a Cat, According to Math

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf1b804253bc58f367abf48/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_crickets_82261987.jpg)
                

Matt Simon

##### Tired: Eating Bugs. Wired: Eating Bug Meat Grown in a Lab

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf1cd3152a6840071250bb3/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_quanta_eo-wilson.jpg)
                

Claudia Dreifus

##### At 90, E. O. Wilson Still Thrives on Being a Scientific Provocateur

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf1ade32de4dfeb6101250e/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_cfc-11_vats.jpg)
                

Richard Conniff

##### An Illicit Chemical Is Again Jeopardizing the Ozone Layer

#### More science

                
                                      *           * Environment
                

## Monterey Bay Is a Natural Wonder--Poisoned With Microplastic

Author: Matt SimonMatt Simon

                
                                      *           * carbon capture
                

## What to Do About CO2? Try Stuffing It Into the Gulf of Mexico

Author: Eric NiilerEric Niiler

                
                                      *           * Tech in Two
                

## Telemedicine as a Workaround to Abortion Regs, and More News

Author: Lydia HorneLydia Horne

                
                                      *           * genetics
                

## Congress Is Debating--Again--Whether Genes Can Be Patented

Author: Megan MolteniMegan Molteni

                
                                      *           * women's health
                

## Telemedicine Makes It Safe to Get Abortion Drugs in the Mail

Author: Adam RogersAdam Rogers

                
                                      *           * Machines, Learning
                

## Your First Look Inside Amazon’s Robot Warehouse of Tomorrow

Author: Matt SimonMatt Simon

#### We Recommend

Powered By Outbrain

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf703c19c2a7cfa165976b2/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_emdrive_637797356.jpg)
                

Daniel Oberhaus

##### A Mythical Form of Space Propulsion Finally Gets a Real Test

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf6f997c5bee9006e926ad6/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/2019-06-03_Wired_Guides_to_Aliens.gif)
                

Sarah Scoles

##### The WIRED Guide to Aliens

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf5a61614e889d39f95c62e/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/ClimateChange_TA--1137670449.jpg)
                

Sara Harrison

##### Companies Expect Climate Change to Cost Them $1 Trillion in 5 Years

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf5be379c2a7ce9005976a8/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/gear_apple-watch_1037041996.jpg)
                

Robbie Gonzalez

##### The Apple Watch Is Now the Control Center for Your Health

                
                                      * ![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5cf5a578da5cea74b6c166f3/1:1/w_150,h_150,c_limit/science_millenium-falcon_1152527228.jpg)
                

Rhett Allain

##### The Physics of the Millennium Falcon's Jump to Hyperspace

![](/images/cm/failsafe-images/cm-failsafe-box.png)

#### Get Science Newsletter

##### Sign up to receive the latest science news.

__submit

__

                
                                      *  __
                      *  __
                      *  __
                      *  __
                      *  __
                      * Subscribe
                      * Advertise
                      * Site Map
                      * Press Center
                      * FAQ
                      * Accessibility Help
                      * Customer Care
                      * Contact Us
                      * Securedrop
                      * Coupons
                      * Newsletter
                      * Wired Staff
                      * Jobs
                      * RSS
                

CNMN Collection

(C) 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved.

Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance
of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie
Statement (updated 5/25/18). Your California Privacy Rights. The material on
this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise
used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices.

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c4=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.com%2F2015%2F10%2Fscience-

cant-say-babys-life-begins%2F&c1=2&c2=6035094)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

