
                
                                      *             * Home
                        * Current Issue
                        * Join Our Mailing List
                        * Subscribe
                        * Donate
                      *             * About TOS
                        * Our Philosophy
                        * Masthead
                        * Contributors
                        * Write for TOS
                        * Understanding Objectivism
                        * Contact
                        * FAQ
                      * ### Follow TOS
                
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                        * __
                
                      * Articles
                      * Journal
                        * ![V14N2-Cover-Medium-342×487](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/V14N2-Cover-Medium-342x487-150x214.jpg)Current Issue
                        * ![Back-Issues](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Back-Issues.jpg)All Issues
                        *  __Close
                      * Topics
                        * Arts & Culture
                        * Ayn Rand & Objectivism
                        * Economics
                        * Education & Parenting
                        * Good Living
                        * History
                        * Philosophy
                        * Politics & Rights
                        * Science & Technology
                        * Announcements
                        *  __Close
                

![The Objective Standard](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/logo.png)

Subscribe

                
                                      * Account
                        * Log In
                        * Join Our Mailing List
                        * Subscribe
                        * Donate
                        * __0 items $0.00
                

0 items - $0.00

Return to Content

## Subscriber-only Content

This audio content is accessible only to current Audio or Premium subscribers.
For access, login, subscribe or upgrade your subscription.

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/themes/canvas_tos_v2/images/tos-subscribe-multiple-devices.jpg)

### Get Access...

SUBSCRIBE NOW

## Subscriber-only Content

This ebook content is accessible only to current Ebook or Premium subscribers.
For access, login, subscribe or upgrade your subscription.

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/themes/canvas_tos_v2/images/tos-subscribe-multiple-devices.jpg)

### Get Access...

SUBSCRIBE NOW

×

Politics & Rights

# Fetuses Don’t Have Rights; Pregnant Women Do; This Distinction is Crucial

Ari Armstrong February 17, 2013

* * *
                
                                      *           *           * ![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/pregnant2-200x300.jpg)Various opponents of abortion like to pretend that, if a woman has a right to seek an abortion, the law can do nothing to protect a fetus that a woman wishes to carry to term. But that pretense is nonsense.
                

As Diana Hsieh and I have argued, an embryo or a fetus is not a person, and a
woman has a right to seek an abortion. However, that does not mean a fetus has
no value: A fetus is enormously valuable to the pregnant woman and the father
who want to have a child. Just as a woman has a right to abort a fetus, so she
has a right to carry it to term, unmolested by others. Although the fetus does
not have rights of its own, the pregnant woman has rights; thus, the
government properly protects her body, its contents, and her choice to bring
the fetus to term.

With that context in mind, consider the legal chaos that arose in a lawsuit
against the St. Thomas Moore Hospital in Colorado.

As the _Denver Post_ reports, in 2006 Lori Stodghill, who was seven months
pregnant with twins. She went to the hospital’s emergency room, where she
“suffered a blocked artery in her lung . . . went into cardiac arrest” and
died. Her twins died, too. “Doctors couldn't save Lori and decided against a
cesarian section to try to save the twins. [Lori’s husband Jeremy] Stodghill
sued because he believes they should have performed the C-section,” the _Post_
reports. Although Stodghill lost the case, his attorney has appealed to the
Colorado Supreme Court.

The hospital’s lawyers argued that the judge “should dismiss wrongful-death
claims with regard to the unborn twins because Colorado law does not define a
fetus as a person,” the _Post_ continues. Stodghill, on the other hand,
contended the fetuses were “persons,” and, later, so did the hospital. A
follow-up article from the _Post_ reports that the hospital “acknowledged [on
February 4] it was morally wrong for their attorneys to defend a medical
malpractice case in the death of unborn twins by arguing Colorado law doesn't
consider fetuses to be persons.”

The entire legal case is utterly confused. Given that fetuses are not
individuated persons with rights, Stodghill and his attorneys had no proper
legal grounds to sue under the wrongful-death statute, which is specifically
restricted to “the death of a person.”

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/subscribe-

now-por.png)That said, although a fetus is not a person, the negligent death
of a fetus that its mother and father want to bring to birth constitutes a
profound harm to the parents. (The question of the doctors’ alleged negligence
is outside the scope of this post, as is the question of whether existing
statutes adequately address the issues of negligence and criminal harm.)

Properly, the fact that a fetus is not a person is no barrier to holding
accountable those who, through criminal assault or negligence, cause or
contribute to the death of a fetus. The pregnant woman has a right to decide
whether to seek an abortion or seek to carry her fetus to term—and the
government’s proper responsibility in this context is to protect her right to
choose.

_Like this post? Join our mailing list to receive ourweekly digest. And for
in-depth commentary from an Objectivist perspective, subscribe to our
quarterly journal,_ The Objective Standard.

**Related:**

                
                                      * The Assault on Abortion Rights Undermines All Our Liberties
                      * Anti-Abortion Crusade is Anti-Life, Anti-Rights, Anti-Reason
                

Image: iStockPhoto

### You might also like

                
                                      * ![Colorado Judge: Today’s “Tom Paine’s Pamphlet” Is Protected Speech](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Colorado-Judge-Today’s-“Tom-Paine’s-Pamphlet”-Is-Protected-Speech-150x150.jpg)Colorado Judge: Today’s “Tom Paine’s Pamphlet” Is Protected Speech
                      * ![Anti-Abortion Crusade is Anti-Life, Anti-Rights, Anti-Reason](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/3223404014_8ab7537e11_z-150x150.jpg)Anti-Abortion Crusade is Anti-Life, Anti-Rights, Anti-Reason
                      * ![Texas Anti-Abortion Law Violates Rights to Liberty and Freedom of Speech](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/pregnant-150x150.jpg)Texas Anti-Abortion Law Violates Rights to Liberty and Freedom of Speech
                      * ![CSG on Colorado’s Amendment 48](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/plugins/wordpress-23-related-posts-plugin/static/thumbs/9.jpg)CSG on Colorado's Amendment 48
                      * ![States Pass Rights-Violating Abortion Restrictions](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/iStock_000018555789XSmall6-200x300-1-150x150.jpg)States Pass Rights-Violating Abortion Restrictions
                      * ![Colorado “Personhood” Measure Would Outlaw All Abortions and More](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/bigstock-Woman-Looking-At-A-Pregnancy-T-6196634-181x300-1-150x150.jpg)Colorado “Personhood” Measure Would Outlaw All Abortions and More
                

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/uploads/2015/01/arismall.jpg)

#### About Ari Armstrong

Ari Armstrong blogs at AriArmstrong.com, and he has written for publications
including the _Denver Post_ and _Complete Colorado_. He is the author of
_Values of Harry Potter: Lessons for Muggles_ , a book exploring the heroic
fight for life-promoting values in the Potter novels.

View all posts by Ari Armstrong ->

__abortion

__The Trinity of Liberty Q &A, with Craig Biddle

Medical Tourism: A Free Market Alternative to ObamaCare __

                
                                      *           *           * Return to Top
                

* * *

Comments submitted to TOS are moderated and checked periodically. Anonymous
posts are not permitted; commenters must use their real names. To be
considered for posting, a comment must be civil, substantive, on topic, and no
longer than 400 words. Ad hominem attacks, arguments from intimidation,
misrepresentations, off-topic comments, and comments that ignore relevant
points made in the article will be deleted. Thank you for helping us to keep
the discussion intellectually profitable.

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/TOS-Con-

widget4-ParkCity-BrickRed-325x500.jpg)

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/loving-

life.jpg)

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/Objectivist-Venture-Fund-Ad.jpg)

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/Prometheus-Connection-Audiobook-Ad.jpg)

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/STRIVE-

Web-Ad.jpg)

![](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/write-for-

tos-3.jpg)

![The Objective Standard](https://www.theobjectivestandard.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/logo.png)

                
                                      * Home
                      * About
                      * Subscribe
                      * Donate
                      * Contact
                

Copyright (C) 2019 The Objective Standard. All Rights Reserved

### Shipping Fees & Policies

                
                                      *           *           * #### Print and Premium Subscriptions
                

Print and Premium subscriptions mailed to addresses in the United States
include free shipping. Charges for Print and Premium subscriptions mailed to
addresses outside the United States are as follows:

                
                                      * **Canada or Mexico:** Subscriptions to Canada or Mexico are an additional $15 per year.
                      * **Other Foreign Destinations:** Subscriptions to foreign destinations other than Canada or Mexico are an additional $20 per year.
                      * **Upgrades:** Shipping for an upgrade from an Online-only subscription to a Print or Premium subscription is pro-rated based on the number of issues remaining in the subscription and the shipping destination (e.g., shipping to Canada for a subscription upgrade with two issues remaining is $7.50).
                

#### Single Issues

Shipping rates for single issues of _The Objective Standard_ are as follows:

                
                                      * $4 for 1 to 3 copies to a U.S. address, $1 for each additional copy;
                      * $10 for 1 to 3 copies to Canada or Mexico, $2 for each additional copy;
                      * $15 for 1 to 3 copies to other foreign destinations, $3 for each additional copy.
                

#### Back Issue Bundle

The Back Issue Bundle ships for free to addresses within the United States,
and for $30 to other destinations.

Send this to friend

Your emailRecipient email

SendCancel

![Clicky](//in.getclicky.com/101051733ns.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

