

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

                
                                      *           *           *           * JOIN MWU
                

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

                
                                      * GAMES
                      * BROWSE THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * MORE __
                

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

                
                                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

                
                                      * JOIN MWU
                      * GAMES
                      * THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# species

noun

spe·​cies | \ ˈspē-(ˌ)shēz ![How to pronounce species

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -(ˌ)sēz\

plural species

## Definition of _species_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1a **:** kind, sort

b **:** a class of individuals having common attributes and designated by a
common name specifically **:** a logical division of a genus or more
comprehensive class confessing sins in species and in number

c **:** the human race **:** human beings --often used with _the_ survival of
the species in the nuclear age

d(1) **:** a category of biological classification ranking immediately below
the genus or subgenus, comprising related organisms or populations potentially
capable of interbreeding, and being designated by a binomial that consists of
the name of a genus followed by a Latin or latinized uncapitalized noun or
adjective agreeing grammatically with the genus name

(2) **:** an individual or kind belonging to a biological species

e **:** a particular kind of atomic nucleus, atom, molecule, or ion

2 **:** the consecrated eucharistic elements of the Roman Catholic or Eastern
Orthodox Eucharist

3a **:** a mental image also **:** a sensible object

b **:** an object of thought correlative with a natural object

species

adjective

Definition of _species_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** belonging to a biological species as distinguished from a horticultural
variety a species rose

Synonyms Example Sentences Learn More about _species_

Keep scrolling for more

## Synonyms for _species_

Synonyms: Noun

bracket, category, class, classification, division, family, genus, grade,
group, kind, league, order, rank(s), rubric, set, tier, type

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Examples of _species_ in a Sentence

Noun

There are approximately 8,000 _species_ of ants. All European domestic cattle
belong to the same _species_. laws that protect endangered _species_

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

Take a look: This sort of behavior is reportedly common for this particular
_species_ of orb-weaving spider native to the southern half of South America.
-- Avery Thompson, _Popular Mechanics_ , "It's Raining Spiders in Brazil," 14
Jan. 2019 And this new paper looks at just one _species_ , when there are more
than 20,000 living bee species. -- Cathleen O'grady, _Ars Technica_ , "There’s
a new insecticide on the block, and it’s also bad news for bees," 19 Aug. 2018
Another _species_ , bone-eating worms,use acid to dissolve the skeletons of
dead whales. -- Cliff Kapono, _sandiegouniontribune.com_ , "Boom! Pow! Zap!
The superheroes of the sea have invaded Birch Aquarium," 3 July 2018 For a
science that can count the bones of some entire fossil hominin species with
the fingers of one hand, finding so many fossils of one _species_ in one place
is unprecedented. -- Lydia Pyne, _Ars Technica_ , "Rising Star found a new
species—now it wants to find a new way for paleoanthropology," 20 Dec. 2018 So
is this one _species_ of spider the only lactating arachnid, or is this
behavior more common than scientists thought? -- Avery Thompson, _Popular
Mechanics_ , "There Is a Spider That Feeds Its Young Delicious Milk, Because
Nature Is Scary," 30 Nov. 2018 Not one _species_ , one bird, the famed African
gray parrot, Alex, who knew not only words, but numbers. -- James Gorman, _New
York Times_ , "Do Bees Know Nothing?," 7 June 2018 The good bit about that
work is that scientists have used tissue samples and genetics to determine
that the salamander is not one _species_ , but at least five. -- Matt Simon,
_WIRED_ , "The 6-Foot Chinese Giant Salamander Is in Serious Trouble," 21 May
2018 This in itself isn’t much to brag about—except that one part of the
boquila can impersonate one _species_ while another part of the same
individual mimics an entirely different species. -- Gerard Helferich, _WSJ_ ,
"‘The Revolutionary Genius of Plants’ Review: Thinking Like a Flower," 4 Jan.
2019

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'species.' Views expressed in the
examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send
us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _species_

Noun

14th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1a

Adjective

1899, in the meaning defined above

## History and Etymology for _species_

Noun

Middle English, from Latin, appearance, kind, species, from _specere_ to look
— more at spy

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _species_

Share _species_

Post the Definition of species to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of species on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _species_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

## Dictionary Entries near _species_

speciedaler

specie jar

specie payment

species

species counterpoint

species-group

speciesism

## Statistics for _species_

Last Updated

2 Jun 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _species_

## The first known use of _species_ was in the 14th century

See more words from the same century

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _species_

species

_noun_

![How to pronounce species \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _species_

biology **:** a group of animals or plants that are similar and can produce
young animals or plants **:** a group of related animals or plants that is
smaller than a genus

**:** a particular group of things or people that belong together or have some
shared quality

See the full definition for _species_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

species

noun

spe·​cies | \ ˈspē-shēz ![How to pronounce species

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -sēz\

plural species

## Kids Definition of _species_

1 **:** a group of similar living things that ranks below the genus in
scientific classification and is made up of individuals able to produce
offspring with one another The one-humped camel is a different _species_ from
the two-humped camel.

2 **:** a class of things of the same kind and with the same name **:** kind,
sort

species

noun

spe·​cies | \ ˈspē-(ˌ)shēz ![How to pronounce species

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -(ˌ)sēz ![How to pronounce species

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

plural species

## Medical Definition of _species_

1a **:** a category of biological classification ranking immediately below the
genus or subgenus, comprising related organisms or populations potentially
capable of interbreeding, and being designated by a binomial that consists of
the name of the genus followed by a Latin or latinized uncapitalized noun or
adjective agreeing grammatically with the genus name

b **:** an individual or kind belonging to a biological species

2 **:** a particular kind of atomic nucleus, atom, molecule, or ion production
of DNA damage by active oxygen species

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _species_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _species_

Spanish Central: Translation of _species_

Nglish: Translation of _species_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _species_ for Arabic Speakers

Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about _species_

Comments on _species_

What made you want to look up _species_? Please tell us where you read or
heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
                
                      * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
                
                      * clementine tangerine
                      * nectarine orange
                

![How Strong Is Your

Vocabulary?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Test your vocabulary with our 10-question quiz!

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Word Winder's

CrossWinder](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

                
                                      1. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
                
                      2. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
                
                      3. codify  Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade
                

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
                

Your poem could win $$

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
                

Going above and beyond

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
                

They sound alike but that's it

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
                

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

                
                                      * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
                

You all would not have guessed some of these

                
                                      * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
                

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

                
                                      * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
                

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

                
                                      * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
                

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
                

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
                

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![How Strong Is Your Vocabulary?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) How Strong Is Your Vocabulary?
                

Test your vocabulary with our 10-question quiz!

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Word Winder's CrossWinder](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Word Winder's CrossWinder
                

A game of winding words.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

                
                                      * SPANISH CENTRAL
                      * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
                      * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
                      * VISUAL DICTIONARY
                      * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
                      * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
                      * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
                      * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
                

FOLLOW US

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * a
                      * b
                      * c
                      * d
                      * e
                      * f
                      * g
                      * h
                      * i
                      * j
                      * k
                      * l
                      * m
                      * n
                      * o
                      * p
                      * q
                      * r
                      * s
                      * t
                      * u
                      * v
                      * w
                      * x
                      * y
                      * z
                      * 0-9
                      * Home 
                      * Help 
                      * Apps 
                      * About Us 
                      * Shop 
                      * Advertising Info 
                      * Dictionary API 
                      * Contact Us 
                      * Video 
                      * Favorites 
                      * Word of the Year 
                      * Law Dictionary 
                      * Medical Dictionary 
                      * Privacy Policy 
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Browse the Thesaurus 
                      * Browse the Medical Dictionary
                      * Browse the Legal Dictionary
                      * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
                

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

