

# Catholic Church and abortion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![Emblem of the Papacy

SE.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/81/Emblem_of_the_Papacy_SE.svg/25px-

Emblem_of_the_Papacy_SE.svg.png)

* * *

Part of a series of articles on  
Abortion  
and the Catholic Church

Official opposition

  * Canon 915
    * Eucharist denial or excommunication
  * Canon 1398
  * _Evangelium vitae_
  * _Humanae vitae_
  * In politics

Philosophy and theology

  * Consistent life ethic
  * Culture of life
  * Sanctity of life
  * Ensoulment
  * Double effect
  * Indirect abortion

History

  * Gianna Beretta Molla
  * Margaret McBride excommunication
  * 2009 Brazilian girl abortion case
  * Death of Savita Halappanavar

Activism

  * March for Life 
    * Life and Family
    * Paris
    * Prague
    * Chicago
    * Washington, D.C.
    * West Coast
  * Priests for Life
  * Sisters of Life
  * Knights of Columbus
  * Catholic Answers
  * CatholicVote.org
  * American Life League
  * Catholic Family and Human Rights Institute
  * National Right to Life Committee

Dissidence

  * Catholics for Choice
    * _A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion_

See also

  * WikiBook: _Catholic Church and abortion_

  * Other Christian views

  * In the United States
  * Abortion
  * Abortion law

![046CupolaSPietro.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/046CupolaSPietro.jpg/16px-046CupolaSPietro.jpg)
Catholicism portal

  * v
  * t
  * e

The Catholic Church opposes all forms of abortion procedures whose direct
purpose is to destroy a zygote, blastocyst, embryo or fetus, since it holds
that "human life must be respected and protected absolutely from the moment of
conception. From the first moment of his existence, a human being must be
recognized as having the rights of a person – among which is the inviolable
right of every innocent being to life."[1] However, the Church does recognize
as morally legitimate certain acts which indirectly result in the death of the
fetus, as when the direct purpose is removal of a cancerous womb. Canon 1398
of the 1983 Code of Canon Law imposes automatic ( _latae sententiae_ )
excommunication on Latin Catholics who procure a completed abortion,[2] if
they fulfill the conditions for being subject to such a sanction.[3] Eastern
Catholics are not subject to automatic excommunication, but by Canon 1450 of
the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches they are to be excommunicated by
decree if found guilty of the same action,[4] and they may be absolved of the
sin only by the eparchial bishop.[5] In addition to teaching that abortion is
immoral, the Catholic Church also makes public statements and takes actions in
opposition to its legality.

Many, and in some Western countries most, Catholics disagree with the official
position of the Catholic Church, which opposes abortion and its legality; with
views ranging from allowing exceptions in a generally pro-life position to
acceptance of complete legality[6][7][8][9][10] and morality[11] of abortion.
There is a correlation between Mass attendance and agreement with the official
teaching of the Church on the issue; that is, frequent Mass-goers are far more
likely to be pro-life, while those who attend less often (or rarely or never)
are more likely to be pro-choice.[8][10][11][12]

## Contents

  * 1 Church doctrine
    * 1.1 Belief in delayed animation
    * 1.2 Juridical consequences
    * 1.3 Discussions about possible justifying circumstances
    * 1.4 Unintentional abortion
    * 1.5 Ectopic pregnancy
    * 1.6 Embryos
    * 1.7 Sanctions
    * 1.8 Forgiveness of women who abort
    * 1.9 Recent statements of the Church's position
  * 2 Attitudes of Catholic laity
    * 2.1 United States
    * 2.2 United Kingdom
    * 2.3 Australia
    * 2.4 Italy
  * 3 Recent events
    * 3.1 Belgium
    * 3.2 Brazil
    * 3.3 England
    * 3.4 India
    * 3.5 Ireland
    * 3.6 Italy
    * 3.7 Poland
    * 3.8 United States
  * 4 Political debate over legalization of abortion
    * 4.1 Position of the Church
    * 4.2 Church treatment of pro-choice politicians
  * 5 Medical personnel and hospitals
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References

## Church doctrine[edit]

According to _Respect For Unborn Human Life: The Church's Constant Teaching_ ,
a document released by United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Committee
on Pro-Life Activities, the Catholic Church has condemned procured abortion as
immoral since the 1st century.[13] However, this claim has been disputed by
several historians, such as John Connery,[14] Ann Hibner Koblitz,[15] Angus
McLaren,[16] John Noonan,[17] and John Riddle.[18][19]

Early Christian writings rejecting abortion are the _Didache_ , the _Epistle
of Barnabas_ , the _Apocalypse of Peter_ ,[20] and the works of early writers
such as Tertullian, Athenagoras of Athens,[21] Clement of Alexandria and Basil
of Caesarea.[22] The earliest Church legislation did not make a distinction
between "formed" and "unformed" fetuses, as was done in the Greek Septuagint
version of Exodus 21:22-23; this position can be found in the writing of early
Church Fathers such as Basil of Caesarea and early Church council canons
(Elvira, Ancyra).[23][24]

In the 4th and 5th centuries, some writers such as Gregory of Nyssa and
Maximus the Confessor held that human life already began at conception, others
such as Lactantius – following Aristotle's view – spoke rather of the soul
that was "infused" in the body after forty days or more, and those such as
Jerome and Augustine of Hippo left the mystery of the timing of the infusion
to God.[23]

Augustine of Hippo "vigorously condemned the practice of induced abortion" as
a crime, in any stage of pregnancy, although he accepted the distinction
between "formed" and "unformed" fetuses mentioned in the Septuagint
translation of Exodus 21:22-23, and did not classify as murder the abortion of
an "unformed" fetus since he thought that it could not be said with certainty
whether the fetus had already received a soul.[25] Catholic clergy considers
Augustine's reflections on abortion to be of little value in the present day
because of the limitations of the science of embryology at that time.[13][26]

Later writers such as John Chrysostom and Caesarius of Arles, as well as later
Church councils (e.g. Lerida and Braga II), also condemned abortion as
"gravely wrong", without making a distinction between "formed" and "unformed"
fetuses nor defining precisely in what stage of pregnancy human life
began.[23][24]

While the Church has always condemned abortion, changing beliefs about the
moment the embryo gains a human soul have led to changes in canon law in the
classification of the sin of abortion.[27][28] In particular, several
historians have written[29][30][31] that prior to the 19th century most
Catholic authors did not regard as an abortion what we call "early abortion"
\-- abortion before "quickening" or "ensoulment."

Not only did they not view early abortions as being abortions, but it is
argued that some Catholics saw nothing wrong with compiling lists of known
abortifacient herbs and discovering new ones. For example, in her treatises
the 12th century abbess and later saint Hildegard of Bingen recommended tansy
as an effective abortifacient.[18]:116-117 Although others have noted that she
explicitly condemned abortion and contraception and likely did not mean to
support the use of tansy for abortion.[32] In the 13th century physician and
cleric Peter of Spain wrote a book called _Thesaurus Pauperum_ (literally
_Treasure of the Poor_ ) containing a long list of early-stage abortifacients,
including rue, pennyroyal, and other mints.[17]:205-211 It is believed by some
that Peter of Spain became Pope John XXI in 1276.

Some prominent theologians, such as John Chrysostom and Thomas Sanchez,
believed that post-quickening abortion was less sinful than deliberate
contraception.[16]:161[33]:172,180 John Chrysostom believed that late-stage
abortion was not as bad as deliberately killing an already-born person,
whereas contraception was definitely worse than murder, according to
him.[17]:98-99

As Koblitz writes,[15]:16

> Catholic theologians have long wrestled with the question of whether one can
truly be forgiven for a sin that one confesses while either still engaged in
the sinful practice or else fully intending to resume the action as soon as
absolution has been obtained. When a woman confesses to having had an
abortion, she can make a sincere act of contrition if she believes that she
will never commit the sin again. "It only happened once" is a frequent (though
not necessarily accurate) refrain when an unintended pregnancy occurs. Daily
use of contraception, on the other hand, is impossible to rationalize to
oneself in this manner, and so it is a sin that, to many Catholics, cannot be
satisfactorily expunged.

### Belief in delayed animation[edit]

See also: History of early Christian thought on abortion and Ensoulment

Following Aristotle's view, it was commonly held by some "leading Catholic
thinkers" in early Church history that a human being did not come into
existence as such immediately on conception, but only some weeks later.
Abortion was viewed as a sin, but not as murder, until the embryo was animated
by a human soul.[34] In _On Virginal Conception and Original Sin_ 7, Anselm of
Canterbury (1033–1109) said that "no human intellect accepts the view that an
infant has the rational soul from the moment of conception."[21] A few decades
after Anselm's death, a Catholic collection of canon law, in the _Decretum
Gratiani_ , stated that "he is not a murderer who brings about abortion before
the soul is in the body."[21]

Even when Church law, in line with the theory of delayed ensoulment, assigned
different penalties to earlier and later abortions, abortion at any stage was
considered a grave evil by some commentators.[35] Thus Thomas Aquinas, who
accepted the Aristotelian theory that a human soul was infused only after 40
days for a male fetus, 90 days for a female, saw abortion of an unsouled fetus
as always unethical,[36] a serious crime,[37] a grave sin, a misdeed and
contrary to nature. He wrote: "This sin, although grave and to be reckoned
among misdeeds and against nature...is something less than homicide... nor is
such to be judged irregular[38] unless one procures the abortion of an already
formed fetus."[21][39][40]

This Aristotelian approach to delayed ensoulment was abandoned by the 17th
century and the conviction grew that the soul was present from the moment of
conception. The scientific proof in 1827 of the existence of the female ovum
and in 1875 of the involvement of the union of a gamete from each parent in
conception reduced philosophical speculation about a delayed "substantial
change".[41]

### Juridical consequences[edit]

Most early penitentials imposed equal penances for abortion whether early-term
or late-term, but others distinguished between the two. Later penitentials
normally distinguished, imposing heavier penances for late-term abortions.[42]
By comparison, anal and oral intercourse were treated much more harshly, as
was intentional homicide.[14]:67-74[17]:155-165[33]:135-213

Although the _Decretum Gratiani_ , which remained the basis of Catholic canon
law until replaced by the 1917 Code of Canon Law, distinguished between early-
term and late-term abortions, that canonical distinction was abolished for a
period of three years by the bull of Pope Sixtus V, _Effraenatam_ , of 28
October 1588. This decreed various penalties against perpetrators of all forms
of abortion without distinction.[43] Calling abortion murder, it decreed that
those who procured the abortion of a fetus, "whether animated or unanimated,
formed or unformed" should suffer the same punishments as "true murderers and
assassins who have actually and really committed murder." As well as decreeing
those punishments for subjects of the Papal States, whose civil ruler he was,
Pope Sixtus also inflicted on perpetrators the spiritual punishment of
automatic excommunication (section 7). Sixtus's successor, Pope Gregory XIV,
recognizing that the law was not producing the hoped-for effects, withdrew it
three years later, limiting the punishments to abortion of a "formed"
fetus.[44]

With his 1869 bull _Apostolicae Sedis moderationi_ , Pope Pius IX rescinded
Gregory XIV's not-yet-animated fetus exception with regard to the spiritual
penalty of excommunication, declaring that those who procured an effective
abortion incurred excommunication reserved to bishops or ordinaries.[45] From
then on this penalty was incurred automatically through abortion at any stage
of pregnancy, which had always been seen as a serious matter.[46]

In another respect Catholic canon law continued even after 1869 to maintain a
distinction between abortion of a formed and of an unformed fetus. As
indicated above in a quotation from Thomas Aquinas, one who procured the
abortion of a quickened fetus was considered "irregular", meaning that he was
disqualified from receiving or exercising Holy Orders. Pope Sixtus V extended
this penalty even to early-term abortion (section 2 of his bull _Effraenatam_
), but Gregory XIV restricted it again. Pius IX made no ruling in its regard,
with the result that the penalty of irregularity was still limited to late-
term abortion at the time of the article "Abortion" in the 1907 Catholic
Encyclopedia.[47] The 1917 Code of Canon Law finally did away with the
distinction.[48]

In summary, with the exception of the three-year period 1588-1591, early
abortion was not prohibited by Catholic canon law until 1869.

### Discussions about possible justifying circumstances[edit]

In the Middle Ages, many Church commentators condemned all abortions, but the
14th-century Dominican John of Naples is reported to have been the first to
make an influential explicit statement that if the purpose was to save the
mother's life abortion was actually permitted, provided that ensoulment had
not been attained.[49] This view met both support and rejection from other
theologians. In the 16th century, while Thomas Sanchez accepted it, Antoninus
de Corbuba made the distinction that from then on became generally accepted
among Catholic theologians, namely that direct killing of the fetus was
unacceptable, but that treatment to cure the mother should be given even if it
would indirectly result in the death of the fetus.[49]

When, in the 17th century, Francis Torreblanca approved abortions aimed merely
at saving a woman's good name, the Holy Office (what is now called the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith), at that time headed by Pope
Innocent XI, condemned the proposition that "it is lawful to procure abortion
before ensoulment of the fetus lest a girl, detected as pregnant, be killed or
defamed."[50][51]

Although it is sometimes said that 18th-century Alphonsus Liguori argued that,
because of uncertainty about when the soul entered the fetus, abortion, while
in general morally wrong, was acceptable in circumstances such as when the
mother's life was in danger,[52] he clearly stated that it is never right to
take a medicine that of itself is directed to killing a fetus, although it is
lawful (at least according to general theological opinion) to give a mother in
extreme illness a medicine whose direct result is to save her life, even when
it indirectly results in expulsion of the fetus.[53] While Liguori mentioned
the distinction then made between animate and inanimate fetuses, he explained
that there was no agreement about when the soul is infused, with many holding
that it happens at the moment of conception, and said that the Church kindly
followed the 40-day opinion when applying the penalties of irregularity and
excommunication only on those who knowingly procured abortion of an animate
fetus.[54]

A disapproving letter published in the New York _Medical Record_ in 1895 spoke
of the Jesuit Augustine Lehmkuhl as considering craniotomy lawful when used to
save the mother's life.[55] The origin of the report was an article in a
German medical journal denounced as false in the _American Ecclesiastical
Review_ of the same year, which said that while Lehmkuhl had at an earlier
stage of discussion admitted doubts and advanced tentative ideas, he had later
adopted a view in full accord with the negative decision pronounced in 1884
and 1889 by the Sacred Penitentiary,[56] which in 1869 had refrained from
making a pronouncement.[57] According to Mackler, Lehmkuhl had accepted as a
defensible theory the licitness of removing even an animated fetus from the
womb as not necessarily killing it, but had rejected direct attacks on the
fetus such as craniotomy.[58]

Craniotomy was thus prohibited in 1884 and again in 1889.[56] In 1895 the Holy
See excluded the inducing of non-viable premature birth and in 1889
established the principle that any direct killing of either fetus or mother is
wrong; in 1902 it ruled out the direct removal of an ectopic embryo to save
the mother's life, but did not forbid the removal of the infected fallopian
tube, thus causing an indirect abortion.(see below).[57]

In 1930 Pope Pius XI ruled out what he called "the direct murder of the
innocent" as a means of saving the mother. And the Second Vatican Council
declared: "Life must be protected with the utmost care from the moment of
conception: abortion and infanticide are abominable crimes."[59]

### Unintentional abortion[edit]

See also: Principle of double effect and Indirect abortion

The principle of double effect is frequently cited in relation to abortion. A
doctor who believes abortion is always morally wrong may nevertheless remove
the uterus or fallopian tubes of a pregnant woman, knowing the procedure will
cause the death of the embryo or fetus, in cases in which the woman is certain
to die without the procedure (examples cited include aggressive uterine cancer
and ectopic pregnancy). In these cases, the intended effect is to save the
woman's life, not to terminate the pregnancy, and the death of the embryo or
fetus is a side effect. The death of the fetus is an undesirable but
unavoidable consequence.[60][61]

### Ectopic pregnancy[edit]

An ectopic pregnancy is one of a few cases where the foreseeable death of an
embryo is allowed, since it is categorized as an indirect abortion. This view
was also advocated by Pius XII in a 1953 address to the Italian Association of
Urology.[62]

Using the Thomistic Principle of Totality (removal of a pathological part to
preserve the life of the person) and the Doctrine of Double Effect, the only
moral action in an ectopic pregnancy where a woman's life is directly
threatened is the removal of the tube containing the human embryo
(salpingectomy). The death of the human embryo is unintended although
foreseen.[63]

The use of methotrexate and salpingectomy remains controversial in the
Catholic medical community, and the Church has not taken an official stance on
these interventions. The Catholic Health Association of the United States,
which issues guidelines for Catholic hospitals and health systems there,
allows both procedures to be used. The argument that these methods amount to
an indirect abortion revolves around the idea that the removal of the
Fallopian tube or, in the case of methotrexate, the chemical destruction of
the trophoblastic cells (those which go on to form the placenta), does not
constitute a direct act upon the developing embryo. Individual hospitals and
physicians, however, may choose to prohibit these procedures if they
personally interpret these acts as a direct abortion.[64][65] Despite the lack
of an official pronouncement by the Church on these treatments, in a 2012
survey of 1,800 Ob/Gyns who work in religious hospitals, only 2.9% of
respondents reported feeling constrained in their treatment options by their
employers, suggesting that in practice, physicians and healthcare institutions
generally choose to treat ectopic pregnancies.[66][67]

### Embryos[edit]

See also: Stem cell controversy

The Church considers the destruction of any embryo to be equivalent to
abortion, and thus opposes embryonic stem cell research.[68]

### Sanctions[edit]

Catholics who procure a completed abortion are subject to a _latae sententiae_
excommunication.[2] That means that the excommunication does not need to be
imposed (as with a _ferendae sententiae_ penalty); rather, being expressly
established by canon law, it is incurred _ipso facto_ when the delict is
committed (a _latae sententiae_ penalty).[69] Canon law states that in certain
circumstances "the accused is not bound by a _latae sententiae_ penalty";
among the ten circumstances listed are commission of a delict by someone not
yet sixteen years old, or by someone who without negligence does not know of
the existence of the penalty, or by someone "who was coerced by grave fear,
even if only relatively grave, or due to necessity or grave
inconvenience."[70][71]

According to a 2004 memorandum by Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, Catholic
politicians who consistently campaign and vote for permissive abortion laws
should be informed by their priest of the Church's teaching and warned to
refrain from receiving the Eucharist or risk being denied it until they end
such activity.[72] This position is based on Canon 915 of the 1983 Code of
Canon Law and has also been supported, in a personal capacity, by Archbishop
Raymond Leo Cardinal Burke, Prefect of the Apostolic Signatura, the highest
judicial authority in the Catholic Church after the pope himself.[73] Pope
Francis reaffirmed this position on March 2013, when he stated that "[people]
cannot receive Holy Communion and at the same time act with deeds or words
against the commandments, particularly when abortion, euthanasia, and other
grave crimes against life and family are encouraged. This responsibility
weighs particularly over legislators, heads of governments, and health
professionals."[74]

### Forgiveness of women who abort[edit]

Apart from indicating in its canon law that automatic excommunication does not
apply to women who abort because of grave fear or due to grave inconvenience,
the Catholic Church, without making any such distinctions, assures the
possibility of forgiveness for women who have had an abortion. Pope John Paul
II wrote:

> I would now like to say a special word to women who have had an abortion.
The Church is aware of the many factors which may have influenced your
decision, and she does not doubt that in many cases it was a painful and even
shattering decision. The wound in your heart may not yet have healed.
Certainly what happened was and remains terribly wrong. But do not give in to
discouragement and do not lose hope. Try rather to understand what happened
and face it honestly. If you have not already done so, give yourselves over
with humility and trust to repentance. The Father of mercies is ready to give
you his forgiveness and his peace in the Sacrament of Reconciliation.[75]

On the occasion of the Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy in 2015, Pope Francis
announced that all priests (during the Jubilee year - ending November 20,
2016) will be allowed in the Sacrament of Penance to remit the penalty of
excommunication for abortion, which had been reserved to bishops and certain
priests who were given such mandate by their bishop.[76] This policy was made
permanent by an apostolic letter titled _Misericordia et misera_ (Mercy and
Misery), which was issued on November 21, 2016.[77][78]

### Recent statements of the Church's position[edit]

See also: Evangelium Vitae

The Church teaches that "human life must be respected and protected absolutely
from the moment of conception. From the first moment of his existence, a human
being must be recognized as having the rights of a person – among which is the
inviolable right of every innocent being to life."[1] This follows from the
fact that probabilism may not be used where human life _may_ be at
stake;[79][80] the _Catholic Catechism_ teaches that the embryo must be
treated from conception "as" (Latin: _tamquam,_ "as if") a human person.[81]
And "morally significant is the large proportion of embryos lost before and
during the process of implantation,"[80] estimated at 70 percent that fail to
last the first five days.[82]

The New Catholic Encyclopedia concludes:[83]

> After a certain stage of intrauterine development it is perfectly evident
that fetal life is fully human. Although some might speculate as to when that
stage is reached, there is no way of arriving at this knowledge by any known
criterion; and as long as it is probable that embryonic life is human from the
first moment of its existence, the purposeful termination (is immoral).

The modern magisterium has carefully avoided confusing "human being" with
"human person", and avoids the conclusion that every embryonic human being is
a person, which would raise the question of "ensoulment" and immoral
destiny.[84]

Since the 1st century, the Church has affirmed that every procured abortion is
a moral evil, a teaching that the Catechism of the Catholic Church declares
"has not changed and remains unchangeable."[85]

The Church teaches that the inalienable right to life of every innocent human
being is a constitutive element of a civil society and its legislation. In
other words, it is beholden upon society to legally protect the life of the
unborn.[86]

Catholic theologians trace Catholic thought on abortion to early Christian
teachings such as the _Didache_ , the _Epistle of Barnabas_ and the
_Apocalypse of Peter_.[20] In contrast, Catholic philosophers Daniel
Dombrowski and Robert Deltete analyzed Church theological history and the
"development of science" in _A Brief, Liberal, Catholic Defense of Abortion_
to argue that "a pro-choice position is defensibly Catholic."[87]

## Attitudes of Catholic laity[edit]

See also: Catholic politicians and abortion

Although the church hierarchy campaigns against abortion and its legalization
in all circumstances, including threats to a woman's life or health and
pregnancy from rape, many Catholics disagree with this position, according to
several surveys of Western Catholic views.

### United States[edit]

Main article: Catholic Church and abortion in the United States

A majority of U.S. Catholics hold views that differ from the official Church
doctrine on abortion. According to a 1995 survey by Lake Research and Tarrance
Group, 64% of U.S. Catholics say they disapprove of the statement that
"abortion is morally wrong in every case".[88] According to a 2016 survey by
Pew Research Center, 51% of U.S. Catholics say that "having an abortion is
morally wrong."[89] Surveys conducted by a number of polling organizations
indicate that between 16% and 22% of American Catholic voters agree with
Church policy that abortion should be illegal in all cases; the rest of the
respondents held positions ranging from support for legal abortions in certain
restricted circumstances to an unqualified acceptance of abortion in all
cases.[6][7][8][90] According to a 2009 survey by Pew Research Center, 47% of
American Catholics believe that abortion should be legal in "all or most
cases", while 42% of American Catholics believe that abortion should be
illegal in "all or most cases".[10] When posed the binary question of whether
abortion was acceptable or unacceptable, rather than a question of whether it
should be allowed or not allowed in all or most cases, according to polls
conducted in 2006-2008 by Gallup, 40% of American Catholics said it was
acceptable, approximately the same percentage as non-Catholics.[11] According
to the _National Catholic Reporter_ , some 58% of American Catholic women feel
that they do not have to follow the abortion teaching of their bishop.[91]

However, the results in the United States differ significantly when the polls
distinguish between practicing and/or churchgoing Catholics and non-practicing
Catholics. Those who attend church weekly are more likely to oppose
abortion.[8][10][11][12] According to a Marist College Institute for Public
Opinion's survey released in 2008, 36% of practising Catholics, defined as
those who attend church at least twice a month, consider themselves "pro-
choice"; while 65% of non-practicing Catholics considers themselves "pro-
choice", 76% of them say that "abortion should be significantly
restricted".[92] According to polls conducted in 2006-2008 by Gallup, 24% of
practicing Catholics, defined in this poll as those who attend church "weekly
or almost every week", believe abortion is morally acceptable.[11]

It is said that "Latino Catholics" in the United States are more likely to
oppose abortion than "White Catholics".[12]

Some reasons for dissenting from the church's position on the legality of
abortion, other than finding abortion morally acceptable, include "I am
personally opposed to abortion, but I think the Church is concentrating its
energies too much on abortion rather than on social action"[93] or "I do not
wish to impose my views on others."[94][95][96][97]

According to a poll conducted by Zogby International, 29% of Catholic voters
choose their candidate based solely on the candidate's position on abortion;
most of these vote for pro-life candidates; 44% believe a "good Catholic"
cannot vote for a pro-choice politician, while 53% believe one can.[6]

According to 2011 report from Public Religion Research Institute, 68% of
American Catholics believe that one can still be a "good Catholic" while
disagreeing with the church's position on abortion, approximately as many as
members of other religious groups.[12] On this long-standing phenomenon of a
number of Catholics disagreeing with the Church's official position on
abortion, Pope John Paul II commented: "It is sometimes claimed that dissent
from the Magisterium is totally compatible with being a "good Catholic" and
poses no obstacle to the reception of the sacraments. This is a grave error."
In what the _Los Angeles Times_ called a key admonition, he added: "It has
never been easy to accept the Gospel teaching in its entirety, and it never
will be."[98][99] Many, however, suggest that this is the problem, that some
of the strongest pro-life advocates seem unconcerned about critical social
issues in the complete spectrum of the Church's moral teaching.[100] US
Cardinal Bernardin and Pope Francis have been prominent proponents of this
"seamless garment" approach.[101] The US Bishops have called on Catholics to
weigh all the threats to life and human dignity before placing their
vote:[102] the tag "intrinsic evil" can lead to an over-simplification of
issues.[103] In his column in the Jesuit magazine _America_ , Professor John
F. Kavanaugh, S.J., observed:[104]

> Most people open to the facts recognize that a human life has begun by the
end of the first trimester of a pregnancy. It is at this point that some
common ground may be reached to protect unborn human life. There is political
will at hand to ensure such protection; but as long as the extreme positions
hold sway, no action will be taken.

### United Kingdom[edit]

A 2010 poll indicated that one in fourteen British Catholics accept the
Church's teaching that abortion should not be allowed in any circumstances.[9]

### Australia[edit]

According to one survey, 72% of Australian Catholics say that the decision to
have an abortion "should be left to individual women and their doctors."[105]

### Italy[edit]

According to the Italian polling organization Eurispes, between 18.6% and
83.2% of Italian Catholics believe abortion is acceptable, depending on the
circumstance. The highest number, 83.2%, is in favor of the voluntary
termination of pregnancy in case the mother's life is in danger.[106]

## Recent events[edit]

### Belgium[edit]

Prior to 1990, Belgium remained one of the few countries where abortion was
illegal. However, abortions were unofficially permitted (and even reimbursed
out of 'sickness funds') as long as they were registered as "curettage". It
was estimated that 20,000 abortions were performed each year (in comparison to
100,000 births).[107]

In early 1990, despite the opposition of the Christian parties, a coalition of
the Socialist and Liberal parties passed a law to partially liberalize
abortion law in Belgium. The Belgian bishops appealed to the population at
large with a public statement that expounded their doctrinal and pastoral
opposition to the law. They warned Belgian Catholics that anyone who co-
operated "effectively and directly" in the procurement of abortions was
"excluding themselves from the ecclesiastical community." Motivated by the
strong stance of the Belgian bishops, King Baudoin notified the Prime Minister
on March 30 that he could not sign the law without violating his conscience as
a Catholic.[108] Since the legislation would not have the force of law without
the king's signature, his refusal to sign threatened to precipitate a
constitutional crisis.[109] However, the problem was resolved by an agreement
between the king and Prime Minister Martens by which the Belgian government
declared the king unable to govern, assumed his authority and enacted the law,
after which Parliament then voted to reinstate the king on the next
day.[107][110][111][112][113][114] The Vatican described the king's action as
a "noble and courageous choice" dictated by a "very strong moral
conscience".[115] Others have suggested that Baudoin's action was "little more
than a gesture", since he was reinstated as king just 44 hours after he was
removed from power.[108]

### Brazil[edit]

Main article: 2009 Brazilian girl abortion case

In March 2009, Archbishop Jose Cardoso Sobrinho said that by securing the
abortion of a nine-year-old girl who had been raped by her stepfather, her
mother and the doctors involved were excommunicated _latae
sententiae_.[116][117] This statement of the Archbishop drew criticism not
only from women's rights groups and the Brazilian government, but also from
Archbishop Rino Fisichella, president of the Pontifical Academy for Life, who
said it was unjust,[118] and other churchmen. In view of the interpretations
that were placed upon Archbishop Fisichella's article, the Congregation for
the Doctrine of the Faith issued a clarification reiterating that "the
Church's teaching on procured abortion has not changed, nor can it
change."[119] The National Conference of Bishops of Brazil declared the
Archbishop's statement mistaken, since in accordance with canon law, when she
had acted under pressure and in order to save her daughter's life, the girl's
mother certainly had not incurred automatic excommunication and there was
insufficient evidence for declaring that any of the doctors involved had.[120]

### England[edit]

In September 2013, Archbishop Peter Smith, Vice-President of the Catholic
Bishops' Conference of England and Wales, decried the decision of the Crown
Prosecution Service not to proceed against two doctors who accepted a request
to perform an abortion as a means of sex selection, a procedure that is
illegal in Britain and that Archbishop Smith described as one expression of
what he called the injustice that abortion is to the unwanted child.[121][122]

### India[edit]

Main article: Abortion in India

Mother Teresa opposed abortion, and in the talk she gave in Norway on being
awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize for Peace, she called abortion "the greatest
destroyer of peace today".[123][124] She further asserted that, "Any country
that accepts abortion is not teaching its people to love but to use violence
to get what they want."[125][126][127][128]

### Ireland[edit]

In October 2012, Savita Halappanavar died at University Hospital Galway in
Ireland, after suffering a miscarriage which led to sepsis (blood poisoning),
multiple organ failure, and her death. She was denied abortion under Irish law
because the fetus had a heartbeat and nothing could therefore be done. A
midwife explained to her, in a remark for which she later apologized: "This is
a Catholic country." Widespread protests were subsequently held in Ireland and
India, and there was a call to re-examine the Irish abortion
laws.[129][130][131][132] On 25 May 2018, the Irish electorate voted by a
majority of 66.4% to repeal the 8th Amendment which banned abortion in almost
all circumstances, thus allowing the government to legislate for abortion. An
exit poll conducted by RTE suggested that almost 70% of those who voted yes
considered themselves to be Catholic. Abortion services commenced on 1 January
2019.

### Italy[edit]

Speaking to a group of pro-life activists from the Congress of the Movement
for Life of Italy, Pope Francis called them Good Samaritans and encouraged
them "to protect the most vulnerable people, who have the right to be born
into life." He called children a gift, and emphasized the dignity of women. He
said they were doing "important work in favor of life from conception until
its natural end."[133]

### Poland[edit]

Main article: Abortion in Poland

It is widely believed that the Catholic Church in Poland is the main source of
opposition to the liberalization of abortion laws and the reintroduction of
sex education in Polish schools in accordance with European standards.
However, research studies have shown that Polish Catholics have a wide range
of views on sex and marriage. Many Polish people, including devout Catholics,
complain that the Catholic Church makes demands that very few Catholics want
and are able to satisfy.[134]

Before the transition to democracy, Poland's government presided over some of
the highest abortion rates in Europe, with approximately 1.5 million
procedures done per year. Polling in 1991, coming after the collapse of the
past communist regime in Poland, found that about 60% of Polish people
supported nonrestrictive abortion laws.[135]

### United States[edit]

An advocacy organization called Catholics for Choice was founded in 1973 to
support the availability of abortion, stating that this position is compatible
with Catholic teachings particularly with "primacy of conscience" and the
importance of the laity in shaping church law.[136] In October 1984, CFC (then
Catholics for a Free Choice) placed an advertisement, signed by over one
hundred prominent Catholics, including nuns, in the _New York Times_. The
advertisement, called A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion contested
claims by the Church hierarchy that all Catholics opposed abortion rights, and
said that "direct abortion ... can sometimes be a moral choice." The Vatican
initiated disciplinary measures against some of the nuns who signed the
statement, sparking controversy among American Catholics, and intra-Catholic
conflict on the abortion issue remained news for at least two years in the
United States.[137] Bishop Fabian Bruskewitz excommunicated Catholics in his
jurisdiction who were associated with this organization in 1996,[138] and the
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops stated in 2000 that "[CFC] is not
a Catholic organization, does not speak for the Catholic Church, and in fact
promotes positions contrary to the teaching of the Church as articulated by
the Holy See and the USCCB."[139]

## Political debate over legalization of abortion[edit]

Main articles: Catholic Church and the politics of abortion and Abortion law

### Position of the Church[edit]

"The moment a positive law deprives a category of human beings of the
protection which civil legislation ought to accord them, the state is denying
the equality of all before the law. When the state does not place its power at
the service of the rights of each citizen, and in particular of the more
vulnerable, the very foundations of a state based on law are undermined. . . .
As a consequence of the respect and protection which must be ensured for the
unborn child from the moment of conception, the law must provide appropriate
penal sanctions for every deliberate violation of the child's rights."

Catechism of the Catholic Church[86]

Since the Catholic Church views procured abortion as gravely wrong, it
considers it a duty to reduce its acceptance by the public and in civil
legislation. While it considers that Catholics should not favour direct
abortion in any field, according to Frank K. Flinn, the Church recognizes that
Catholics may accept compromises that, while permitting direct abortions,
lessen their incidence by, for instance, restricting some forms or enacting
remedies against the conditions that give rise to them. Flinn says that
support may be given to a political platform that contains a clause in favour
of abortion but also elements that will actually reduce the number of
abortions, rather than to an anti-abortion platform that will lead to their
increase.[140]

In 2004, Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, then Prefect of the Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith, declared: "A Catholic would be guilty of formal
cooperation in evil, and so unworthy to present himself for holy Communion, if
he were to deliberately vote for a candidate precisely because of the
candidate's permissive stand on abortion and/or euthanasia. When a Catholic
does not share a candidate's stand in favor of abortion and/or euthanasia, but
votes for that candidate for other reasons, it is considered remote material
cooperation, which can be permitted in the presence of proportionate
reasons."[141]

### Church treatment of pro-choice politicians[edit]

Main article: Catholic politicians, abortion and communion or excommunication

Many controversies have arisen over its treatment of Catholic politicians who
support abortion rights. In most cases, Church officials have threatened to
refuse communion to these politicians. In some cases, officials have stated
that the politicians should refrain from receiving communion; in others, the
possibility of excommunication has been suggested.[ _citation needed_ ]

## Medical personnel and hospitals[edit]

Some medical personnel, including many Catholics, have strong moral or
religious objections to abortions and do not wish to perform or assist in
abortions.[142][143] The Catholic Church has argued that the "freedom of
conscience" rights of such personnel should be legally protected. For example,
the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops supports such "freedom of
conscience" legislation arguing that all healthcare providers should be free
to provide care to patients without violating their "most deeply held moral
and religious convictions."[144][145] The Virginia Catholic Conference
expressed support for pharmacists who consider that they cannot in conscience
be on duty during a sale of emergency contraception, which they believe is the
same as abortion.[146]

In response to such concerns, many states in the U.S. have enacted "freedom of
conscience" laws that protect the right of medical personnel to refuse to
participate in procedures such as abortion.[146] In 2008, towards the end of
the second Bush administration, the U.S. federal government issued a new rule
that ensured that healthcare workers would have the right to "refuse to
participate in abortions, sterilizations or any federally funded health
service or research activity on religious or ethical grounds." The new rule
was welcomed by pro-life organizations including the Catholic Church; however,
pro-choice advocates criticized the new regulation arguing that it would
"restrict access not only to abortion but also to contraception, infertility
treatment, assisted suicide and stem-cell research." The incoming Obama
administration proposed to rescind this rule.[147]

Attempts have been made to oblige Catholic hospitals to accept an obligation
to perform emergency abortions in cases where the pregnant woman's life is at
risk;[148] however, hospitals that agree to perform abortions in contradiction
to Church teaching may lose their official qualification as
"Catholic".[149][150] Church authorities have also admonished Catholic
hospitals who, following medical standards, refer patients outside the
hospital for abortion or contraception, or who perform tests for fetal
deformity.[151]

One Catholic hospital devotes care to helping women who wish to stop an
abortion after the process has begun.[152][153]

In November 2009, when Sister Margaret McBride, as a member of the ethics
board of a Catholic hospital, allowed doctors to perform an abortion to save
the life of a mother suffering from pulmonary hypertension, Bishop Thomas J.
Olmsted determined that she had incurred a _latae sententiae_ excommunication,
on the grounds that direct abortion cannot be justified.[154][155][156]

As of December 2011[update], the hospital stated that McBride had reconciled
with the Church and is in good standing with her religious institute and the
hospital.[157]

## See also[edit]

  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/046CupolaSPietro.jpg/32px-046CupolaSPietro.jpg)Catholicism portal

  * Religion and abortion

  * Christianity and abortion
  * Catholic moral theology
  * Culture war
  * Pro-life
  * Right to life
  * Sanctity of life
  * Culture of life

## References[edit]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - IntraText". _www.vatican.va_. Retrieved 2017-07-05.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Code of Canon Law, canon 1398 Archived February 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
  3. **^** Code of Canon Law, canons 1321-1329 Archived December 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  4. **^** Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 1450 §2
  5. **^** Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, canon 728 §2
  6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Karkabi, Barbara (October 31, 2008). "Abortion not main issue for Catholics: Survey results contradict bishops' stance". _Houston Chronicle_.
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Notre Dame Should Not Disinvite Obama, U.S. Catholics Tell Quinnipiac University National Poll; Attitudes On Abortion Similar Among All U.S. Voters". Quinnipiac University Polling Institute. May 14, 2009.
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Smith, Gregory; Pond, Allison (September 16, 2008). "Slight but Steady Majority Favors Keeping Abortion Legal". Pew Research Center.
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Most UK Catholics support abortion and use of contraception". _The Independent_. 19 September 2010.
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Obama, Catholics and the Notre Dame Commencement". Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. April 30, 2009.
  11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Newport, Frank (March 30, 2009). "Catholics Similar to Mainstream on Abortion, Stem Cells". Gallup. The same poll reported American Catholics as more permissive than American non-Catholics on sex between an unmarried man and woman, divorce, medical research using stem cells obtained from human embryos, having a baby outside of marriage, gambling and homosexual relations.
  12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jones, Robert P.; Cox, Daniel; Laser, Rachel (June 9, 2011). "Committed to Availability, Conflicted about Morality: What the Millennial Generation Tells Us about the Future of the Abortion Debate and the Culture Wars" (PDF). Public Religion Research Institute.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Respect for Unborn Human Life: the Church's Constant Teaching
  14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ John Connery, _Abortion: The Development of the Roman Catholic Perspective_ , Loyola University Press, 1997.
  15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ann Hibner Koblitz, _Sex and Herbs and Birth Control: Women and Fertility Regulation Through the Ages_ , Kovalevskaia Fund, 2014.
  16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Angus McLaren, _A History of Contraception from Antiquity to the Present Day_ , Basil Blackwell, 1990.
  17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ John Noonan, _Contraception: A History of Its Treatment by the Catholic Theologians and Canonists_ , Harvard University Press, 1965 (2nd edition 1986).
  18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ John M. Riddle, _Contraception and Abortion from the Ancient World to the Renaissance_ , Harvard University Press, 1992.
  19. **^** John M. Riddle, _Eve's Herbs: A History of Contraception and Abortion in the West_ , Harvard University Press, 1997.
  20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Abortion, the development of the Roman Catholic perspective By John R. Connery
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Frank K. Flinn, J. Gordon Melton, _Encyclopedia of Catholicism_ (Facts on File Encyclopedia of World Religions 2007 ISBN 978-0-8160-5455-8), p. 4
  22. **^** Kristin, Luker, _Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood_ (University of California Press 1985 ISBN 978-0-5209-0792-8), p. 12
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ M. Therese Lysaught, Joseph Kotva, Stephen E. Lammers, Allen Verhey, _On Moral Medicine: Theological Perspectives on Medical Ethics_ (Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing 2012 ISBN 9780802866011), p. 676
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michèle Goyens, Pieter de Leemans, An Smets, _Science Translated: Latin and Vernacular Translations of Scientific Treatises in Medieval Europe_ (Leuven University Press 2008 ISBN 9789058676719), p. 384, 399
  25. **^** Bauerschmidt, John C. (1999). "Abortion". In Allan D. Fitzgerald (ed.) (eds.). _Augustine Through the Ages: An Encyclopedia_. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8028-3843-8.CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
  26. **^** Bishop Robert Vasa. "Modern Look at Abortion Not Same as St. Augustine's". EWTN.
  27. **^** Østnor, Lars (2008-04-03). _Stem Cells, Human Embryos and Ethics: Interdisciplinary Perspectives_. Springer Science  & Business Media. ISBN 9781402069895.
  28. **^** Ana S. Iltis, Mark J. Cherry, _At the Roots of Christian Bioethics_ (M  & M Scrivener Press 2010 ISBN 978-0-9764041-8-7), p. 166
  29. **^** Joan Cadden, "Western medicine and natural philosophy," in Vern L. Bullough and James A. Brundage, eds., _Handbook of Medieval Sexuality_ , Garland, 1996, p. 51-80.
  30. **^** Cyril C. Means, Jr., "A historian's view," in Robert E. Hall, ed., _Abortion in a Changing World_ , vol. 1, Columbia University Press, 1970, p. 16-24.
  31. **^** John M. Riddle, "Contraception and early abortion in the Middle Ages," in Vern L. Bullough and James A. Brundage, eds., _Handbook of Medieval Sexuality_ , Garland, 1996, p. 261-277.
  32. **^** A History of Health  & Fitness: Implications for Policy Today
  33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Peter Biller, _The Measure of Multitude: Population in Medieval Thought_ , Oxford University Press, 2000.
  34. **^** David L. Hull, Michael Ruse (editors), _The Cambridge Companion to the Philosophy of Biology_ (Cambridge University Press 2007 ISBN 978-0-52185128-2), p. 328
  35. **^** United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, "The Catholic Church Is a Pro-Life Church"
  36. **^** David Albert Jones, _Soul of the Embryo_ (Continuum International 2004 ISBN 978-0-82646296-1), p. 221
  37. **^** S. C Selner-Wright, _On Creation: Quaestiones Disputatae de Potentia Dei_ , Q. 3 (CUA Press 2010 ISBN 978-0-81321798-7), p. xiv
  38. **^** The technical juridical term "irregular" is explained below.
  39. **^** William Petersen, _From Persons to People_ (Transaction Publishers 2002 ISBN 978-0-7658-0170-8), p. 114
  40. **^** William B. Smith, Donals Haggerty, _Modern Moral Problems_ (Ignatius Press 2012 ISBN 978-1-58617634-1), p. 19
  41. **^** Jean-Yves Lacoste (editor), _Encyclopedia of Christian Theology_ (Routledge 2005 ISBN 978-0-20331901-7), vol. 1, p. 4
  42. **^** Michèle Goyens, Pieter de Leemans, An Smets (editors), _Science Translated: Latin and Vernacular Translations of Scientific Treatises in Medieval Europe (Leuven University Press 2008_ _ISBN 978-90-5867-671-9), pp. 390-396_
  43. **^** The text of the bull _Effraenatam_ is available at this site.
  44. **^** Nicholas Terpstra, _Lost Girls: Sex and Death in Renaissance Florence_ (Johns Hopkins University Press 2010 ISBN 978-0-8018-9499-2), p. 91
  45. **^** "Excommunicationi latae sententiae Episcopis sive Ordinariis reservatae subiacere declaramus: ... 2. Procurantes abortum, effectu sequuto" ([1] Archived February 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, p. 317)
  46. **^** Johnstone, Brian V. (March 2005). "Early Abortion: Venial or Mortal Sin?". _Irish Theological Quarterly_. **70** (1): 60. doi:10.1177/002114000507000104. An excerpt can be found here.
  47. **^** Charles Coppens, "Abortion" in _Catholic Encyclopedia_ 1907
  48. **^** 1917 Code of Canon Law, canon 985 4º
  49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Aaron L. Mackler, _Introduction to Jewish and Catholic Bioethics_ (Georgetown University Press 2003 ISBN 978-0-87840-146-8), p. 122
  50. **^** Mackler 2003, pp. 122-123
  51. **^** Alphonsus Maria de Ligorio, _Theologia Moralis_ (Bassano 1831), vol. 1, p. 247
  52. **^** Charles Panati. _Sacred Origins of Profound Things: The Stories Behind the Rites and Rituals of the World's Religions_ (Penguin Arcana 1996), p. 454
  53. **^** " _Question 4_. Is it permissible to give a mother in extreme illness medicine to expel a fetus? Reply. Firstly, it is certain that it is not permissible for a mother outside of danger of death to take medicine for expelling even an inanimate fetus, since directly impeding the life of a human being is a grave sin, and a still graver one if the fetus is animate. It is certain, secondly, that it is not permissible for a mother even in danger of death to take medicine for expelling an ensouled fetus directly, since this would be procuring the child's death directly. The question is rather whether it is permissible for a mother to take a medicine absolutely necessary to save her life when it involves danger of expulsion of the fetus. The reply is that, if the fetus is inanimate, the mother may certainly ensure her life, even though, unintentionally on her part, expulsion of the fetus results, an expulsion for which the mother is not responsible, since she is only using her natural right to preserve her life. If the fetus is animate, it is generally held that a mother may take a medicine whose direct purpose is to save her life when nothing else will save it; but it is different in the case of medicines that of themselves are directed to killing a fetus, which it is never permissible to take" (Alphonsus Maria de Ligorio, _Theologia Moralis_ (Bassano 1831), vol. 1, pp. 247-248); cf. Timothy Lincoln Bouscaren, _When Mother or Baby Must Die_ (originally published in 1933; reprint: Tradibooks 2008 ISBN 978-2-917813-01-0), p. 61.
  54. **^** Alphonsus Maria de Ligorio, _Theologia Moralis_ (Bassano 1831), vol. 1, pp. 248-249
  55. **^** _Medical Record_ vol. 48, no. 2 (13 July 1895), pp. 71-72
  56. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ A. Sabetti, "The Catholic Church and Obstetrical Science" in _American Ecclesiastical Review_ , New Series, Vol. III (August 1895), pp.128-132
  57. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Charles E. Curran, _The Catholic Moral Tradition Today: A Synthesis_ , pp. 201-202
  58. **^** Mackler 2003, p. 123
  59. **^** Mackler 2003, p. 124
  60. **^** McIntyre, Alison. "Doctrine of Double Effect". In Edward N. Zalta (ed.). _Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy_ (Summer 2006 ed.). Retrieved 2007-08-18.
  61. **^** David F. Kelly, _Contemporary Catholic Health Care Ethics_ , (Georgetown University Press, 2004. ISBN 978-1-58901-030-7), pp. 111-13
  62. **^** "Indirect abortion".
  63. **^** "ALL: The moral management of ectopic pregnancies".
  64. **^** "The National Catholic Bioethics Center – When Pregnancy Goes Awry".
  65. **^** "Early Pregnancy Complications and the Ethical and Religious Directives". _www.chausa.org_. Retrieved 2016-04-20.
  66. **^** Stulberg, Debra B.; Dude, Annie M.; Dahlquist, Irma; Curlin, Farr A. (2012-07-01). "Obstetrician-gynecologists, religious institutions, and conflicts regarding patient-care policies". _American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology_. **207** (1): 73.e1–73.e5. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2012.04.023. PMC 3383370. PMID 22609017.
  67. **^** "When Religious Rules And Women's Health Collide". _NPR.org_. Retrieved 2016-04-20.
  68. **^** "USCCB on embryonic stem cell research" (PDF). Retrieved July 6, 2017.
  69. **^** Code of Canon Law, canon 1314
  70. **^** Code of Canon Law, canon 1324 Archived December 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  71. **^** See also commentaries on the Code of Canon Law such as E. Caparros, M. Thériault, J. Thorn (editors), _Code of Canon Law Annotated_ (Wilson  & Lafleur 1993 ISBN 2-89127-232-3), pp. 829-830
  72. **^** Written in "Worthiness to Receive Holy Communion. General Principles" by Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger on July 3, 2004
  73. **^** NCRegister.com "America's 'Most Complete' Catholic Newsweekly"
  74. **^** Pope Francis: Pro-abortion Politicians Ineligible for Communion, LifeNews, 7 May 2013
  75. **^** Encyclical _Evangelium vitae_ , 99
  76. **^** Akin, Jimmy (September 1, 2015). "Holy Year Gestures on Abortion and the SSPX: 12 Things to Know and Share". _National Catholic Register_. Retrieved December 30, 2015.
  77. **^** http://en.radiovaticana.va/news/2016/11/21/now_is_a_time_of_mercy_pope_issues_new_apostolic_letter/1273725
  78. **^** https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/world/europe/pope-francis-abortion-priests.html
  79. **^** The Catechism of the Catholic Church states that the embryo "must be treated from conception as a person." "The church has not determined officially when human life actually begins" and respect for life at all stages, even potential life, is generally the context of church documents. (Thomas P. Rausch, S.J. _Catholicism in the Third Millennium_. Collegeville:Liturgical Press, 2nd Ed. 2003, p. 150. ISBN 0814658997.)
  80. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The Tradition of Probabilism and the Moral Status of the Early Embryo" (PDF). Theological Studies. Retrieved 4 July 2017.
  81. **^** _CCC_ 2274
  82. **^** "Earlier, more accurate prediction of embryo survival enabled by research". _News Center_. Retrieved 2017-07-08.
  83. **^** _New Catholic Encyclopedia_ , Abortion II, p.29, Col 1.
  84. **^** "The Wisdom of the Church Is in Her Silence, Too". _National Catholic Register_. Retrieved 2017-07-06.
  85. **^** Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2271
  86. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Catechism of the Catholic Church, part 3, section 2, chapter 2, article 5: The Fifth Commandment. The Official Vatican Website.
  87. **^** Keller, Rosemary Skinner; Ruether, Rosemary Radford; Cantlon, Marie (2006). _Encyclopedia of women and religion in North America, Volume 3_. Indiana University Press. p. 1109. ISBN 978-0253346889.
  88. **^** "BBC – Religions – Abortion". Retrieved 2012-01-05.
  89. **^** Lipka, Michael; Gramlich, John (January 26, 2017). "5 facts about abortion". Pew Research Center.
  90. **^** O'Brien, Jon; Morello, Sara (Spring 2008). "Catholics for Choice and Abortion: Pro-choice Catholicism 101". _Perspectives: Catholic_. Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice. Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved April 19, 2011.
  91. **^** Swicord, Jeff (April 14, 2008). "Many US Catholics Out of Step with Church on Contraception, Abortion". Voice of America.
  92. **^** Gipson, Ashley (October 14, 2008). "Survey: Catholic voters split on abortion, gay marriage". USA Today.
  93. **^** Mary T. Hanna, _Catholics and American Politics_ (Harvard University Press 1979 ISBN 978-0-674-10325-2), p. 154
  94. **^** John Finnis, _Religion and Public Reasons_ (Oxford University Press 2011 ISBN 978-0-19-958009-5), vol. 5, p. 122
  95. **^** Susan Elizabeth Davis, _Women under Attack_ (South End Press 1999 ISBN 978-0-89608-356-1), p. 61
  96. **^** Patrick W. Carey, _Catholics in America_ (Greenwood 2004 ISBN 978-0-275-98255-3), p. 135
  97. **^** Christopher Robert Kaczor, _The Ethics of Abortion_ (Taylor  & Francis 2010 ISBN 978-0-415-88468-6), p. 202
  98. **^** "Pope Counsels Bishops to Hold to Christ's Teachings in the Face of Dissent". _New York Times_. 17 September 1987.
  99. **^** Chandler, Russell (20 September 1987). "Pope Builds Bridges With U.S. Church : Unbending in Policies but Shows Willingness to Listen to Dissent". _Los Angeles Times_.
  100. **^** "Nones Beyond the Numbers". Retrieved July 5, 2017.
  101. **^** "With Pope's cardinal picks, Bernardin's 'seamless garment' is back". _Crux_. 2016-10-09. Retrieved 2017-07-06.
  102. **^** "Forming Consciences for Faithful Citizenship - Part III - Goals for Political Life: Challenges for Citizens, Candidates, and Public Officials". _www.usccb.org_. Retrieved 2017-07-05.
  103. **^** "Intrinsic Evil and Political Responsibility: Is the concept of intrinsic evil helpful to the Catholic voter?". _America Magazine_. 2008-10-27. Retrieved 2017-07-05.
  104. **^** _America Magazine_ , Dec. 15, 2008. 
  105. **^** BBC – Religions – Christianity:Abortion
  106. **^** "Cattolici italiani favorevoli ai Pacs e anche a divorzio e aborto". _La Repubblica_ (in Italian). 17 January 2006.
  107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Belien, Paul (2005). _A Throne in Brussels: Britain, the Saxe-Coburgs and the Belgianisation of Europe_. Devon: Imprint Academic. pp. 292–293. ISBN 978-1-84540-033-0.
  108. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hubert, Vivian; Green, Howard (1 March 2000). _New History of Christianity_. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 389. ISBN 978-0-8264-1227-0. Retrieved 7 January 2012.
  109. **^** Barker, Eileen (15 April 2010). _The Centrality of Religion in Social Life_. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 76. ISBN 978-1-4094-0343-2. Retrieved 7 January 2012.
  110. **^** David Wilsford, _Political Leaders of Contemporary Western Europe_ (Greenwood Press 1995 ISBN 978-0-313-28623-0), p. 30
  111. **^** Geoffrey K. Roberts, Patricia Hogwood, _West European Politics_ (Manchester University Press 2003 ISBN 978-0-7190-5421-1), p. 84
  112. **^** Els Witte, Jan Craeybeckx, Alain Meynen, _Political History of Belgium_ (VUB University Press 2010 ISBN 978-90-5487-517-8), p. 266
  113. **^** _Encyclopedia of World Constitutions_ (Facts on File 2006 ISBN 978-0-8160-6078-8), p. 92
  114. **^** Sandro Magister, "Obama's Pick for Vice President Is Catholic. But the Bishops Deny Him Communion"
  115. **^** "Pope Prays at Tomb of Abortion Foe". Associated Press. 4 June 1995.
  116. **^** Duffy, Gary (March 5, 2009). "Rape row sparks excommunications". BBC.
  117. **^** "Vatican backs excommunication of Brazilian MDs over child's abortion". CBCNews. 2008-03-07. Retrieved 2009-03-07.
  118. **^** "Top Vatican ethicist says abortion saved life of nine-year-old rape victim". _The Christian Century_. April 21, 2009.
  119. **^** The Holy Office Teaches Archbishop Fisichella a Lesson
  120. **^** Nunes Leal, Luciana (13 March 2009). "CNBB desautoriza iniciativa de bispo". _O Estadão de S.Paulo_.
  121. **^** "Archbishop Smith on CPS decision not to prosecute over gender abortions". Independent Catholic News. 10 September 2013.
  122. **^** "England: Mgr. Smith, "Examination of conscience on life protection "". Servizio Informazione Religiosa. 10 September 2013.
  123. **^** Michael Keene, _Religion in Life and Society_ (Folens 2002 ISBN 1-84303-295-3), p. 24
  124. **^** Simon Sebag Montefiore, _Speeches That Changed the World_ (Quercus 2005 ISBN 1-905204-16-7), p. 196
  125. **^** Leo Maasburg, _Mother Teresa of Calcutta_ (Ignatius Press 2011 ISBN 978-1-58617-555-9), p. 169
  126. **^** Meg Greene, _Mother Teresa: A Biography_ (Greenwood Press 2004 ISBN 978-0-313-32771-1), p. 83
  127. **^** Niebuhr, Gustav (4 February 1994). "Abortion, Contraception Condemned". _Washington Post_.
  128. **^** Noonan, Peggy (February 1998). "Still, Small Voice". _Crisis Magazine 16 no. 2_.
  129. **^** "Husband: Ireland hospital denied Savita Halappanavar life saving abortion because it is a "Catholic country "". CBS News. 14 November 2012.
  130. **^** Bhalla, Nita (20 November 2012). "Indian charities outraged over abortion death in Ireland". _Reuters_. Retrieved 21 November 2012.
  131. **^** Fallon, Bridget (17 November 2012). "Protesters in Ireland rally for abortion rights". _CNN_. Retrieved 21 November 2012.
  132. **^** Dalby, Douglas (April 11, 2013). "Religious Remark Confirmed in Irish Abortion Case". _The New York Times_.
  133. **^** Schneible, Ann (November 9, 2015). "Pope Francis to pro-life activists: You are the world's Good Samaritans". Retrieved December 28, 2015.
  134. **^** Kozakiewicz, Mikolaj (1999). _Guaranteeing freedom of choice in matters of reproduction, sexuality and lifestyles in Europe: trends and developments : international forum, Tallinn(Estonia), 27–29 November 1997_. Council of Europe, European Committee for Equality between Women and Men. p. 97. ISBN 978-92-871-3995-5. Retrieved 30 December 2011.
  135. **^** http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1991-04-19/news/1991109033_1_abortion-law-poland-sejm
  136. **^** "The Truth About Catholics and Abortion" (PDF). Catholics for Choice.
  137. **^** Dillon, Michele (1999). _Catholic identity: balancing reason, faith, and power_. Cambridge University Press. p. 106. ISBN 9780521639590.
  138. **^** Extra-synodal Legislation: Bishop Fabian Bruskewitz at ewtn.com. March 19, 1996. Retrieved 2011-07-20.
  139. **^** NCCB/USCC President Issues Statement on Catholics for a Free Choice Archived 2011-11-13 at the Wayback Machine
  140. **^** Frank K. Flinn, J. Gordon Melton (editor), _Encyclopedia of Catholicism_ (Facts on File 2007 ISBN 978-0-8160-5455-8), p. 5
  141. **^** _Denver Catholic Register_ , 21 July 2004
  142. **^** Nurses Against Abortion Suing N.J. Hospital Requiring They Assist In The Procedures (CBS New York, 7 November 2011)
  143. **^** NJ nurses explain lawsuit against hospital's abortion requirements (CNA, 15 November 2011)
  144. **^** "World News: USCCB official welcomes regulation protecting conscience rights", _Georgia Bulletin_ , 18 December 2008, "Individuals and institutions committed to healing should not be required to take the very human life that they are dedicated to protecting. ... All health care providers should be free to serve their patients without violating their most deeply held moral and religious convictions in support of life."
  145. **^** Rob Stein, "Rule Shields Health Workers Who Withhold Care Based on Beliefs" in _Washington Post_ , 19 December 2008
  146. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sizemore, Bill (30 December 2008). "State groups on opposite sides of 'Conscience rule'". _Virginian Pilot_. Retrieved 14 September 2013.
  147. **^** "Obama proposal would have devastating impact on health care access'" in _California Catholic Daily_ , 12 June 2009
  148. **^** "ACLU Tries to Force Abortions on Catholic Hospitals". _National Catholic Register_. Retrieved 2017-07-06.
  149. **^** Bishop strips Ariz. hospital of 'Catholic' description after abortion (The Washington Times, 21 December 2010
  150. **^** Nun's excommunication lifted in Phoenix hospital abortion case? (Catholic World News, 13 December 2011
  151. **^** "Abortion row at Catholic hospital". BBC News. 20 March 2006.
  152. **^** Hospital offers help for women who want to halt abortions" (Chicago Tribune, 8 February 2011)
  153. **^** "Catholic Hospital Saves Pregnancies of Women Undergoing Abortions" (FoxNews 11 February 2011)
  154. **^** Gibson, David (May 21, 2010). "Nun Excommunicated For Abortion Decision To Save Mother's Life". _Politics Daily_. " The end does not justify the means"
  155. **^** Garrison, Becky (December 30, 2010). "Playing Catholic politics with US healthcare". _The Guardian_. London. " An unborn child is not a disease … the end does not justify the means"
  156. **^** Winters, Michael Sean (5 June 2010). "Sister of mercy" (PDF). _The Tablet_.
  157. **^** Clarke, Kevin (14 December 2011). "McBride un-excommunicated". _America Magazine_. Retrieved 17 July 2018. "In a Dec. 8 statement, the hospital said Sister Margaret has since "met the requirements for reinstatement with the church and she is no longer excommunicated. She continues to be a member in good standing with the Sisters of Mercy and is a valued member of the St. Joseph's executive team.""

  158. v

  159. t
  160. e

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

  * History of abortion
  * Methods of abortion
  * Abortion debate
  * Abortion law

Movements|

  * Abortion-rights movements
  * Anti-abortion movements

Issues|

  * Abortion and mental health
  * Beginning of human personhood
  * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
  * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
  * Anti-abortion violence
  * Abortion under communism
  * Birth control
  * Crisis pregnancy center
  * Ethical aspects of abortion
  * Eugenics
  * Fetal rights
  * Forced abortion
  * Genetics and abortion
  * Late-term abortion
  * Legalized abortion and crime effect
  * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
  * Limit of viability
  * Men's rights
  * Minors and abortion
  * One-child policy
  * Paternal rights and abortion
  * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
  * Prenatal development
  * Reproductive rights
  * Self-induced abortion
  * Sex-selective abortion
  * Sidewalk counseling
  * Societal attitudes towards abortion
  * Toxic abortion
  * Unsafe abortion
  * Women's rights

By country|

| Africa|

  * Algeria
  * Angola
  * Benin
  * Botswana
  * Burkina Faso
  * Burundi
  * Cameroon
  * Cape Verde
  * Central African Republic
  * Chad
  * Egypt
  * Ghana
  * Namibia
  * Nigeria
  * South Africa
  * Uganda
  * Zimbabwe

\---|---  
Asia|

  * Afghanistan
  * Armenia
  * Azerbaijan
  * Bahrain
  * Bangladesh
  * Bhutan
  * Brunei
  * Cambodia
  * China
  * Cyprus
  * Georgia
  * East Timor
  * India
  * Iran
  * Israel
  * Japan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Northern Cyprus
  * South Korea
  * Philippines
  * Qatar
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Turkey

Europe|

  * Albania
  * Andorra
  * Austria
  * Belarus
  * Belgium
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Kazakhstan
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Malta
  * Moldova
  * Monaco
  * Montenegro
  * Netherlands
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * Russia
  * San Marino
  * Serbia
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom

North America|

  * Belize
  * Canada
  * Costa Rica
  * Cuba
  * Dominican Republic
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Mexico
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama
  * Trinidad and Tobago
  * United States

Oceania|

  * Australia
  * Micronesia
  * Fiji
  * Kiribati
  * Marshall Islands
  * New Zealand
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Samoa
  * Solomon Islands
  * Tonga
  * Tuvalu
  * Vanuatu

South America|

  * Argentina
  * Bolivia
  * Brazil
  * Chile
  * Colombia
  * Ecuador
  * Guyana
  * Paraguay
  * Peru
  * Suriname
  * Uruguay
  * Venezuela

Law|

  * Case law
  * Constitutional law
  * History of abortion law
  * Laws by country
  * Buffer zones
  * Conscientious objection
  * Fetal protection
  * Heartbeat bills
  * Informed consent
  * Late-term restrictions
  * Parental involvement
  * Spousal consent

Methods|

  * Vacuum aspiration
  * Dilation and evacuation
  * Dilation and curettage
  * Intact D&X
  * Hysterotomy
  * Instillation
  * Menstrual extraction
  * Abortifacient drugs
    * Methotrexate
    * Mifepristone
    * Misoprostol
    * Oxytocin
  * Self-induced abortion
  * Unsafe abortion

Religion|

  * Buddhism
  * Christianity
    * Catholicism
  * Hinduism
  * Islam
  * Judaism
  * Scientology

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * v

  * t
  * e

Christianity and politics

* * *

  * **Christian left**
  * **Christian right**

Key concepts|

  * Separation of church and state
  * "Render unto Caesar"
  * Two kingdoms doctrine
  * Freedom of religion

Movements|

  * Christian anarchism
  * Christian democracy
  * Clerical fascism
  * Communalism
  * Christian communism
  * Distributism
  * Evangelical left
  * Christian feminism
  * Christian libertarianism
  * National Catholicism
  * Christian pacifism
  * Political Catholicism
  * Christian Reconstructionism
  * Christian socialism
  * Theodemocracy
  * Christian Zionism

Issues|

  * Abortion
  * Homosexuality
  * Poverty and wealth

Theology|

  * Catholic social teaching
  * Dominion theology
  * Liberation theology
  * Political theology
    * China
    * Middle East
    * Sub-Saharan Africa
  * Social Gospel
  * Symphonia

Christian state|

  * Caesaropapism
  * Christian republic
  * Divine right of kings

Related topics|

  * Christianity and other religions
  * Civil religion
  * Political science of religion
  * State religion

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catholic_Church_and_abortion&oldid=898184309"

Categories:

  * Catholic Church and abortion

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * CS1 Italian-language sources (it)
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2011
  * All articles containing potentially dated statements

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Lëtzebuergesch

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 21 May 2019, at 23:07 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

