

# Accessory (legal term)

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Accessory" legal term – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( February 2009)_ _(Learn how and when to remove
this template message)_

---|---  
Criminal law  
---  
Elements  
* _Actus reus_ * _Mens rea_ * Causation * Concurrence  
Scope of criminal liability  
* Complicity * Corporate * Vicarious  
Severity of offense  
* Felony * Infraction (also called violation) * Misdemeanor  
Inchoate offenses  
* Attempt * Conspiracy * Incitement * Solicitation  
Offence against the person  
|

                
                                      * Assassination
                      * Assault
                      * Battery
                      * Child abuse
                      * Criminal negligence
                      * Defamation
                      * False imprisonment
                      * Harassment
                      * Home invasion
                      * Homicide
                      * Intimidation
                      * Kidnapping
                      * Manslaughter (corporate)
                      * Mayhem
                      * Murder
                        * corporate
                      * Negligent homicide
                      * Invasion of privacy
                      * Robbery
                      * Torture
                

* * *

Sexual offences  
* Adultery * Bigamy * Fornication * Incest * Indecent exposure * Masturbation * Obscenity * Prostitution * Rape * Sexual assault * Sodomy  
Crimes against property  
* Arson * Blackmail * Bribery * Burglary * Embezzlement * Extortion * False pretenses * Fraud * Gambling * Intellectual property violation * Larceny * Payola * Pickpocketing * Possessing stolen property * Robbery * Smuggling * Tax evasion * Theft  
Crimes against justice  
* Compounding * Malfeasance in office * Miscarriage of justice * Misprision * Obstruction * Perjury * Perverting the course of justice  
Crimes against the public  
* Apostasy * Begging * Censorship violation * Dueling * Illegal consumption (such as prohibition of drugs, alcohol, and smoking) * Suicide * Terrorism  
Crimes against animals  
* Cruelty to animals * Wildlife smuggling * Bestiality  
Crimes against the state  
* Lèse-majesté * Treason  
Defences to liability  
* Automatism * Consent * Defence of property * Diminished responsibility * Duress * Entrapment * _Ignorantia juris non excusat_ * Infancy * Insanity * Justification * Mistake (of law) * Necessity * Provocation * Self-defence  
Other common-law areas  
* Contracts * Evidence * Property * Torts * Wills, trusts and estates  
Portals  
* Criminal justice * Law 
                
                                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

An **accessory** is a person who assists in the commission of a crime, but who
does not actually participate in the commission of the crime as a joint
principal. The distinction between an accessory and a principal is a question
of fact and degree:

                
                                      * The principal is the one whose acts or omissions, accompanied by the relevant _mens rea_ (Latin for "guilty mind"), are the most immediate cause of the _actus reus_ (Latin for "guilty act").
                      * If two or more people are directly responsible for the _actus reus_ , they can be charged as joint principals (see common purpose). The test to distinguish a joint principal from an accessory is whether the defendant independently contributed to causing the _actus reus_ rather than merely giving generalised and/or limited help and encouragement.
                

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Elements
                        * 1.1 Relative severity of penalties
                        * 1.2 Conspiracy
                        * 1.3 Criminal facilitation
                        * 1.4 Knowledge of the crime
                        * 1.5 Exceptions
                      * 2 Usage
                      * 3 History
                      * 4 Specific laws
                        * 4.1 Canada
                        * 4.2 France
                        * 4.3 Norway
                        * 4.4 England and Wales
                          * 4.4.1 The significance of presence
                          * 4.4.2 _Mens rea_
                        * 4.5 Scotland
                        * 4.6 United States
                      * 5 See also
                      * 6 Notes and references
                      * 7 External links
                

## Elements[edit]

In some jurisdictions, an accessory is distinguished from an accomplice, who
normally is present at the crime and participates in some way. An accessory
must generally have knowledge that a crime is being committed, will be
committed, or has been committed. A person with such knowledge may become an
accessory by helping or encouraging the criminal in some way. The assistance
to the criminal may be of any type, including emotional or financial
assistance as well as physical assistance or concealment.

### Relative severity of penalties[edit]

The punishment tariff for accessories varies in different jurisdictions, and
has varied at different periods of history. In some times and places
accessories have been subject to lesser penalties than _principals_ (the
persons who actually commit the crime). In others accessories are considered
the same as principals in theory, although in a particular case an accessory
may be treated less severely than a principal. In some times and places
accessories before the fact (i.e., with knowledge of the crime before it is
committed) have been treated differently from accessories after the fact
(e.g., those who aid a principal after a crime has been committed, but had no
role in the crime itself). Common law traditionally considers an accessory
just as guilty as the principal(s) in a crime, and subject to the same
penalties. Separate and lesser punishments exist by statute in many
jurisdictions.

### Conspiracy[edit]

In some situations, a charge of conspiracy can be made even if the primary
offense is never committed, so long as the plan has been made, and at least
one _overt act_ towards the crime has been committed by at least one of the
conspirators. For example, if a group plans on forging bank checks, and forges
the checks but ultimately does not attempt to cash the checks, the group might
still be charged with conspiracy due to the overt act of forgery. Thus, an
accessory before the fact will often, but not always, also be considered a
conspirator. A conspirator must have been a party to the planning of the
crime, rather than merely becoming aware of the plan to commit it and then
helping in some way.

A person who incites another to a crime will become a part of a conspiracy if
agreement is reached, and may then be considered an accessory or a joint
principal if the crime is eventually committed.

In the United States, a person who learns of the crime and gives some form of
assistance before the crime is committed is known as an "accessory before the
fact". A person who learns of the crime after it is committed and helps the
criminal to conceal it, or aids the criminal in escaping, or simply fails to
report the crime, is known as an "accessory after the fact". A person who does
both is sometimes referred to as an "accessory before and after the fact", but
this usage is less common.

### Criminal facilitation[edit]

In some jurisdictions, criminal "facilitation" laws do not require that the
primary crime be actually committed as a prerequisite for criminal liability.
These include state statutes making it a crime to "provide" a person with
"means or opportunity" to commit a crime, "believing it probable that he is
rendering aid to a person who intends to commit a crime."[1]

### Knowledge of the crime[edit]

To be convicted of an accessory charge, the accused must generally be proved
to have had actual knowledge that a crime was going to be, or had been,
committed. Furthermore, there must be proof that the accessory knew that his
or her action, or inaction, was helping the criminals commit the crime, or
evade detection, or escape. A person who unknowingly houses a person who has
just committed a crime, for instance, may not be charged with an accessory
offense because they did not have knowledge of the crime.

### Exceptions[edit]

In many jurisdictions a person may not be charged as an accessory to a crime
committed by his or her spouse. This is related to the traditional privilege
not to testify against an accused spouse, and the older idea that a wife was
completely subject to the orders of a husband, whether lawful or illegal.

In most jurisdictions an accessory cannot be tried before the principal is
convicted, unless the accessory and principal are tried together, or unless
the accessory consents to being tried first.

## Usage[edit]

The term "accessory" derives from the English common law, and been inherited
by those countries with a more or less Anglo-American legal system. The
concept of complicity is, of course, common across different legal traditions.
The specific terms _accessory-before-the-fact_ and _accessory-after-the-fact_
were used in England and the United States but are now more common in
historical than in current usage.

The spelling **accessary** is occasionally used, but only in this legal sense.

## History[edit]

The English legal authority William Blackstone, in his _Commentaries_ ,
defined an accessory as:

> II. AN accessory is he who is not the chief actor in the offense, nor
present at its performance, but is someway concerned therein, either before or
after the fact committed.

>

> — Book 4 chapter 3

He goes on to define an _accessory-before-the-fact_ in these words:

> As to the second point, who may be an accessory before the fact; Sir Matthew
Hale 12 defines him to be one, who being absent at the time of the crime
committed, does yet procure, counsel, or command another to commit a crime.
Herein absence is necessary to make him an accessory; for such procusence is
necessary to make him an accessory; for if such procurer, or the like, be
present, he is guilty of the crime as principal.

and an _accessory-after-the-fact_ as follows:

> An accessory after the fact may be, where a person, knowing a felony to have
been committed, receives, relieves, comforts, or assists the felon. Therefore,
to make an accessory ex post facto, it is in the first place requisite that he
knows of the felony committed.18 In the next place, he must receive, relieve,
comfort, or assist him. And, generally, any assistance whatever given to a
felon, to hinder his being apprehended, tried, or suffering punishment, makes
the assistor an accessory. As furnishing him with a horse to escape his
pursuers, money or victuals to support him, a house or other shelter to
conceal him, or open force and violence to rescue or protect him.

## Specific laws[edit]

### Canada[edit]

See also: Aiding and abetting

The _Criminal Code_ has several sections which deal with accessory to
offences:

>           1. (1) Every one is a party to an offence who

>

> (a) actually commits it;

>

> (b) does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to
commit it; or

>

> (c) abets any person in committing it.

>

> (2) Where two or more persons form an intention in common to carry out an
unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in
carrying out the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or
ought to have known that the commission of the offence would be a probable
consequence of carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence.

>

>           1. (1) An accessory after the fact to an offence is one who,
knowing that a person has been a party to the offence, receives, comforts or
assists that person for the purpose of enabling that person to escape.

For these purposes, _abetting_ means "to encourage or set on" and an _abettor_
is "an instigator or setter on, one who promotes or procures a crime to be
committed..."

Note that under s. 21(2), the words "ought to have known" indicating objective
knowledge have been ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Canada in
cases where the principal offence requires subjective foresight of the
consequences, such as murder ( _R v Logan_ , [1990] 2 SCR 731).

### France[edit]

Article 121-6 states that "the accomplice to the offence, in the meaning of
article 121-7, is punishable as a perpetrator". Article 121-7 distinguishes,
in its two paragraphs, complicity by aiding or abetting and complicity by
instigation. It thus states that:

> The accomplice to a felony or misdemeanor is the person who, by aiding or
abetting, facilitates its preparation or commission. Any person who, by means
of a gift, promise, threat, order or an abuse of authority or powers, provokes
the commission of an offence or gives instructions to commit it, is also an
accomplice. It follows from this article that in order to incur liability as
an accomplice, that person must have participated in the unlawful act of the
principal and must have intended the principal to succeed. The theory of
_assumed criminality_ requires that the participation of an accomplice must be
linked to an offence actually committed by a principal.

### Norway[edit]

Each penal provision in the Norwegian criminal code specifies if it is
criminal to aid and abet. Further, when the attempt is criminal, participating
in that attempt is criminal.

### England and Wales[edit]

The law governing complicity in criminal offences originally arose from the
common law, but was codified in section 8 of the Accessories and Abettors Act
1861 (as amended by s.65(4) Criminal Law Act 1977), which states:

> Whosoever shall aid, abet, counsel, or procure the commission of any
indictable offence, whether the same be an offence at common law or by virtue
of any Act passed or to be passed, shall be liable to be tried, indicted, and
punished as a principal offender.

#### The significance of presence[edit]

Mere presence at the scene of a crime is not enough, even where the defendant
remains at the scene to watch the crime being committed. In _R v Coney_ (1882)
8 QBD 534, where a crowd watched an illegal prize fight, it was held that
there must be active, not mere passive, encouragement. Hence, even though the
fight would not have taken place without spectators prepared to bet on the
outcome, the spectators were acquitted because their presence was accidental.
It would have been different if they had attended at the scene of a crime by
prior agreement because their mere presence would be an encouragement.
Similarly, in _R v J. F. Alford Transport Ltd_ (1997) 2 Cr. App. R. 326 it was
held a reasonable inference that a company, knowing that its employees are
acting illegally and deliberately doing nothing to prevent it from being
repeated, actually intends to encourage the repetition. This will be a natural
inference in any situation where the alleged accessory has the right to
control what the principal is doing.

#### _Mens rea_ [edit]

A _mens rea_ is required even when it is not required for the principal
offender (for example, when the principal commits a strict liability offence).
The defendant must intend to do the acts which he knows will assist or
encourage the principal to commit a crime of a certain type. In _R v
Bainbridge_ (1960) 1 QB 129 the defendant supplied cutting equipment not
knowing exactly what crime was going to be committed, but was convicted
because the equipment supplied was not used in the ordinary way, but for a
criminal purpose instead. The accomplice must also know of all the essential
matters that make the act a crime, but need not know that the act would amount
to a crime because _ignorantia juris non excusat_. In _National Coal Board v
Gamble_ (1959) 1 QB 11 the operator of a weighbridge was indifferent as to
whether the principal committed the offence which is generally not a
sufficient _mens rea_ , but the NCB was convicted because the act of the
employee was an act of sale (see vicarious liability).

_Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority_ (1986) AC 112 is an
example of a type of case where the uncertainties of the precise meaning of
intention effectively confer a sometimes welcome discretion on whether to
impose responsibility. That case concerned the question of whether a doctor
giving contraceptive advice or treatment to a girl under the age of 16 could
be liable as an accessory to a subsequent offence of unlawful sexual
intercourse committed by the girl's sexual partner. The Lords held that
generally this would not be the case (the action was a civil one for a
declaration) since the doctor would lack the necessary intention (even though
he realised that his actions would facilitate the intercourse). One rationale
for the decision would be that a jury would not infer intention in such
circumstances if they thought that the doctor was acting in what he considered
to be the girl's best interests.

### Scotland[edit]

In Scotland, under section 293 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995,
a person may be convicted of, and punished for, a contravention of any
enactment, notwithstanding that he was guilty of such contravention as art and
part only.

### United States[edit]

U.S. jurisdictions (that is, the federal government and the various state
governments) have come to treat accessories before the fact differently from
accessories after the fact. All U.S. jurisdictions have effectively eliminated
the distinction between accessories before the fact and principals, either by
doing away with the category of "accessory before the fact" entirely or by
providing that accessories before the fact are guilty of the same offense as
principals. The Model Penal Code's definition of accomplice liability includes
those who at common law were called accessories before the fact; under the
Model Penal Code, accomplices face the same liability as principals. It is now
possible to be convicted as an accessory before the fact even though the
principal has not been convicted or (in most jurisdictions) even if the
principal was acquitted at an earlier trial.[2]

However, modern U.S. jurisdictions punish accessories after the fact for a
separate criminal offense distinct from the underlying crime and having a
different (and less severe) punishment. Some states still use the term
"accessory after the fact"; others no longer use the term, but have comparable
laws against hindering apprehension or prosecution, obstruction of justice,
tampering with evidence, harboring a felon, or the like. Such crimes usually
require proving (1) an intent to hinder apprehension or prosecution and (2)
actual aid in the form of either (a) harboring the criminal, (b) providing
specified means (such as a disguise) to evade arrest, (c) tampering with
evidence, (d) warning the criminal of impending arrest, or (e) using force or
deception to prevent the arrest.[3]

Federal law has followed both these trends. The U.S. Code effectively treats
as principals those who would traditionally have been considered accessories
before the fact at common law:[4]

> (a) Whoever aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures the
commission of an offense, is punishable as a principal.

>

> (b) Whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed
by him or another would be an offense, is punishable as a principal.

However, federal law treats accessories after the fact differently from
principals. Accessories after the fact face a maximum of only half the fine
and half the prison time that principals face. (If the principal faces the
death penalty or life imprisonment, accessories after the fact face up to 15
years' imprisonment.) Federal law defines accessories after the fact as
persons who provide criminals with certain aid in order to hinder a criminal's
apprehension or prosecution:[5]

> Whoever, knowing that an offense against the United States has been
committed, receives, relieves, comforts or assists the offender in order to
hinder or prevent his apprehension, trial or punishment, is an accessory after
the fact.

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * Accomplice
                

## Notes and references[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** (See e.g., N.Y. Penal Law § 115.05 (McKinney 1996); see also Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 13-1004 (1996); Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 506.080 (Baldwin 1996); N.D. Cent. Code § 12.1-06-02 (1995). Cited in the U.S. Dept. of Justice report: Report on the Availability of Bombmaking Information, April 1997.)
                      2. **^** Wayne LaFave, _Substantive Criminal Law_ § 13.1(e) (2d ed. 2003).
                      3. **^** Wayne LaFave, _Substantive Criminal Law_ § 13.6(a) (2d ed. 2003).
                      4. **^** "18 U.S. Code § 2 - Principals". Retrieved  15 July 2015.
                      5. **^** "18 U.S. Code § 3 - Accessory after the fact". Retrieved  15 July 2015.
                

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This article's **use ofexternal links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or
guidelines**. Please improve this article by removing excessive or
inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate
into footnote references. _( July 2015)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this
template message)_

---|---  
* Lawyer Source * All Refer reference * Free dictionary * New Zealand Net Law * Blackstone's Commentaries * New South wales legal aid article * West Virginia (US) model jury instructions * Florida (US) statutes

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Accessory_(legal_term)&oldid=900010050"

Categories:

                
                                      * Criminal law
                      * Inchoate offenses
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Articles needing additional references from February 2009
                      * All articles needing additional references
                      * Wikipedia external links cleanup from July 2015
                      * Wikipedia spam cleanup from July 2015
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * Deutsch
                      * Gaeilge
                      * Nederlands
                      * 日本語
                      * Polski
                      * Svenska
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 21:19 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

