

![Huggies](/images/reskin/red-logo.png)

**Join Huggies** Sign In Getting Pregnant Pregnancy Birth Baby Toddler
Parenting Products Forum Promotions ![](/images/alexa/icon.svg) Huggies on
Alexa Contact Us __Buy Huggies Online

* * *

**Join Huggies** Sign In

__

__

![](/images/ads/wipes-refill/new-refill-packs.png) ![](/images/ads/wipes-

refill/new-refill-packs-mobile.png)

![](/images/ads/wipes-refill/refill-packs.png) ![](/images/ads/wipes-

refill/refill-packs-mobile.png)

![](/images/ads/wipes-refill/perfect-for-tubs.png)

Find Out More __

New & Improved

![](/images/ads/ultimate-newborn/product-ultimate-newborn.png)

# OUR Softest NAPPY

##

Find Out More __

                
                                      1. Baby
                      2. Baby Care
                      3. Baby weeks
                      4. 1 week baby
                

# 1 week baby

![1 week baby](https://assets-0.huggies-

cdn.net/system/page_images/2223/thumb.jpg)

# Newborn Baby Development: 1 Week old Baby

The first week of your baby's life will be one of enormous change. Instead of
having its every need catered for, your baby now needs to function in a semi
independent state. Its breathing, digestion, elimination and communication
will all be very different to the way they were through the long months of
gestation. But your baby will still rely on you for all of its physical and
emotional care for a long time to come.

At one week of age your baby may still look like and behave like a foetus. It
will curl itself up most of the time, sleep for long periods, have short
bursts of activity and then need to recuperate. You will probably find
yourself spending endless hours just gazing at this miracle you have created.
If you feel as if you're still in a state of shock, don't be alarmed. It can
take weeks for new parents to feel as if they are back to reality after giving
birth, and to feel utterly preoccupied with the baby is completely normal.

## Feeding

If your baby is breastfeeding, don't expect all of your feeding issues to be
straightforward. Although breastfeeding is completely natural, it also
requires a series of learned skills and it takes time, practice and patience
for it to become easy. Your baby will still be learning as well and there will
be times when you feel you've mastered it and others where you're full of
doubt. Your baby will let you know when they are hungry by crying, searching
for the nipple with their mouth, not calming when you are holding them or if
there has been more than a couple of hours since they last fed. It is
important to offer your baby a breastfeed when they want it as this will help
your breasts to make sufficient milk for your baby to grow.

If you are bottle feeding, you will need to be very careful about following
the manufacturer's instructions on correct formula preparation. The general
recommended feeding volume guide for this age is 150ml per kilogram of weight
per day. You will need to divide this total amount over 6-7 feeds every 24
hours. For example: if your baby weighed 3.5 kilograms at birth, then multiply
3.5 Ã— 150 and divide this number by 6 or 7, (approximately 75ml - 90mls every
3-4 hours). This would give you an idea of what your baby's feeding quota for
their age and weight is.

## Sleeping

Your baby will spend the majority of its time in the first week sleeping. It
will still be recovering from labour and birth as well and if you have had
drugs during labour, this could make your baby sleepy. Remember to always
follow the safe sleeping guidelines and place your baby to sleep on their
back, ensure your baby is in their own safe sleeping environment, avoid
overheating, and ensure your baby is in a smoke free environment. Check Red
Nose for specific information.

It is common for one week old babies to go to sleep when they are feeding and
be difficult to wake when they do. Feeding uses a lot of energy and it is very
tiring work. When your baby is sleeping they are conserving energy, and
releasing growth hormones. Much of your baby's sleep will be spent in the
phase of Rapid Eye Movement or REM sleep, which is vitally important for their
early brain growth.

## Behaviour

Your baby may be very quiet this week, with only the occasional cry or whimper
to remind you they are in the house. They may wake for feeds, stay alert for a
while and then need to doze off again. They may have periods of alert
wakefulness when they gaze and stare at you. They could respond to yours or
your partner's voices, familiar music or the voices of your older children.

Try not to form an opinion or assessment of your baby's temperament at this
very early stage of their life. Most newborns are passive and calm if they are
fed when they want to be. If they feel generally comfortable and have lots of
cuddles they are mostly content. It is often not until they get a little older
and have more maturity that they cry and become a bit more demanding.

## Nappies

Nappies will be a daily reality from now until your baby is a toddler. Most
parents use disposables and it is important to use the right size nappy for
your baby's age and weight. Huggies Ultimate Newborn Nappies might look tiny
but they cover all the important orifices to maximise their absorbency
properties.

Your baby's output will give you an idea of the amount of milk they are
having. It is important that they have at least 6 heavy, wet nappies/24 hours.
Breast fed babies may poo frequently and formula fed babies tend not to poo as
frequently.

You will need to change your baby's nappy every time they soil their nappy and
when the nappy is full. You will be able to feel by the weight and texture of
your baby's nappy if they need changing. Huggies Ultimate Newborn Nappies have
a wetness indicator that changes from yellow to blue to help you know when its
time to change. Cleanse their skin with plain, warm water and cotton wool or
with low-allergenic Huggies Baby Wipes. It is unlikely you will need to use
nappy rash cream at this age, so unless your baby's skin is red don't worry
about applying cream.

## Cord Care

Your baby's cord clamp will have been removed by now, leaving just the
remnants of the cord stump to dry and drop off. Although it may not look very
attractive, it will soon separate from the navel. If there is a small amount
of blood on your baby's nappy or jumpsuit from the cord stump or it is moist,
just be more careful about cleaning it and keeping the stump dry with a clean
cotton bud. The best time to do this will be after your baby's bath.

## Hygiene

You may have had a bathing demonstration at the maternity hospital or perhaps
you have bathed a newborn before. If you haven't, then bathing can be a little
scary; but like many other aspects of baby care, it is just a matter of time
and practice which builds confidence. If you don't have a chance to bath your
baby everyday, don't worry. A wash over with warm water and a drop of bath
solution will suffice on days between proper baths.

If you are worried about your baby slipping or going underwater, ask someone
else to be with you through bath times. Place a towel or a washer on the
bottom of the bath, don't overfill the water and pick a time when you and the
baby are calm and not rushing. Bath time is a special, interactive time but it
can takes weeks before it may feel like this.

## What about mum?

You could be feeling all the attention is on the baby and not on you.
Alternately, you could feel as if you are being swamped with attention and
have little room to breath. Ask your partner to monitor visitors and give
subtle hints if they are overstaying their welcome. Other parents are usually
very aware of what a sensitive, emotional time this is and are careful to
respect boundaries of what needs to be family and new mother time.

## Physical recovery

You will still be recovering from your labour and birth and it won't be until
around 6 weeks time that your body returns to its normal state. If you had a
caesarean section delivery, an episiotomy, a forceps delivery or any other
intervention, you are likely to take longer to recover. Sleep, rest,
nutritious meals, time and sound hygiene will all help your body to heal. This
is a time when you just need to do the basics and focus on what is truly
important. Accept all reasonable offers of care and support and be kind to
yourself.

## Emotions

Don't expect yourself to immediately be an expert in caring for your baby.
Although you may have read a lot, gathered heaps of information and listened
intently to every bit of advice offered, this does not guarantee that looking
after your baby will be easier. The first week after birth is exhausting, both
physically and emotionally and it is unfair to place unrealistic expectations
on yourself to know it all.

This is a week where you will need to find some space and time to learn all
you can about your new little one. This can be difficult, especially if you've
been overrun with visitors and well wishers. It is also important to think
about the changes to your own sense of who you are and the big shifts already
made within your relationship with your partner. Your own relationship with
your parents, your family and extended family will also be transformed.

## What about dad?

This can be a challenging time for new fathers. The shock of the birth,
transition to fatherhood and the busyness of post-natal time can take its
toll. Many dads take advantage of paternity leave entitlements. Make the most
of this precious time to get to know your baby. It is also important to know
that neither you or the new mother are "experts" when it comes to decisions
about the care of newborn babies. Both parents have an equally important role
to play in your baby's life, even at this very early stage.

For more information see Baby weeks

                
                                      * Skin Care
                      * Breastfeeding
                      * Baby formula
                      * Baby food & feeding
                      * Baby sleep
                      * Baby health care
                      * Baby milestones
                      * Newborn care
                      * Baby care resources
                      * Baby care videos
                      * Baby care expert answers
                      * Baby months
                      * Baby weeks
                        * 1 week baby
                        * 2 week baby
                        * 3 week baby
                        * 4 week baby
                        * 5 week baby
                        * 6 week baby
                        * 7 week baby
                        * 8 week baby
                        * 9 week baby
                        * 10 week baby
                        * 11 week baby
                        * 12 week baby
                      * Baby birthdays
                      * Christening and naming ceremonies
                      * Interior design ideas
                      * Active Baby
                

![](/images/promotions/baby-club/win-6-months2.png)

### **Sign Up** for your chance to **WIN**!

![](/images/promotions/baby-club/win-6-months2.png)

Become a Huggies Member for exclusive content and a chance to win a **6 month
supply of Huggies**.

Sign Up! __

Contact Us Privacy Policy Site Terms

![](/images/alexa/just-ask-badge2.svg)

* * *

Â® Registered Trademark Kimberly-Clark Worldwide, Inc.

(C) KCWW | Kimberly-Clark Australia & New Zealand.

The information contained in this site is not an alternative for specific,
individual medical advice and guidance from your doctor or health care
provider, where all surrounding conditions and circumstances are known. If you
are worried about your own health, or your childâ€™s well being, seek immediate
medical advice. You should never delay seeking medical advice, disregard
medical advice, or discontinue medical treatment because of information on
this website. HuggiesÂ® (and any healthcare professional, where relevant)
intend for the information on this website to be up to date, timely and
accurate but, to the extent that we are permitted by law, do not accept any
liability or responsibility for claims, errors or omissions. HuggiesÂ® may
amend the material at any time without notice.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

