

![Des Moines Register](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/sites/desmoinesregister/images/site-masthead-logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWfor full access

  * ![Des Moines Register](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/desmoinesregister/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
  * Home
  * News
  * Sports
  * Things to Do
  * Opinion
  * Business
  * Communities
  * Media
  * USA TODAY
  * Jobs
  * Autos
  * Archives
  * Obituaries
  * Business Directory
  * Public Notices
  * Advertise with Us
  * More

    * Home
    * News
    * Sports
    * Things to Do
    * Opinion
    * Business
    * Communities
    * Media
    * USA TODAY
    * Jobs
    * Autos
    * Archives
    * Obituaries
    * Business Directory
    * Public Notices
    * Advertise with Us
  * Search

  *     * Subscribe
  * salutation

    * Manage Account
    * Access e-Edition
    * Newsletters
    * Pay Bill
    * Report Delivery Issues
    * Pause Delivery
    * Subscriber Guide
    * Help Center
    * Sign Out

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### FACT CHECK: 50 million abortions claim checks out

Before reading Dr. Seuss from the Iowa House floor last week, a state lawmaker
claimed there have been more than 50 million abortions performed in the United
States since Roe v. Wade. He's right.

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/desmoinesregister/uscp-web-

static-4510.17.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

FACT CHECK: 50 million abortions claim checks out Before reading Dr. Seuss
from the Iowa House floor last week, a state lawmaker claimed there have been
more than 50 million abortions performed in the United States since Roe v.
Wade. He's right. Check out this story on desmoinesregister.com:
http://dmreg.co/1bdFUML

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

# FACT CHECK: 50 million abortions claim checks out

Jason Noble, jnoble2@dmreg.com Published 5:42 p.m. CT March 6, 2015 | Updated
11:28 a.m. CT March 17, 2015

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/desmoinesregister/uscp-web-

static-4510.17.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

![Print](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/f70b0a730b4ecca4710e74717a937cdf83ec27b4/c=12-0-387-282/local/-/media/2015/03/06/IAGroup/DesMoines/635612638656229472-RegisterRealityCheckFactCheck.jpg?width=534&height=401&fit=crop)Buy
Photo

Register Reality Fact Check.(Photo: The Des Moines Register)Buy Photo

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Iowa state Rep. Greg Heartsill made headlines last week for reading Dr. Seuss'
"Horton Hears a Who!" during an impassioned speech from the House floor in
support of a so-called "Personhood Amendment" to the state constitution.

Before his dramatic reading and political interpretation of the children's
book, Heartsill, R-Chariton, offered one clear, verifiable fact. He said 50
million abortions have been performed in the United States since 1973, when
the U.S. Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision made the procedure legal.

We rate this statement **TRUE**.

Data from the Guttmacher Institute — a research organization that supports
legal access to abortion — does indeed show more than 50 million abortions
were performed between 1973 and 2011. Those findings are peer-reviewed and
have been cited by proponents and opponents of legal access to abortion alike.

Figures compiled by the federal government over the same period show less than
50 million, but are missing data from several states over several years.

**_CONTEXT_**

Here's exactly what Heartsill said in his Feb. 26 point of personal privilege
on the House floor:

"This morning I along with 10 other colleagues have introduced House Joint
Resolution 9. It is a resolution that proposes an amendment to the Iowa
Constitution which would recognize and protect the inalienable right to life
of every person in our great state regardless of where they are in their state
of development.

"It is a right that has been denied to well over 50 million Americans —
citizens — since 1973."

When asked to clarify what he meant by 50 million Americans whose "right to
life" has been "denied," Heartsill said he was referencing the number of
abortion procedures performed since the Roe v. Wade ruling. That's what we're
fact-checking here.

That big-picture number — more than 50 million abortions performed since 1973
— is a frequent talking point for opponents of abortion. But unlike other
rhetorical points in the political battle over abortion, it's not contested by
advocates of legal access, and in fact is based on data produced by an
organization that supports abortion.

NEWSLETTERS

Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox

We're sorry, but something went wrong

Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-0225.

Delivery:

Invalid email address

Thank you! You're almost signed up for

Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration.

More newsletters![](https://staticassets.gannettdigital.com/gci-static-

assets/assets/global/static-web/right-arrow@2x.png)

**_ANALYSIS_**

The Guttmacher Institute estimates that 52.6 million abortions were performed
between 1973 and 2011, the most recent year for which data is available. That
number was certainly higher as of Feb. 26, 2015, when Heartsill made his
remarks.

The figure is based on data collected over several years and recorded in two
scholarly papers: "Abortion Incidence and Access to Services in the United
States, 2008," published in 2011, and "Abortion Incidence and Service
Availability in the United States, 2011," published in 2014. Both appeared in
_Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health_ , a peer-reviewed journal
published by the Guttmacher Institute.

The data was drawn from surveys of health care facilities starting in 1973
"known or expected to have provided abortion services," although for 13 years
researchers relied on estimates formed by interpolating "numbers of abortions
and adjustments based on state health department reports."

The federal Centers for Disease Control collects similar data and publishes an
annual "Abortion Surveillance" report. Data from the 2002 edition and the most
recent 2014 edition show 42 million abortions performed between 1973 and 2011,
but comes with a California-sized caveat.

Several states have gone years without providing data for the CDC report,
including California — the most populous in the nation — which hasn't reported
abortion figures since 1998.

A spokesman for the California Department of Public Health told the Register
this week the state has no data on the total number of abortions performed
annually. With 38.8 million people, according to 2014 census data, California
represents 12 percent of the U.S. population.

New Hampshire hasn't reported data since 1998 either, while Maryland,
Oklahoma, Alaska, West Virginia, Louisiana and Delaware also have failed to
report in at least one year since then.

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1bdFUML

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

###### More Stories

  * ![Man charged in 'horrendous' animal abuse case involving 300 cats in central Iowa home](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/06/05/PDEM/6432d4df-bc27-4b44-8b7a-cd4c5178212a-Carlson_Dennis.jpg?crop=480,480,x89,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Man charged in 'horrendous' animal abuse case

June 5, 2019, 1:35 p.m.

  * !['It’s absolutely horrendous:' 200 dead cats, 100 live cats found in central Iowa home, ARL says](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/06/05/PDEM/17711803-7551-46f2-bd74-fa2dab3d7988-ARL_photo.jpg?crop=400,400,x153,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### 200 dead, 100 live cats found in central Iowa home

June 5, 2019, 1:44 p.m.

  * ![Iowa man who raped girl from infancy, livestreamed abuse sentenced to 120 years](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/06/04/PDEM/abbf4b71-78f0-4dd5-80fe-f026f78fd143-Jail_Photo_CROOK_1.JPG?crop=363,363,x168,y112&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Iowa man who raped girl from infancy gets 120 years

June 4, 2019, 4:43 p.m.

  * ![A 100-year-old Iowan and WWII pilot has wanted to skydive since 1942. He finally made the jump.](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/06/03/PDEM/8a70b46a-89bc-457d-99d3-b147a232b45f-20190601_RonaldMason_3465.JPG?crop=3328,3328,x506,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Centenarian Iowan fulfills skydiving dream

June 4, 2019, 6:40 p.m.

  * ![Female truckers allege they suffer sexual harassment as they haul goods marketed to women](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/05/28/PDEM/dcd199b2-d750-4104-87ee-520e05832611-AP_120312121722.jpg?crop=1980,1979,x479,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Female truckers: We're being sexually harassed

June 5, 2019, 9:30 a.m.

  * ![How your Iowa Wild, state tournament, Barnstormer experience is about to improve](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/02/25/PDEM/9ea20f77-90a5-42bd-8a1a-0ab29494d770-0225_JohnstonVsUrbandale_18.JPG?crop=2010,1999,x959,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)

###### Wells Fargo Arena getting $1.7 million upgrade

June 4, 2019, 12:28 p.m.

![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/gannett-

web/properties/desmoinesregister/logos-and-branding/logo-default-light.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

