

icon-circle-arrow-right

Menu

Verywell Family

Your 1-Week-Old Baby’s Development

                
                                      * Pin 
                      * Flip 
                      * Email
                

Search

Search Clear GO

#### More in Babies

                
                                      * Growth & Development 
                        * Baby's First Year 
                      * Health & Safety 
                      * Everyday Care 
                      * Formula 
                      * Baby Food 
                      * Breastfeeding 
                      * Preemies 
                      * Gear and Products
                

View More

#### Featured Tools

                
                                      * Ovulation Calculator 
                      * Pregnancy Due Date Calculator
                
                      * Paternity Leave 
                      * #MeToo 
                      * Bullying Hotlines 
                      * Breastfeeding Tracker Apps 
                      * Mom Guilt 
                      * Round Ligament Pain
                
                      * ####  Getting Pregnant
                
                        * Trying to Conceive
                        * Signs & Symptoms
                        * Pregnancy Tests
                        * Challenges
                        * Fertility Testing
                        * Fertility Treatment
                        * View All 
                      * ####  Pregnancy
                
                        * Weeks & Trimesters
                        * Staying Healthy
                        * Preparing for Baby
                        * Complications & Concerns
                        * Postpartum Care
                        * Pregnancy Loss
                        * View All 
                      * ####  Ages & Stages
                
                        * Babies
                        * Breastfeeding
                        * Toddlers
                        * School-Aged Kids
                        * Tweens
                        * Teens
                        * View All 
                      * ####  Parenting
                
                        * Raising Kids
                        * Activities
                        * Child Care
                        * School
                        * Bullying
                        * Special Needs Kids
                        * View All 
                      * ####  Healthy Kids
                
                        * Everyday Wellness
                        * Safety & First Aid
                        * Immunizations
                        * Food & Nutrition
                        * Fitness
                        * Active Play
                        * View All
                

Visit our other Verywell sites:

Verywell Health Verywell Fit Verywell Mind

Babies

Growth & Development

Print

# Your 1-Week-Old Baby’s Development

## Major milestones and everyday tips for your baby at 1 week old

By Chaunie Brusie, RN | Medically reviewed by Joel Forman, MD | Updated May
06, 2019

![Baby's First

Year](https://www.verywellfamily.com/thmb/HAEYtat6c2fef9Gv682o1yb4JYg=/220x0/filters:no_upscale\(\):max_bytes\(150000\):strip_icc\(\)/illo_baby-

first-year-5b84753946e0fb0025cb9875.png)

Read More

#### Baby's First Year

Overview

                
                                      * ## Newborns
                
                        * 1-Week-Old 
                        * 2-Week-Old 
                        * 3-Week-Old 
                        * 4-Week-Old 
                        * 5-Week-Old 
                        * 6-Week-Old 
                        * 7-Week-Old
                
                      * ## Infants
                
                        * 2-Month-Old 
                        * 3-Month-Old 
                        * 4-Month-Old 
                        * 5-Month-Old 
                        * 6-Month-Old 
                        * 7-Month-Old 
                        * 8-Month-Old 
                        * 9-Month-Old 
                        * 10-Month-Old 
                        * 11-Month-Old
                

### In This Article

Table of Contents

Expand

                
                                      * Your Growing Baby
                
                      * Developmental Milestones
                
                      * A Day in the Life
                
                      * Baby Care Basics
                
                      * Feeding & Nutrition
                
                      * Sleep
                
                      * Health & Safety
                
                      * Must Knows
                

View All

The first week of your baby’s life can be a special and overwhelming time. You
may feel like you couldn’t imagine life without your little one, and also be
amazed that your life could change so drastically overnight. Although your
baby is only one week old, there is a lot that can happen in their growth and
development during this time.

![1 week old baby development and milestones](//:0)

Illustration by Josh Seong, Verywell

### Your Growing Baby

At birth, a newborn baby is classified in one of three ways: small for
gestational age (SGA), average for expected age, or large for gestational age
(LGA). The exact height and weight of your baby will vary depending on if they
were born full-term or premature, so at delivery, medical staff will evaluate
your baby based on the averages for that age.

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, the majority of babies born
full-term weigh between 5.11 and 8.5 pounds, so anything between that range is
considered a healthy average. For a full-term infant (born at or after 37
weeks of pregnancy), a low birth weight is classified as anything less than
5.8 pounds, while a high birth weight is anything over 8.8 pounds. Certain
risk factors in the biological mother, such as smoking or gestational
diabetes, can affect the baby’s weight as well. Keep in mind that your baby’s
size at birth, in both length and weight, is not an accurate reflection of
what they may be like as an adult.

Your baby will actually lose weight (the excess fluid from pregnancy and
delivery) during the first few days of life. In fact, most babies will be
considerably lighter by the time you are discharged from the hospital. This is
normal, so there's no need to be alarmed. The AAP says most babies lose about
one-tenth of their initial birth weight during the first five days of life,
then slowly regain it over the next week. Typically, by day 10, your baby will
be back up to the original birth weight. You can almost think of that first
weight “re-gain” as your baby warming up for the real action. After they reach
their birth weight again, 1-week-old babies gain weight very quickly—about
20-30 grams (or two-thirds of an ounce) every single day.

Your 1-week-old will also have their first doctor’s appointment—usually a few
days after being discharged from the hospital. At the appointment, the doctor
will measure your baby’s head circumference. Why? As it turns out, it’s a very
important measurement that helps the doctor know what is happening with your
baby’s brain growth. At 1-week-old, your baby’s skull is still growing and
fusing together. On average, your 1-week old baby’s head circumference will be
somewhere around 13.75 inches or 35 centimeters for baby girls, and slightly
larger for baby boys.

### Developmental Milestones

At 1-week-old, your baby is working on fine-tuning the skills needed to
survive outside of the womb. The top priorities? Suckling, digesting, and
setting up their immune system and digestion system with good flora to develop
a separate microbiome from mom. Right now, your baby relies heavily on a sense
of smell and sense of touch, so it’s important to have as much skin-to-skin
contact as possible this week. You may also notice a lot of reflexes early on,
such as appearing to startle or looking like they’re shivering—both are normal
reflexes.

One key occurrence in newborns is their breathing pattern. At 1-week-old, your
baby’s breathing will be irregular, with normal episodes of apnea (when they
stop breathing altogether). This can be scary to witness when it first
happens, but irregular breathing in newborns is actually normal, especially
while sleeping. Of course, you should always monitor for a problem and follow
safe sleep guidelines.

In your baby's first week, you can usually expect them to:

                
                                      * **Have a spontaneous or almost reflexive smile** , which can occur as early as your baby's first few days of life and should be present by 10 weeks old. This is different than the social smile that occurs in response to something, like when you talk or sing to your baby. Babies develop the social smile a little later when they are 1-2 months old.
                      *  **Have equal movements of the arms and legs on both sides of the body**. For example, 1-week-old babies shouldn 't move one arm or one leg much more than the other, which could be a sign of injury or weakness.
                      *  **Lift their head briefly when on their tummy**. But remember, newborn babies have poor head control and need their head supported at all times.
                      *  **Focus briefly on objects that are near the face and up to about 12 to 15 inches away** , which is about the distance of a breastfeeding baby looking at their mother's face. Babies can also see simple, high-contrast patterns at this time, but their vision will quickly mature over the next few months. Your baby may also be able to respond to loud noises and look at and follow objects toward the midline of the face.
                

**When to Be Concerned**

Although 1-week-old babies will sleep a lot, if they won’t wake up for
feedings or have any change in activity levels where they appear much more
lethargic than usual, you will want to speak with your baby’s doctor. You
should also be sure to call a doctor if you notice any additional symptoms,
such as yellowing skin or a fever. Fevers in a 1-week-old can be a sign of a
very serious infection, so don’t hesitate to take your baby into the doctor’s
office or to the ER.

The Different Reflexes Your Newborn's Doctor Will Test

### A Day in the Life

A 1-week-old, a baby will spend most of the day sleeping. In fact, during the
first week of life, a typical newborn baby will sleep for 16-18 hours every 24
hours. However, because a baby’s body hasn’t started its own circadian rhythm
with regular melatonin production, they don’t yet have the same sleep patterns
an older child would, so a schedule can be pretty much non-existent. For this
reason, it’s best to just go with the flow when it comes to your baby’s sleep
and stay stress-free. Eventually, they'll develop a rhythm and you'll be able
to rely on some type of schedule.

Until then, your days and nights might feel a little mixed up during this
first week. Your daily routine will consist of feeding the baby, sleeping,
resting, diaper changing—and repeating. This first week, everything will be a
bit of a challenge and that’s perfectly normal. Give yourself plenty of time
to learn what it’s like to be a new parent! And if you haven't already had a
baby shower or received the supplies you need for a newborn, make sure you
pick up the basic equipment. Some of the essentials at this time include:

                
                                      * Bouncer or another type of baby seat
                      * Baby monitor to keep an eye on your little one when you're out of the room
                      * Baby swing to help soothe and give them new scenery
                      * Breastfeeding pillow, if you will be nursing, to help you stay comfortable and keep your baby in the correct position
                

### Baby Care Basics

Here’s what you need to know to take care of a 1-week-old baby—from diapers to
bathtime to helpful soothing techniques.

**Umbilical Cord Care**

Parents used to be told to frequently put alcohol on their baby's umbilical
cord until it falls off, but that is no longer the recommended practice.
Instead, the AAP recommends parents actually do nothing! Your baby’s umbilical
cord will fall off on its own in about a week.

**Sponge Baths**

To avoid getting the umbilical cord too wet (and help it dry out), it's
usually best to give your baby a sponge bath during this time. You can use a
baby bath that doesn’t immerse the belly button area, or simply lay a towel on
the floor and use a warm rag. Wash with soapy water first, followed by warm
water to clean your baby’s skin. You might notice a lot of “cheesy” white
substance. That’s vernix, which protected your baby’s skin in the womb and is
completely normal. You can wipe it off if you want, but it will also absorb
into your baby’s skin. Your baby’s skin might appear dry and cracked at this
time, which is another after-effect of the womb and is not dangerous to your
baby at all.

**Diaper Changes**

In the first few days of life, your 1-week-old baby will still be passing
meconium (a mixture of skin cells, mucus, and other substances your baby
ingested during delivery), which makes the bowel movements look dark, sticky,
and almost tar-like in appearance. Those diaper changes can be challenging to
clean, but they are normal.

By the time your baby is 5-7 days old, your baby will need a lot of diaper
changes and should be having six or more wet diapers and three to four loose
yellow stools each day. Babies who are exclusively breastfed will have stool
that can vary in color, from bright yellow to greenish.

During this week, your baby's stools will change from the large, black, tarry
meconium, to green/yellow transitional stools, to the more regular yellow
bowel movements of an older baby.

Color, Consistency, and Frequency of Baby Bowel Movements

**Nail Trimming**

Trimming your baby's fingernails when they seem long is important and can
prevent accidental scratching of the face, or more seriously, the eye. You can
use a baby nail clipper or a nail file to give them a trim. You may need an
extra set of hands, or you can do it while your baby is sleeping or eating to
avoid extra movement.

**Burping**

You should usually burp your baby after each feeding to prevent gas and
fussiness. If your baby spits up a lot if you burp them during feeding, they
may do better if you wait until the end. Breastfed babies may not need to be
burped as frequently as babies fed from a bottle since they don’t swallow as
much air during feeding. But every baby is different, so take special note of
how your baby acts after eating. If they seem fussy or uncomfortable right
away, it may be time for a burp.

If you're having trouble getting your baby to burp, try a new holding
position. For example, try burping your baby lying against your shoulder. If
you don't get a burp, switch to a more upright position and burp while they're
sitting up.

### Feeding & Nutrition

For a 1-week-old baby, you may still be choosing your preferred feeding
technique, and it may change as your baby grows. You can choose to feed your
baby breast milk from the breast, expressed breast milk from a bottle, formula
from a bottle, or a mixture of breast milk and formula. For the first 24 hours
after your baby is born, you might notice they seem especially sleepy and
uninterested in eating. This can be normal as babies recover after delivery
(they went through a lot, too), so just check that your baby is getting enough
to eat by how many wet and dirty diapers they have.

**Breast Milk**

Breast milk does provide optimum nutrition for a baby, but every family
situation is different, so there are a lot of factors that go into deciding
what's best for you and your baby. Remember, breastfeeding doesn’t have to be
“all or nothing,” either. If you are interested in providing your baby with
breast milk, there are many options you can choose—from feeding the baby from
your breast full-time, feeding from the breast part-time, doing a mixture of
pumped breast milk and formula, or utilizing donor breast milk if it’s
available.

If you're interested in supplying breast milk yourself, it's very important to
try to get your breast milk supply established during this first week. You can
get your supply going by putting your baby to the breast frequently to
initiate breast milk production, by nursing on demand, and by getting plenty
of fluids and rest. Breast milk typically begins to comes in around day four
or five and is generally established by day 11.

If you need help breastfeeding, don’t hesitate to call a lactation consultant,
nurse, or doctor while you are in the hospital or after you've been discharged
so you can get your supply established and correct any issues right away.
Breastfeeding might be uncomfortable in the beginning, especially as your milk
comes in and your breasts fill up, but it should never cause excruciating pain
or bleeding. If you develop a fever or have any reddened, hardened spots in
your breast, it could signal an infection, so call your doctor right away.

You may also want to consider these helpful breastfeeding tips:

                
                                      * **Plan to breastfeed your newborn baby 8-12 times a day** during the first few weeks.
                      *  **Try to make sure your infant nurses from both breasts for each feeding and fully empties each breast** , if possible. Not only will this help encourage your supply, it will also ensure your baby is getting their full nutrients. There are different types of milk released during the beginning of the feed, the middle, and the end. The end especially contains lots of healthy fats your baby needs to grow.
                      *  **Get help if you begin to have problems** , including a poor latch, engorgement, sore nipples, or to improve your breast milk supply. This help might come from other moms who have breastfed their children, a pediatrician who is supportive of breastfeeding, and/or a lactation consultant.
                      *  **Avoidformula supplements as you establish your supply** , unless your pediatrician thinks they are medically necessary.
                      *  **Most experts recommend you don 't introduce bottles or pacifiers** until breastfeeding is well established.
                

**Baby Formula**

If you're not breastfeeding, your 1-week-old baby will likely be drinking a
milk-based, iron-fortified baby formula. Your baby will probably only drink
about one to two ounces at a time, every two to three hours, during the first
few days. This amount will slowly increase to two to four ounces by the end of
the first week.

**Feeding Schedule**

Especially during the first few weeks, it's usually best to feed your baby on
demand every 1.5-3 hours and not on a strict schedule. More tips for feeding
your 1-week-old include:

                
                                      * Learn your baby's hunger cues and go with them! Don't wait until your baby is crying to start to feed them.
                      * Ensure that you're feeding at least 8-12 times in a 24-hour period.
                      * If your baby is not waking on their own at the 3-hour mark to feed, it's time to step in and help them along.
                      * If your baby is too sleepy for feedings, you can help wake them up by stripping them down to a diaper to keep them awake during feedings and make sure they're sucking properly.
                

### Sleep

As introduced above, your 1-week-old baby will sleep a lot—but not necessarily
during the night when you'd like them to. Although you might be able to try
sleep training later, your 1-week-old baby is still learning to adjust to life
outside of the womb, so this week is all about going with the flow. Sleep when
you can and let your little one sleep when they are sleepy. Again, be sure to
follow safe sleep guidelines set by the AAP, which include the following:

                
                                      * No co-sleeping of any kind
                      * Room-sharing for the first six months of your baby’s life with a bassinet, cradle, or crib that is near the mother's bed, but not in the bed
                      * Always placing your baby to sleep on their back (never on the side or stomach) on a firm sleep surface, such as a firm crib mattress covered by a well-fitted sheet
                      * There should be nothing at all in the crib, including soft objects like pillows and toys or loose bedding. The AAP also recommends not using bumpers of any kind, including the “breathable” versions, as they have not been proven to be safe for sleep.
                

If you're having trouble getting your baby to sleep in a crib, consider using
a bassinet or cradle instead. A full-size crib is sometimes too big for a
newborn. Swaddling often helps babies get to sleep, stay asleep, and get
comforted quickly, especially when they are newborns.

To help everyone in your family get enough sleep, parents may try to take
turns caring for their baby at night, take naps during the day when their baby
is sleeping, and get help from family and friends when possible. Your partner
can help at night by changing the baby's diaper, setting your baby up for the
feeding, and putting them back to bed.

Why Newborn Sleep Is So Unpredictable (and How to Make the Best of It)

### Health & Safety

Ideally, your home and environment will be well baby-proofed before your baby
is born. In fact, it is a policy in most hospitals that you show you have a
properly installed car seat before you are allowed to bring your baby home. In
addition to a rear-facing car seat, you can make your home safer for your baby
in these ways:

                
                                      * Make sure your baby’s crib is safe. Always buy a new crib to ensure it is up-to-date with safety recommendations. Place the crib away from windows, cords, heaters, and furniture that could fall.
                      * Don’t use hand-me-down equipment, such as car seats, strollers, and cribs.
                      * If you do have any used products, call the manufacturer or the Consumer Product Safety Commission for an up-to-date list of recalled products.
                      * Set the temperature of your hot water heater to 120 degrees Fahrenheit to prevent scalding burns.
                      * Install smoke and carbon monoxide detectors and use flame-retardant bedtime clothing.
                      * Make your home smoke-free so your baby isn't exposed to secondhand smoke. Simply smoking outside is not enough to reduce your baby's risk of SIDS, ear infections, asthma, and other conditions.
                      * Review your home's risk for causing lead poisoning, especially if it was built before 1978.
                

**Immunizations**

At 1-week-old, your baby will receive the Hepatitis B vaccine (the first
vaccination), which is sometimes given right in the hospital before you are
discharged. This vaccine is given so early because it can help protect a
newborn from getting infected from a family member who may not know they are
infected. The Hepatitis B vaccine is safe for newborns to receive.

**Common Concerns**

One of the most common concerns for parents of a 1-week-old baby is jaundice.
Jaundice is a condition that can occur in newborn babies when they have a high
level of bilirubin. As a 1-week-old baby is still adjusting to life outside of
the womb, they may have a delay in clearing some of the extra red blood cells
from pregnancy and delivery. As those red blood cells break down, they release
bilirubin, which is normally taken care of by the liver and eliminated through
bowel movements. If the baby can’t quite keep up, however, the bilirubin can
build up, leading to that classic sign of “yellowed” skin and even eyes.

If your baby is diagnosed with jaundice, it is very important to continue to
feed your baby to help clear the bilirubin from the system and to check in
frequently with your pediatrician for the first two weeks of your baby's life.
They will guide you as to when the baby needs to be seen.

**When to Call Your Pediatrician**

                
                                      * If your baby is not feeding 8-12 times in a 24-hour period
                      * If your baby is not wetting or having bowel movements. By day two, you should see at least two wet diapers and three black tarry stools (meconium). Day three, at least three wet diapers and three greenish-brown bowel movements. Day four, at least six wet diapers and three mustard-yellow bowel movements. Please keep in mind that these guidelines are per day, not the total since birth.
                      * If your baby is either too sleepy or too cranky
                      * If the color of your baby's skin or eyes is getting more yellow (bordering on orange), or if the color is below the belly button level
                

### Must Knows

This first week is an enormous adjustment for new parents, so try to keep
these tips in mind:

                
                                      * **Take it one step at a time**. You have a whole lifetime to handle this parenting thing—you don’t have to learn it all in the first few days!
                      *  **Focus on what is most important**. Right now, the most important thing that both you and your baby need is rest and recovery. Get as much rest as possible. We won’t tell you to sleep when the baby sleeps, because that’s tired advice, but we do recommend you sleep whenever you get the chance.
                      *  **Nourish your body**. If you gave birth either vaginally or through a C-section, your body has been through a tremendous physical feat. It needs time to rest and recover, and it’s important to provide it with good nutrition. Drink plenty of water and focus on lots of healthy fats, carbohydrates, and proteins that will help your body heal. If you have welcomed a baby into your home in other ways, it’s still important to keep your body well-nourished through all of the nights of sleep deprivation.
                      *  **Soak it in**. There is no other time in your life like the first week with your baby, so try to enjoy every single moment of those newborn snuggles and smells—except maybe those meconium diapers.
                

Your 2-Week-Old Baby's Development & Milestones

Was this page helpful?

Thanks for your feedback!

Track your baby’s most exciting moments with our milestone checklist. Get it
free when you sign up for our newsletter.

Email Address Sign Up

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you, , for signing up.

What are your concerns?

Other Inaccurate Hard to Understand Submit

Article Sources

                
                                      * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017, July). Hepatitis B and the Vaccine (Shot) to Prevent It.
                
                      * Daniel, K. & Chung-Hong, C. (2013, April). A review of normal values of infant sleep polysomnography. Pediatrics & Neonatology, 54(2): 82-87. DOI: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2012.11.011
                
                      * Healthy Children.org. (2009). Tracking your baby's weight and measurements. American Academy of Pediatrics.
                
                      * Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Nutritional Status During Pregnancy and Lactation. Nutrition During Lactation. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 1991. 5, Milk Volume.
                
                      * Kent, J. C., Gardner, H., & Geddes, D. T. (2016). Breastmilk Production in the First 4 Weeks after Birth of Term Infants. _Nutrients_ , _8_ (12), 756. DOI: 10.3390/nu8120756.
                
                      * MedLine Plus. (2018, April 20). Birth weight. U.S. National Library of Medicine.
                
                      * Stewart, D. & Benitz, W. (2016, September). Umbilical cord care in the newborn infant. Pediatrics, 138(3): e 20162149. DOI: 10.1542/peds.2016-2149.
                

Continue Reading

                
                                      * ![2-Week-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 2-Week-Old Baby's Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![3-Week-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 3-Week-Old Baby's Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![4-Week-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 4-Week-Old Baby’s Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![Mother with her newborn child](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Is Your Baby Getting Enough Breast Milk?

                
                                      * ![5-Week-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 5-Week-Old Baby's Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![Woman changing baby diaper](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Answers to Common Questions About Baby Pee

                
                                      * ![Mother changing baby's diaper](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Is It Blood or Urate Crystals in Your Baby's Diaper?

                
                                      * ![6-Week-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 6-Week-Old Baby’s Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![Mixed race mother nursing newborn baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Ways to Tell If Your Baby Is Getting Enough Breast Milk

                
                                      * ![Mother watching nurse weigh her newborn baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### What You Can Do If Your Breastfed Baby Is Losing Weight

                
                                      * ![4-Month-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 4-Month-Old Baby’s Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![2-Month-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 2-Month-Old Baby’s Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![9-Month-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 9-Month-Old Baby's Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![3-Month-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 3-Month-Old Baby’s Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![6-Month-Old Baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### Your 6-Month-Old Baby’s Development & Milestones

                
                                      * ![Woman with newborn baby](//:0)
                

Babies

#### An Overview of Newborn Babies

Verywell Family

Daily Parenting Advice to Your Inbox

Email Address Sign Up

There was an error. Please try again.

Thank you, , for signing up.

Follow Us

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Pinterest
                      * Instagram
                      * Flipboard
                
                      * Getting Pregnant 
                      * Pregnancy 
                      * Ages & Stages 
                      * Parenting 
                      * Healthy Kids 
                      * Editorial Policy
                      * About Us
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Advertise
                      * Cookie Policy
                      * Careers
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Contact
                

Visit our other Verywell sites:

Verywell Health Verywell Fit Verywell Mind

Ⓒ 2019 About, Inc. (Dotdash) — All rights reserved

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information: **verify here**.

Verywell is part of the Dotdash publishing family:

                
                                      * The Balance
                      * Lifewire
                      * Trip Savvy
                      * The Spruce
                      * and more
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

