

Skip to main content

                
                                      * U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
                

![Office on Women's Health -

womenshealth.gov](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/OWH_Logo-

URL_RGB_2C.svg)

En Español

Call the OWH HELPLINE: 1-800-994-9662 9 a.m. -- 6 p.m. ET, Monday -- Friday

![Office on Women's Health -

womenshealth.gov](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/OWH_Logo-

URL_RGB_2C.svg)

Menu

CHANGE

                
                                      * Health and Wellness
                        * Getting Active
                        * Healthy Eating
                        * Healthy Living by Age
                        * Healthy Weight
                        * Mental Health
                        * Relationships and Safety
                

## Popular topics

                
                                          * Caregiver stress
                          * Folic acid
                          * Heart-healthy eating
                          * Iron-deficiency anemia
                          * Stress and your health
                

**All A-Z health topics**

                
                                      * Diseases and Conditions
                        * Cancer
                        * Heart Disease and Stroke
                        * HIV and AIDS
                        * Lupus
                

## Popular topics

                
                                          * Autoimmune diseases
                          * Carpal tunnel syndrome
                          * Depression
                          * Irritable bowel syndrome
                          * Migraine
                          * Thyroid disease
                          * Urinary tract infections
                

**All A-Z health topics**

                
                                      * Reproductive Health
                        * Breastfeeding
                        * Menopause
                        * Menstrual Cycle
                        * Ovulation Calculator
                        * Pregnancy
                

## Popular topics

                
                                          * Bacterial vaginosis
                          * Birth control methods
                          * Human papillomavirus (HPV)
                          * Infertility
                          * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
                          * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
                          * Uterine fibroids
                          * Vaginal yeast infections
                

**All A-Z health topics**

                
                                      * Patient Materials
                        * Autoimmune Diseases
                        * Breastfeeding
                        * Cancer
                        * Fitness and Nutrition
                        * Heart Disease and Stroke
                        * HIV and AIDS
                        * Mental Health
                        * Pain
                        * Pregnancy
                        * Reproductive Health
                        * Sexual Health
                        * Sexually Transmitted Infections
                        * Other A-Z Topics
                

## Browse by resource

                
                                          * Fact sheets
                          * Infographics
                          * Guides
                          * Videos
                          * Webinars
                

**View all pages in this section**

                
                                      * About Us
                        * Who we are
                        * What we do
                        * Programs and activities
                        * Work with us
                        * Contact Us
                        * Blog
                

## Popular topics

                
                                          * Vision and mission
                          * Leadership
                          * Programs and activities
                          * In your community
                          * Funding opportunities
                          * Internships and jobs
                

**View all pages in this section**

Search __

En Español

Call the OWH HELPLINE: **1-800-994-9662**  
9 a.m. -- 6 p.m. ET, Monday -- Friday

                
                                      * ![Home](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/css/home_icon.png)
                      * Health and Wellness
                
                        * ****
                        * Getting Active
                        * Healthy Eating
                        * Healthy Living by Age
                        * Healthy Weight
                        * Mental Health
                        * Relationships and Safety
                
                        * **Popular topics**
                        * Caregiver stress
                        * Folic acid
                        * Heart-healthy eating
                        * Iron-deficiency anemia
                        * Stress and your health
                

**All A-Z health topics**

                
                                      * Diseases and Conditions
                
                        * ****
                        * Cancer
                        * Heart Disease and Stroke
                        * HIV and AIDS
                        * Lupus
                
                        * **Popular topics**
                        * Autoimmune diseases
                        * Carpal tunnel syndrome
                        * Depression
                        * Irritable bowel syndrome
                        * Migraine
                        * Thyroid disease
                        * Urinary tract infections
                

**All A-Z health topics**

                
                                      * Reproductive Health
                
                        * ****
                        * Breastfeeding
                        * Menopause
                        * Menstrual Cycle
                        * Ovulation Calculator
                        * Pregnancy
                
                        * **Popular topics**
                        * Bacterial vaginosis
                        * Birth control methods
                        * Human papillomavirus (HPV)
                        * Infertility
                        * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
                        * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
                        * Uterine fibroids
                        * Vaginal yeast infections
                

**All A-Z health topics**

                
                                      * Patient Materials
                
                        * ** Browse by health topic  **
                
                        *             * Autoimmune Diseases
                        * Breastfeeding
                        * Cancer
                        * Fitness and Nutrition
                        * Heart Disease and Stroke
                        * HIV and AIDS
                        * Mental Health
                
                        * Pain
                        * Pregnancy
                        * Reproductive Health
                        * Sexual Health
                        * Sexually Transmitted Infections
                        * Other A-Z Topics
                
                        * **Browse by resource**
                        * Fact sheets
                        * Infographics
                        * Guides
                        * Videos
                        * Webinars
                

**View all pages in this section**

                
                                      * About Us
                
                        * ****
                        * Who we are
                        * What we do
                        * Programs and activities
                        * Work with us
                        * Contact Us
                        * Blog
                
                        * **Popular topics**
                        * Vision and mission
                        * Leadership
                        * Programs and activities
                        * In your community
                        * Funding opportunities
                        * Internships and jobs
                

**View all pages in this section**

Share Facebook Twitter

                
                                      1. Home
                      2. A-Z Health Topics
                      3. Infertility
                

### Infertility

> A-Z Health Topics

### Related information

                
                                      * Endometriosis fact sheet
                      * Men's health
                      * Menstruation and the menstrual cycle fact sheet
                      * Pelvic inflammatory disease fact sheet
                      * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) fact sheet
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Sexually transmitted infections fact sheet
                      * Uterine fibroids fact sheet
                

OPA Office of Population Affairs

Find a Family Planning Clinic

Such as "Washington, DC" or "20002"

SEARCH

About this tool | Host this tool

![@ symbol on a purple envelope](/resources/images/subscribe-icon.png)

### Subscribe

To receive Publications email updates

Submit

![](https://www.womenshealth.gov/files/styles/masthead/public/images/fs_is525807261.jpg?itok=UgV6V8Jt&c=49280ee9ebe4098b9e04cda4f1b628c7)

# Infertility

![](https://www.womenshealth.gov/files/styles/masthead/public/images/fs_is525807261.jpg?itok=UgV6V8Jt&c=49280ee9ebe4098b9e04cda4f1b628c7)

**Infertility** means not being able to get pregnant after one year of trying
(or six months if a woman is 35 or older). Women who can get pregnant but are
unable to stay pregnant may also be infertile. About 10 percent of women (6.1
million) in the United States ages 15-44 have difficulty getting pregnant or
staying pregnant, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC).

Expand all

|

Collapse all

## What is infertility?

Infertility means not being able to get pregnant after one year of trying (or
six months if a woman is 35 or older). Women who can get pregnant but are
unable to stay pregnant may also be infertile.

Pregnancy is the result of a process that has many steps. To get pregnant:

                
                                      * A woman's body must release an egg from one of her ovaries (ovulation).
                      * The egg must go through a fallopian tube toward the uterus (womb).
                      * A man's sperm must join with (fertilize) the egg along the way.
                      * The fertilized egg must attach to the inside of the uterus (implantation).
                

Infertility can happen if there are problems with any of these steps.

## Is infertility a common problem?

Yes. About 10 percent of women (6.1 million) in the United States ages 15-44
have difficulty getting pregnant or staying pregnant, according to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

## Is infertility just a woman's problem?

No, infertility is not always a woman's problem. Both women and men can have
problems that cause infertility. About one-third of infertility cases are
caused by women's problems. Another one third of fertility problems are due to
the man. The other cases are caused by a mixture of male and female problems
or by unknown problems.

## What causes infertility in men?

Infertility in men is most often caused by:

                
                                      * A problem called varicocele (VAIR-ih-koh-seel). This happens when the veins on a man's testicle(s) are too large. This heats the testicles. The heat can affect the number or shape of the sperm.
                      * Other factors that cause a man to make too few sperm or none at all.
                      * Movement of the sperm. This may be caused by the shape of the sperm. Sometimes injuries or other damage to the reproductive system block the sperm.
                

Sometimes a man is born with the problems that affect his sperm. Other times
problems start later in life due to illness or injury. For example, cystic
fibrosis often causes infertility in men.

## What increases a man's risk of infertility?

A man's sperm can be changed by his overall health and lifestyle. Some things
that may reduce the health or number of sperm include:

                
                                      * Heavy alcohol use
                      * Drugs
                      * Smoking cigarettes
                      * Age
                      * Environmental toxins, including pesticides and lead
                      * Health problems such as mumps, serious conditions like kidney disease, or hormone problems
                      * Medicines
                      * Radiation treatment and chemotherapy for cancer
                

## What causes infertility in women?

Most cases of female infertility are caused by problems with ovulation.
Without ovulation, there are no eggs to be fertilized. Some signs that a woman
is not ovulating normally include irregular or absent menstrual periods.

Ovulation problems are often caused by polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
PCOS is a hormone imbalance problem which can interfere with normal ovulation.
PCOS is the most common cause of female infertility. Primary ovarian
insufficiency (POI) is another cause of ovulation problems. POI occurs when a
woman's ovaries stop working normally before she is 40. POI is not the same as
early menopause.

Less common causes of fertility problems in women include:

                
                                      * Blocked fallopian tubes due to pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis, or surgery for an ectopic pregnancy
                      * Physical problems with the uterus
                      * Uterine fibroids, which are non-cancerous clumps of tissue and muscle on the walls of the uterus.
                

## What things increase a woman's risk of infertility?

Many things can change a woman's ability to have a baby. These include:

                
                                      * Age
                      * Smoking
                      * Excess alcohol use
                      * Stress
                      * Poor diet
                      * Athletic training
                      * Being overweight or underweight
                      * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
                      * Health problems that cause hormonal changes, such as polycystic ovarian syndrome and primary ovarian insufficiency
                

## How does age affect a woman's ability to have children?

Many women are waiting until their 30s and 40s to have children. In fact,
about 20 percent of women in the United States now have their first child
after age 35. So age is a growing cause of fertility problems. About one-third
of couples in which the woman is over 35 have fertility problems.

Aging decreases a woman's chances of having a baby in the following ways:

                
                                      * Her ovaries become less able to release eggs
                      * She has a smaller number of eggs left
                      * Her eggs are not as healthy
                      * She is more likely to have health conditions that can cause fertility problems
                      * She is more likely to have a miscarriage
                

## How long should women try to get pregnant before calling their doctors?

Most experts suggest at least one year. Women 35 or older should see their
doctors after six months of trying. A woman's chances of having a baby
decrease rapidly every year after the age of 30.

Some health problems also increase the risk of infertility. So, women should
talk to their doctors if they have:

                
                                      * Irregular periods or no menstrual periods
                      * Very painful periods
                      * Endometriosis
                      * Pelvic inflammatory disease
                      * More than one miscarriage
                

It is a good idea for any woman to talk to a doctor before trying to get
pregnant. Doctors can help you get your body ready for a healthy baby. They
can also answer questions on fertility and give tips on conceiving.

## How will doctors find out if a woman and her partner have fertility

problems?

Doctors will do an infertility checkup. This involves a physical exam. The
doctor will also ask for both partners' health and sexual histories. Sometimes
this can find the problem. However, most of the time, the doctor will need to
do more tests.

In men, doctors usually begin by testing the semen. They look at the number,
shape, and movement of the sperm. Sometimes doctors also suggest testing the
level of a man's hormones.

In women, the first step is to find out if she is ovulating each month. There
are a few ways to do this. A woman can track her ovulation at home by:

                
                                      * Writing down changes in her morning body temperature for several months
                      * Writing down how her cervical mucus looks for several months
                      * Using a home ovulation test kit (available at drug or grocery stores)
                

Doctors can also check ovulation with blood tests. Or they can do an
ultrasound of the ovaries. If ovulation is normal, there are other fertility
tests available.

Some common tests of fertility in women include:

                
                                      * **Hysterosalpingography (HIS-tur-oh-sal-ping-GOGH-ru-fee):**  This is an x-ray of the uterus and fallopian tubes. Doctors inject a special dye into the uterus through the vagina. This dye shows up in the x-ray. Doctors can then watch to see if the dye moves freely through the uterus and fallopian tubes. This can help them find physical blocks that may be causing infertility. Blocks in the system can keep the egg from moving from the fallopian tube to the uterus. A block could also keep the sperm from reaching the egg.
                      * **Laparoscopy (lap-uh-ROS-kuh-pee):**  A minor surgery to see inside the abdomen. The doctor does this with a small tool with a light called a laparoscope (LAP-uh-roh-skohp). She or he makes a small cut in the lower abdomen and inserts the laparoscope. With the laparoscope, the doctor can check the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus for disease and physical problems. Doctors can usually find scarring and endometriosis by laparoscopy.
                

Finding the cause of infertility can be a long and emotional process. It may
take time to complete all the needed tests. So don't worry if the problem is
not found right away.

## How do doctors treat infertility?

Infertility can be treated with medicine, surgery, artificial insemination, or
assisted reproductive technology. Many times these treatments are combined. In
most cases infertility is treated with drugs or surgery.

Doctors recommend specific treatments for infertility based on:

                
                                      * Test results
                      * How long the couple has been trying to get pregnant
                      * The age of both the man and woman
                      * The overall health of the partners
                      * Preference of the partners
                

Doctors often **treat** **infertility in men** in the following ways:

                
                                      * **Sexual problems:**  Doctors can help men deal with impotence or premature ejaculation. Behavioral therapy and/or medicines can be used in these cases.
                      * **Too few sperm:**  Sometimes surgery can correct the cause of the problem. In other cases, doctors surgically remove sperm directly from the male reproductive tract. Antibiotics can also be used to clear up infections affecting sperm count.
                      * **Sperm movement:**  Sometimes semen has no sperm because of a block in the man's system. In some cases, surgery can correct the problem.
                

In women, some physical problems can also be corrected with surgery.

A number of fertility medicines are used to treat women with ovulation
problems. It is important to talk with your doctor about the pros and cons of
these medicines. You should understand the possible dangers, benefits, and
side effects.

## What medicines are used to treat infertility in women?

Some common medicines used to treat infertility in women include:

                
                                      * **Clomiphene citrate ( _Clomid_ ):** This medicine causes ovulation by acting on the pituitary gland. It is often used in women who have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) or other problems with ovulation. This medicine is taken by mouth.
                      * **Human menopausal gonadotropin or hMG ( _Repronex, Pergonal_ ):** This medicine is often used for women who don't ovulate due to problems with their pituitary gland. hMG acts directly on the ovaries to stimulate ovulation. It is an injected medicine.
                      * **follicle-stimulating hormone or FSH ( _Gonal-F, Follistim_ ):** FSH works much like hMG. It causes the ovaries to begin the process of ovulation. These medicines are usually injected.
                      * **Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (Gn-RH) analog:**  These medicines are often used for women who don't ovulate regularly each month. Women who ovulate before the egg is ready can also use these medicines. Gn-RH analogs act on the pituitary gland to change when the body ovulates. These medicines are usually injected or given with a nasal spray.
                      * **Metformin ( _Glucophage_ ):** Doctors use this medicine for women who have insulin resistance and/or PCOS. This drug helps lower the high levels of male hormones in women with these conditions. This helps the body to ovulate. Sometimes clomiphene citrate or FSH is combined with metformin. This medicine is usually taken by mouth.
                      * **Bromocriptine ( _Parlodel_ ):** This medicine is used for women with ovulation problems due to high levels of prolactin. Prolactin is a hormone that causes milk production.
                

Many fertility drugs increase a woman's chance of having twins, triplets, or
other multiples. Women who are pregnant with multiple fetuses have more
problems during pregnancy. Multiple fetuses have a high risk of being born too
early (prematurely). Premature babies are at a higher risk of health and
developmental problems.

## What is intrauterine insemination (IUI)?

**Intrauterine insemination (IUI)** is an infertility treatment that is often
called artificial insemination. In this procedure, the woman is injected with
specially prepared sperm. Sometimes the woman is also treated with medicines
that stimulate ovulation before IUI.

IUI is often used to treat:

                
                                      * Mild male factor infertility
                      * Women who have problems with their cervical mucus
                      * Couples with unexplained infertility
                

## What is assisted reproductive technology (ART)?

Assisted reproductive technology (ART) is a group of different methods used to
help infertile couples. ART works by removing eggs from a woman's body. The
eggs are then mixed with sperm to make embryos. The embryos are then put back
in the woman's body.

## How often is assisted reproductive technology (ART) successful?

Success rates vary and depend on many factors. Some things that affect the
success rate of ART include:

                
                                      * Age of the partners
                      * Reason for infertility
                      * Clinic
                      * Type of ART
                      * If the egg is fresh or frozen
                      * If the embryo is fresh or frozen
                

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) collects success
rates on ART for some fertility clinics. According to a 2014 CDC report on
ART, the average percentage of ART cycles that led to a live birth were:

                
                                      * 39 percent in women under the age of 35
                      * 30 percent in women aged 35-37
                      * 21 percent in women aged 37-40
                      * 11 percent in women aged 41-42
                

ART can be expensive and time-consuming. But it has allowed many couples to
have children that otherwise would not have been conceived. The most common
complication of ART is multiple fetuses. But this is a problem that can be
prevented or minimized in several different ways.

## What are the different types of assisted reproductive technology (ART)?

Common methods of ART include:

                
                                      * **In vitro fertilization (IVF)**  means fertilization outside of the body. IVF is the most effective ART. It is often used when a woman's fallopian tubes are blocked or when a man produces too few sperm. Doctors treat the woman with a drug that causes the ovaries to produce multiple eggs. Once mature, the eggs are removed from the woman. They are put in a dish in the lab along with the man's sperm for fertilization. After 3 to 5 days, healthy embryos are implanted in the woman's uterus.
                      * **Zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT)**  or  **Tubal Embryo Transfer**  is similar to IVF. Fertilization occurs in the laboratory. Then the very young embryo is transferred to the fallopian tube instead of the uterus.
                      * **Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT)**  involves transferring eggs and sperm into the woman's fallopian tube. So fertilization occurs in the woman's body. Few practices offer GIFT as an option.
                      * **Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)**  is often used for couples in which there are serious problems with the sperm. Sometimes it is also used for older couples or for those with failed IVF attempts. In ICSI, a single sperm is injected into a mature egg. Then the embryo is transferred to the uterus or fallopian tube.
                

ART procedures sometimes involve the use of donor eggs (eggs from another
woman), donor sperm, or previously frozen embryos. Donor eggs are sometimes
used for women who can not produce eggs. Also, donor eggs or donor sperm is
sometimes used when the woman or man has a genetic disease that can be passed
on to the baby. An infertile woman or couple may also use donor embryos. These
are embryos that were either created by couples in infertility treatment or
were created from donor sperm and donor eggs. The donated embryo is
transferred to the uterus. The child will not be genetically related to either
parent.

### Surrogacy

Women with no eggs or unhealthy eggs might also want to consider surrogacy. A
surrogate is a woman who agrees to become pregnant using the man's sperm and
her own egg. The child will be genetically related to the surrogate and the
male partner. After birth, the surrogate will give up the baby for adoption by
the parents.

### Gestational carrier

Women with ovaries but no uterus may be able to use a gestational carrier.
This may also be an option for women who shouldn't become pregnant because of
a serious health problem. In this case, a woman uses her own egg. It is
fertilized by the man's sperm and the embryo is placed inside the carrier's
uterus. The carrier will not be related to the baby and gives him or her to
the parents at birth.

Recent research by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed that
ART babies are two to four times more likely to have certain kinds of birth
defects. These may include heart and digestive system problems, and cleft
(divided into two pieces) lips or palate. Researchers don't know why this
happens. The birth defects may not be due to the technology. Other factors,
like the age of the parents, may be involved. More research is needed. The
risk is relatively low, but parents should consider this when making the
decision to use ART.

## Did we answer your question about infertility?

For more information about infertility, call the OWH Helpline at
1-800-994-9662 or contact the following organizations:

                
                                      * **American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists**
                

**Phone:** 202-638-5577

                
                                      * **Path2Parenthood**
                

**Phone:** 888-917-3777

                
                                      * **Division of Reproductive Health, NCCDPHP, CDC  **
                

**Phone:** 800-323-4636 (TDD: 888-232-6348)

                
                                      * **Fertile Hope, LiveStrong**
                

**Phone:** 888-965-7205

                
                                      * **Food and Drug Administration**
                

**Phone:** 888-463-6332

                
                                      * **InterNational Council on Infertility Information Dissemination, Inc.**
                

**Phone:** 703-379-9178

                
                                      * **RESOLVE: The National Infertility Association**
                

**Phone:** 703-556-7172

### Infertility

> A-Z Health Topics

### Related information

                
                                      * Endometriosis fact sheet
                      * Men's health
                      * Menstruation and the menstrual cycle fact sheet
                      * Pelvic inflammatory disease fact sheet
                      * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) fact sheet
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Sexually transmitted infections fact sheet
                      * Uterine fibroids fact sheet
                

OPA Office of Population Affairs

Find a Family Planning Clinic

Such as "Washington, DC" or "20002"

SEARCH

About this tool | Host this tool

![@ symbol on a purple envelope](/resources/images/subscribe-icon.png)

### Subscribe

To receive Publications email updates

Submit

The Office on Women's Health is grateful for the medical review in 2012 by:

                
                                      * Esther Eisenberg, M.D., M.P.H., Reproductive Sciences Branch, <em>Eunice Kennedy Shriver</em> National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
                
                      * Kelly Brumbaugh, M.P.H., C.H.E.S., Division of Reproductive Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                
                      * Renee Brown-Bryant, M.S., Division of Reproductive Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                
                      * Lee Warner, Ph.D., Division of Reproductive Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                

All material contained on these pages are free of copyright restrictions and
may be copied, reproduced, or duplicated without permission of the Office on
Women’s Health in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Citation
of the source is appreciated.

Page last updated: April 01, 2019.

# Infertility

**Infertility** means not being able to get pregnant after one year of trying
(or six months if a woman is 35 or older). Women who can get pregnant but are
unable to stay pregnant may also be infertile. About 10 percent of women (6.1
million) in the United States ages 15-44 have difficulty getting pregnant or
staying pregnant, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC).

## What is infertility?

Infertility means not being able to get pregnant after one year of trying (or
six months if a woman is 35 or older). Women who can get pregnant but are
unable to stay pregnant may also be infertile.

Pregnancy is the result of a process that has many steps. To get pregnant:

                
                                      * A woman's body must release an egg from one of her ovaries (ovulation).
                      * The egg must go through a fallopian tube toward the uterus (womb).
                      * A man's sperm must join with (fertilize) the egg along the way.
                      * The fertilized egg must attach to the inside of the uterus (implantation).
                

Infertility can happen if there are problems with any of these steps.

## Is infertility a common problem?

Yes. About 10 percent of women (6.1 million) in the United States ages 15-44
have difficulty getting pregnant or staying pregnant, according to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

## Is infertility just a woman's problem?

No, infertility is not always a woman's problem. Both women and men can have
problems that cause infertility. About one-third of infertility cases are
caused by women's problems. Another one third of fertility problems are due to
the man. The other cases are caused by a mixture of male and female problems
or by unknown problems.

## What causes infertility in men?

Infertility in men is most often caused by:

                
                                      * A problem called varicocele (VAIR-ih-koh-seel). This happens when the veins on a man's testicle(s) are too large. This heats the testicles. The heat can affect the number or shape of the sperm.
                      * Other factors that cause a man to make too few sperm or none at all.
                      * Movement of the sperm. This may be caused by the shape of the sperm. Sometimes injuries or other damage to the reproductive system block the sperm.
                

Sometimes a man is born with the problems that affect his sperm. Other times
problems start later in life due to illness or injury. For example, cystic
fibrosis often causes infertility in men.

## What increases a man's risk of infertility?

A man's sperm can be changed by his overall health and lifestyle. Some things
that may reduce the health or number of sperm include:

                
                                      * Heavy alcohol use
                      * Drugs
                      * Smoking cigarettes
                      * Age
                      * Environmental toxins, including pesticides and lead
                      * Health problems such as mumps, serious conditions like kidney disease, or hormone problems
                      * Medicines
                      * Radiation treatment and chemotherapy for cancer
                

## What causes infertility in women?

Most cases of female infertility are caused by problems with ovulation.
Without ovulation, there are no eggs to be fertilized. Some signs that a woman
is not ovulating normally include irregular or absent menstrual periods.

Ovulation problems are often caused by polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
PCOS is a hormone imbalance problem which can interfere with normal ovulation.
PCOS is the most common cause of female infertility. Primary ovarian
insufficiency (POI) is another cause of ovulation problems. POI occurs when a
woman's ovaries stop working normally before she is 40. POI is not the same as
early menopause.

Less common causes of fertility problems in women include:

                
                                      * Blocked fallopian tubes due to pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis, or surgery for an ectopic pregnancy
                      * Physical problems with the uterus
                      * Uterine fibroids, which are non-cancerous clumps of tissue and muscle on the walls of the uterus.
                

## What things increase a woman's risk of infertility?

Many things can change a woman's ability to have a baby. These include:

                
                                      * Age
                      * Smoking
                      * Excess alcohol use
                      * Stress
                      * Poor diet
                      * Athletic training
                      * Being overweight or underweight
                      * Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
                      * Health problems that cause hormonal changes, such as polycystic ovarian syndrome and primary ovarian insufficiency
                

## How does age affect a woman's ability to have children?

Many women are waiting until their 30s and 40s to have children. In fact,
about 20 percent of women in the United States now have their first child
after age 35. So age is a growing cause of fertility problems. About one-third
of couples in which the woman is over 35 have fertility problems.

Aging decreases a woman's chances of having a baby in the following ways:

                
                                      * Her ovaries become less able to release eggs
                      * She has a smaller number of eggs left
                      * Her eggs are not as healthy
                      * She is more likely to have health conditions that can cause fertility problems
                      * She is more likely to have a miscarriage
                

## How long should women try to get pregnant before calling their doctors?

Most experts suggest at least one year. Women 35 or older should see their
doctors after six months of trying. A woman's chances of having a baby
decrease rapidly every year after the age of 30.

Some health problems also increase the risk of infertility. So, women should
talk to their doctors if they have:

                
                                      * Irregular periods or no menstrual periods
                      * Very painful periods
                      * Endometriosis
                      * Pelvic inflammatory disease
                      * More than one miscarriage
                

It is a good idea for any woman to talk to a doctor before trying to get
pregnant. Doctors can help you get your body ready for a healthy baby. They
can also answer questions on fertility and give tips on conceiving.

## How will doctors find out if a woman and her partner have fertility

problems?

Doctors will do an infertility checkup. This involves a physical exam. The
doctor will also ask for both partners' health and sexual histories. Sometimes
this can find the problem. However, most of the time, the doctor will need to
do more tests.

In men, doctors usually begin by testing the semen. They look at the number,
shape, and movement of the sperm. Sometimes doctors also suggest testing the
level of a man's hormones.

In women, the first step is to find out if she is ovulating each month. There
are a few ways to do this. A woman can track her ovulation at home by:

                
                                      * Writing down changes in her morning body temperature for several months
                      * Writing down how her cervical mucus looks for several months
                      * Using a home ovulation test kit (available at drug or grocery stores)
                

Doctors can also check ovulation with blood tests. Or they can do an
ultrasound of the ovaries. If ovulation is normal, there are other fertility
tests available.

Some common tests of fertility in women include:

                
                                      * **Hysterosalpingography (HIS-tur-oh-sal-ping-GOGH-ru-fee):**  This is an x-ray of the uterus and fallopian tubes. Doctors inject a special dye into the uterus through the vagina. This dye shows up in the x-ray. Doctors can then watch to see if the dye moves freely through the uterus and fallopian tubes. This can help them find physical blocks that may be causing infertility. Blocks in the system can keep the egg from moving from the fallopian tube to the uterus. A block could also keep the sperm from reaching the egg.
                      * **Laparoscopy (lap-uh-ROS-kuh-pee):**  A minor surgery to see inside the abdomen. The doctor does this with a small tool with a light called a laparoscope (LAP-uh-roh-skohp). She or he makes a small cut in the lower abdomen and inserts the laparoscope. With the laparoscope, the doctor can check the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus for disease and physical problems. Doctors can usually find scarring and endometriosis by laparoscopy.
                

Finding the cause of infertility can be a long and emotional process. It may
take time to complete all the needed tests. So don't worry if the problem is
not found right away.

## How do doctors treat infertility?

Infertility can be treated with medicine, surgery, artificial insemination, or
assisted reproductive technology. Many times these treatments are combined. In
most cases infertility is treated with drugs or surgery.

Doctors recommend specific treatments for infertility based on:

                
                                      * Test results
                      * How long the couple has been trying to get pregnant
                      * The age of both the man and woman
                      * The overall health of the partners
                      * Preference of the partners
                

Doctors often **treat** **infertility in men** in the following ways:

                
                                      * **Sexual problems:**  Doctors can help men deal with impotence or premature ejaculation. Behavioral therapy and/or medicines can be used in these cases.
                      * **Too few sperm:**  Sometimes surgery can correct the cause of the problem. In other cases, doctors surgically remove sperm directly from the male reproductive tract. Antibiotics can also be used to clear up infections affecting sperm count.
                      * **Sperm movement:**  Sometimes semen has no sperm because of a block in the man's system. In some cases, surgery can correct the problem.
                

In women, some physical problems can also be corrected with surgery.

A number of fertility medicines are used to treat women with ovulation
problems. It is important to talk with your doctor about the pros and cons of
these medicines. You should understand the possible dangers, benefits, and
side effects.

## What medicines are used to treat infertility in women?

Some common medicines used to treat infertility in women include:

                
                                      * **Clomiphene citrate ( _Clomid_ ):** This medicine causes ovulation by acting on the pituitary gland. It is often used in women who have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) or other problems with ovulation. This medicine is taken by mouth.
                      * **Human menopausal gonadotropin or hMG ( _Repronex, Pergonal_ ):** This medicine is often used for women who don't ovulate due to problems with their pituitary gland. hMG acts directly on the ovaries to stimulate ovulation. It is an injected medicine.
                      * **follicle-stimulating hormone or FSH ( _Gonal-F, Follistim_ ):** FSH works much like hMG. It causes the ovaries to begin the process of ovulation. These medicines are usually injected.
                      * **Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (Gn-RH) analog:**  These medicines are often used for women who don't ovulate regularly each month. Women who ovulate before the egg is ready can also use these medicines. Gn-RH analogs act on the pituitary gland to change when the body ovulates. These medicines are usually injected or given with a nasal spray.
                      * **Metformin ( _Glucophage_ ):** Doctors use this medicine for women who have insulin resistance and/or PCOS. This drug helps lower the high levels of male hormones in women with these conditions. This helps the body to ovulate. Sometimes clomiphene citrate or FSH is combined with metformin. This medicine is usually taken by mouth.
                      * **Bromocriptine ( _Parlodel_ ):** This medicine is used for women with ovulation problems due to high levels of prolactin. Prolactin is a hormone that causes milk production.
                

Many fertility drugs increase a woman's chance of having twins, triplets, or
other multiples. Women who are pregnant with multiple fetuses have more
problems during pregnancy. Multiple fetuses have a high risk of being born too
early (prematurely). Premature babies are at a higher risk of health and
developmental problems.

## What is intrauterine insemination (IUI)?

**Intrauterine insemination (IUI)** is an infertility treatment that is often
called artificial insemination. In this procedure, the woman is injected with
specially prepared sperm. Sometimes the woman is also treated with medicines
that stimulate ovulation before IUI.

IUI is often used to treat:

                
                                      * Mild male factor infertility
                      * Women who have problems with their cervical mucus
                      * Couples with unexplained infertility
                

## What is assisted reproductive technology (ART)?

Assisted reproductive technology (ART) is a group of different methods used to
help infertile couples. ART works by removing eggs from a woman's body. The
eggs are then mixed with sperm to make embryos. The embryos are then put back
in the woman's body.

## How often is assisted reproductive technology (ART) successful?

Success rates vary and depend on many factors. Some things that affect the
success rate of ART include:

                
                                      * Age of the partners
                      * Reason for infertility
                      * Clinic
                      * Type of ART
                      * If the egg is fresh or frozen
                      * If the embryo is fresh or frozen
                

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) collects success
rates on ART for some fertility clinics. According to a 2014 CDC report on
ART, the average percentage of ART cycles that led to a live birth were:

                
                                      * 39 percent in women under the age of 35
                      * 30 percent in women aged 35-37
                      * 21 percent in women aged 37-40
                      * 11 percent in women aged 41-42
                

ART can be expensive and time-consuming. But it has allowed many couples to
have children that otherwise would not have been conceived. The most common
complication of ART is multiple fetuses. But this is a problem that can be
prevented or minimized in several different ways.

## What are the different types of assisted reproductive technology (ART)?

Common methods of ART include:

                
                                      * **In vitro fertilization (IVF)**  means fertilization outside of the body. IVF is the most effective ART. It is often used when a woman's fallopian tubes are blocked or when a man produces too few sperm. Doctors treat the woman with a drug that causes the ovaries to produce multiple eggs. Once mature, the eggs are removed from the woman. They are put in a dish in the lab along with the man's sperm for fertilization. After 3 to 5 days, healthy embryos are implanted in the woman's uterus.
                      * **Zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT)**  or  **Tubal Embryo Transfer**  is similar to IVF. Fertilization occurs in the laboratory. Then the very young embryo is transferred to the fallopian tube instead of the uterus.
                      * **Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT)**  involves transferring eggs and sperm into the woman's fallopian tube. So fertilization occurs in the woman's body. Few practices offer GIFT as an option.
                      * **Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)**  is often used for couples in which there are serious problems with the sperm. Sometimes it is also used for older couples or for those with failed IVF attempts. In ICSI, a single sperm is injected into a mature egg. Then the embryo is transferred to the uterus or fallopian tube.
                

ART procedures sometimes involve the use of donor eggs (eggs from another
woman), donor sperm, or previously frozen embryos. Donor eggs are sometimes
used for women who can not produce eggs. Also, donor eggs or donor sperm is
sometimes used when the woman or man has a genetic disease that can be passed
on to the baby. An infertile woman or couple may also use donor embryos. These
are embryos that were either created by couples in infertility treatment or
were created from donor sperm and donor eggs. The donated embryo is
transferred to the uterus. The child will not be genetically related to either
parent.

### Surrogacy

Women with no eggs or unhealthy eggs might also want to consider surrogacy. A
surrogate is a woman who agrees to become pregnant using the man's sperm and
her own egg. The child will be genetically related to the surrogate and the
male partner. After birth, the surrogate will give up the baby for adoption by
the parents.

### Gestational carrier

Women with ovaries but no uterus may be able to use a gestational carrier.
This may also be an option for women who shouldn't become pregnant because of
a serious health problem. In this case, a woman uses her own egg. It is
fertilized by the man's sperm and the embryo is placed inside the carrier's
uterus. The carrier will not be related to the baby and gives him or her to
the parents at birth.

Recent research by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed that
ART babies are two to four times more likely to have certain kinds of birth
defects. These may include heart and digestive system problems, and cleft
(divided into two pieces) lips or palate. Researchers don't know why this
happens. The birth defects may not be due to the technology. Other factors,
like the age of the parents, may be involved. More research is needed. The
risk is relatively low, but parents should consider this when making the
decision to use ART.

## Did we answer your question about infertility?

For more information about infertility, call the OWH Helpline at
1-800-994-9662 or contact the following organizations:

                
                                      * **American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists**
                

**Phone:** 202-638-5577

                
                                      * **Path2Parenthood**
                

**Phone:** 888-917-3777

                
                                      * **Division of Reproductive Health, NCCDPHP, CDC  **
                

**Phone:** 800-323-4636 (TDD: 888-232-6348)

                
                                      * **Fertile Hope, LiveStrong**
                

**Phone:** 888-965-7205

                
                                      * **Food and Drug Administration**
                

**Phone:** 888-463-6332

                
                                      * **InterNational Council on Infertility Information Dissemination, Inc.**
                

**Phone:** 703-379-9178

                
                                      * **RESOLVE: The National Infertility Association**
                

**Phone:** 703-556-7172

_This content is provided by theOffice on Women's Health._

## About Us

                
                                      * Who we are
                      * What we do
                      * Work with us
                      * Our vision and mission
                

## Programs and Activities

                
                                      * Health Information Gateway
                      * It's Only Natural
                      * Make the Call, Don't Miss a Beat
                      * National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day
                      * National Women's Health Week
                      * Supporting Nursing Moms at Work
                

## Popular Topics

                
                                      * Autoimmune diseases
                      * Breastfeeding
                      * Carpal tunnel syndrome
                      * Depression
                      * HIV and AIDS
                      * Menstruation
                      * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Thyroid disease
                      * All A-Z health topics
                

## Find Help

                
                                      * Get breastfeeding help
                      * Get health care
                      * Get health insurance
                      * Get help with family planning
                      * Get help with mental health
                      * Find girls' health information
                

## Stay Connected

                
                                      * Blog
                      * Contact us
                      * Media inquiries
                      * Social media
                

## About Us

                
                                      * Who we are
                      * What we do
                      * Work with us
                      * Our vision and mission
                

## Programs and Activities

                
                                      * Health Information Gateway
                      * It's Only Natural
                      * Make the Call, Don't Miss a Beat
                      * National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day
                      * National Women's Health Week
                      * Supporting Nursing Moms at Work
                

## Popular Topics

                
                                      * Autoimmune diseases
                      * Breastfeeding
                      * Carpal tunnel syndrome
                      * Depression
                      * HIV and AIDS
                      * Menstruation
                      * Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Thyroid disease
                      * All A-Z health topics
                

## Find Help

                
                                      * Get breastfeeding help
                      * Get health care
                      * Get health insurance
                      * Get help with family planning
                      * Get help with mental health
                      * Find girls' health information
                

## Stay Connected

                
                                      * Blog
                      * Contact us
                      * Media inquiries
                      * Social media
                

![Envelope Icon](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/Contact_Icon.png)

![](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/Contact_Icon.png) Subscribe to
receive OWH updates Submit

![Pinterest

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_pinterest_icon.png) ![Youtube

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_youtube_icon.png) ![Twitter

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_twitter_icon.png) ![Facebook

Logo](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/owh_facebook_icon.png)

                
                                      * HHS Non-Discrimination Notice
                      * Language Assistance Available
                      * Accessibility
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
                      * USA.gov
                      * Use Our Content
                

Language Assistance Available

                
                                      * Español
                      * 繁體中文
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * 한국어
                      * Tagalog
                      * Русский
                      * العربية
                      * Kreyòl Ayisyen
                      * Français
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Italiano
                      * Deutsch
                      * 日本語
                      * فارسی
                      * English
                

A federal government website managed by the Office on Women's Health in the
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health at the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.

200 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20201  
1-800-994-9662 • Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET (closed on federal
holidays).

![U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office on Women's

Health.](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/images/footer_lockup.png)

![Girlshealth.gov. From the Office on Women's

Health.](/files/images/footer_girlshealth.png)

![Up Arrow](/sites/all/themes/womenshealth/css/images/Left-NoCircle-

White.png)Top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

