

__ 1

Desktop notifications are on | Turn off

Get breaking news alerts from The Washington Post

Turn on desktop notifications?

Yes Not now

                
                                      * __
                      * Sections __
                      * __
                      * Home
                

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

                
                                      * Try 1 month for $1
                      * Username
                      * Sign In
                

* * *
                
                                        * My Post __
                        * My Reading List __
                        * Account Settings __
                        * Newsletters & alerts __
                        * Gift subscriptions __
                        * Contact us __
                        * Help desk __
                
                      * My Post __
                      * My Reading List __
                      * Account Settings __
                      * Newsletters & alerts __
                      * Gift subscriptions __
                      * Contact us __
                      * Help desk __
                
                      * Accessibility for screenreader
                

Share Options

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share via Email

Share on LinkedIn

Share on Pinterest

Share on Tumblr

Comments

Link to homepage

Resize Text

Print Article

Politics

# The claim that the incidence of rape resulting in pregnancy is ‘very low’

By Glenn Kessler

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Glenn Kessler

The Fact Checker

Email **Bio __Follow**

June 13, 2013

_“The incidence of rape resulting in pregnancy are very low.”_

**— Rep. Trent Franks (R-Ariz.), June 12, 2013**

_This column has been significantly updated._

Rep. Franks made this comment during a House Judiciary Committee debate over a
bill that would ban abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy, in which he opposed
a Democratic amendment to make exceptions for rape and incest.

After a firestorm erupted, Franks later sought to clarify his somewhat
ungrammatical comments, claiming he was referring to women seeking abortions
in the sixth month. “Pregnancies from rape that result in abortion after the
beginning of the sixth month are very rare,” he said. “This bill does not
address unborn children in earlier gestations. Indeed, the bill does nothing
to restrict abortions performed before the beginning of the 6th month.”

We’re not sure his clarification really tracks with the comment he originally
made after this statement: “But when you make that exception, there’s usually
a requirement to report the rape within 48 hours. And in this case that’s
impossible because this is in the sixth month of gestation.” After all, how
many women know they are pregnant after being raped?

Readers can listen to the audio recording above and judge for themselves.

In any case, Franks raises an interesting issue: What is the incidence of
pregnancy after a rape? And is it much lower than rate of pregnancy after
consensual sex?

#### The Facts

Because of the violence and stigma associated with rape — as well as different
definitions — there are a wide range of statistics concerning rape. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, for instance, estimates that
nearly 1.3 million American women were victims of rape or attempted rape in
2010. (About half were actual rapes.) But RAINN, the Rape Abuse and Incest
National Network, says about 64,000 women were raped between 2004-2005, citing
Justice Department data.

Obviously, the number of rapes will make a huge difference in the number of
rapes that result in pregnancy. But Franks spoke of “incidence,” which
suggests he is speaking about the rate of pregnancy.

The most widely cited study of this question (embedded below) was published in
1996 by the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, which determined a
national rape-related pregnancy rate of 5.0 percent per rape among victims
between the ages of 12 and 45. The study was based on a survey of 4008 adult
women, over a three-year period, which covered a range of questions on drug
and alcohol abuse but also included questions intended to draw out information
on sexual assaults.

Rape-related pregnancy by The Washington Post

All told, there were 315 rape victims of reproductive age in this sample,
resulting in 20 rape-related pregnancies. In an interview, Dean. G.
Kilpatrick, one of the researchers and director of the National Crime Victims
Research and Treatment Center at the Medical University of South Carolina,
acknowledged that, given the sample size, it might have been appropriate to
provide a confidence interval. Still, he added, “most people who have looked
at the methodology were pretty satisfied that this is a reasonable way to go
about it.”

The study concluded that in one year, this rate would result in more than
32,000 rape-related pregnancies, which Kilpatrick said would be about 50,000 a
year when adjusted to today’s population. RAINN, using the same incidence
rate, calculates about 3,200 pregnancies.

Though the study is nearly two decades old, it has not been updated. The 5
percent figure is a little higher than a separate study that estimates the
chance of getting pregnant from a single act of unprotected sex was 3.1
percent; a European study pegged the chances of getting pregnant as 25 percent
at two days before ovulation but a 5 percent average over the rest of the
cycle, though the possibilities rapidly dwindled within days of ovulation.

Indeed, a 2002 study speculated that the incidence of pregnancy from rape
could be even higher — 6.4 percent — in part because women have no choice in
refusing sex, whereas in consensual sex a woman may refuse if she thinks the
chances of pregnancy are higher.

Franks’ spokesman did not respond to a request for comment.

**Update:** Some readers have suggested we misinterpreted Franks’ comments,
with one pointing us to liberal and conservative commentary arguing that
Franks was not repeating the controversial statement made by Todd Akin last
year regarding “legitimate rape.” We agree that Franks’ comments were not like
Akin’s, which is why we never mentioned Akin.

But it is worth noting that some readers believe Franks, in using the word
“incidence,” was referring to either the number of abortions in the case of
rape or the number of rape-induced pregnancies. The Guttmacher Institute says
that one percent of women who have abortions say they are victims of rape and
less than a half percent say they became pregnant because of incest.

We stand by our interpretation, but it demonstrates why it is risky for a
politician to utter imprecise language on a subject such as abortion. The
Pinocchio rating might be different depending on the interpretation.

#### The Pinocchio Test

To some extent, one could argue that whether an incidence rate of one out of
20 is “very low” or not is a matter of opinion. But, by inference, Franks’
comment only makes sense if he is comparing the rate from rapes to rates of
pregnancy through consensual intercourse.

The available research suggests that not only is there little or no
difference, but the rate of pregnancy after rape may actually be slightly
higher. Under any definition, that does not qualify as “very low.” There is no
reason to suggest any distinction.

**Update, June 14:** Ben Carnes, communications director for Franks, says that
Franks misspoke and intended to refer to the number of abortions due to rape.
We had originally awarded Four Pinocchios for Franks’ statement, but in light
of the clarification, we have removed the rating from this column. We don’t
try to play gotcha here, and might not have written a column if Carnes had
responded to our initial inquiry. In any case, given that some readers
interpreted Franks’s statement differently, it no longer appears appropriate
to have a rating.

(About our rating scale)

**Check out our candidatePinocchio Tracker**

**Follow The Fact Checker onTwitter and friend us on Facebook**

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Glenn Kessler Glenn Kessler has reported on domestic and foreign policy for
more than three decades. Send him statements to fact check by emailing him,
tweeting at him, or sending him a message on Facebook. Follow __

Please enter a valid email address.

Try 1 month for $10 $1

Send me this offer

Already a subscriber? **Sign in**

By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy
Policy.

You’re all set!

We sent this offer to john.smith@gmail.com

Most Read Politics

                
                                      * 1
                

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

‘These boys were on a holiday’: Trump family members promote themselves, and
businesses, on European trip

                
                                      * 2
                

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Analysis More Americans were shot to death by March 6 this year than died on
D-Day

                
                                      * 3
                

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

A wealthy Iraqi sheikh who urges a hard-line U.S. approach to Iran spent 26
nights at Trump’s D.C. hotel

                
                                      * 4
                

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Joe Biden reverses position on federal funding of abortion after Democratic
outcry

                
                                      * 5
                

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Democrats narrow presidential debate rules days before deadline to qualify

Try 1 month for $10 $1

Please enter a valid email address.

Send me this offer

Already a subscriber? **Sign in**

By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy
Policy.

You’re all set!

We sent this offer to

john.smith@gmail.com

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/sRNPXEGxw8O_DGFXDdt4z2LD_0s=/480x0/www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-

politics/files/2017/01/Trump-Revealed.paperback.jpg)

Inside 'Trump Revealed'

Read stories based on reporting for “Trump Revealed,” a broad, comprehensive
biography of the life of the 45th president.

                
                                      * Reporting archive: Trump’s financial records, depositions and interview transcripts
                

politics

__

Success! Check your inbox for details.

Please enter a valid email address

You might also like:

Sign Up No Thanks

See all newsletters

                
                                      * **washingtonpost.com**
                      * (C) 1996-2019 The Washington Post
                      *  
                      * Help
                      * Policies and Standards
                      * Terms of Service
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Print Products Terms of Sale
                      * Digital Products Terms of Sale
                      * Submissions and Discussion Policy
                      * RSS Terms of Service
                      * Ad Choices
                      * Contact Us
                

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

