

~~~~~~~~~~~~

                
                                      *           * News
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Strange News
                      * Animals
                      * History
                      * Culture
                      * Space
                      * ________
                

Live Science

* * *
                
                                      * News
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Strange News
                      * Animals
                      * History
                      * Culture
                      * Space
                

Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History
Culture Space __ ____

__

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * Live Science
                      * Health
                

**Reference:**

# Ectopic Pregnancy: Signs, Symptoms & Treatment

By Cari Nierenberg, Live Science Contributor | January 9, 2018 08:07pm ET

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * MORE
                

![Ectopic Pregnancy: Signs, Symptoms &

Treatment](https://img.purch.com/rc/300x200/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzA3Ny81ODEvb3JpZ2luYWwvZWN0b3BpYy1wcmVnbmFuY3kxLmpwZw==)

In a healthy pregnancy, the fertilized egg attaches itself to the lining of
the uterus. In an ectopic pregnancy, the egg attaches itself somewhere outside
the uterus â€” usually to the inside of the fallopian tube.

Credit: Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research

An ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside of the
uterus or not within the uterine cavity. The word "ectopic" refers to
something medically that is in the wrong place or position.

In about 98 percent of ectopic pregnancies, the fertilized egg implants within
a woman's fallopian tube, the narrow tube that links the ovaries and uterus.
This is also called a tubal pregnancy.

In rare cases, the fertilized egg can implant in a woman's cervix, or in a
scar from a previous Caesarean section, according to the Mayo Clinic. Rarely,
it can also attach directly to a woman's ovary, or to her cervix, or to an
organ in the abdomen, such as the abdominal wall.

During twin pregnancies, it's possible -- but rare -- for one embryo to
implant in the uterus while a second implants at an ectopic location, outside
of the uterus.

An ectopic pregnancy can be dangerous because when an embryo implants in a
location other than the uterine wall, it's unable to develop normally.
Locations other than the uterus don't have enough space or the right tissue
for the embryo to grow, according to the March of Dimes.

As the embryo grows, it can cause the organ it attaches to, such as the
fallopian tube or an ovary, to rupture. If this occurs, it can lead to severe
internal bleeding. In some cases, a pregnant woman might die.

"The uterus is a unique organ that can stretch dramatically with a growing
pregnancy," said Dr. Jennifer Kickham, an obstetrician and gynecologist, and
the medical director of the outpatient gynecology clinic at Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston. "No other tissue in the body has the ability to
grow to accommodate a nine-pound baby or twins," she said.

An ectopic pregnancy can be life threatening to a woman when the embryo
implants onto locations outside the uterine cavity. That's because the tissue
in these areas can't stretch like the uterus and if the embryo implants into
the vascular supply, blood vessels can start bleeding, Kickham said.

Although an ectopic pregnancy can be a life-threatening gynecological
emergency, most women who experience one can be treated and can have normal
pregnancies in the future, she explained.

In the United States, an ectopic pregnancy can affect 1 to 3 percent of all
pregnancies, so it affects a significant number of women and is more common
than people realize, Kickham said.

## Symptoms

Usually the most common complaints of women with an ectopic pregnancy are
vaginal bleeding and/or pain in the abdomen or pelvis, especially on one side
of the body, Kickham said. Some women may have shoulder pain or lower back
pain. There may also be some dizziness or fainting, because of blood loss.
Some women may have no symptoms at all until the fallopian tube ruptures.

It's most common for women to experience the symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy
6 to 10 weeks after a missed menstrual period, Kickham said.

## Risk factors

Anything that affects the ability of the egg to travel down the fallopian tube
into the uterus -- such as prior damage to the fallopian tubes, tubal
abnormalities or infections that may block the tube -- can increase the risk
of having an ectopic pregnancy.

The following women may be at higher risk of having an ectopic pregnancy:

                
                                      * Women who have had a prior ectopic pregnancy.
                      * Women who have a history of infertility.
                      * Women who have had sexually transmitted diseases, such as infections caused by gonorrhea or chlamydia.
                      * Women who have had pelvic inflammatory disease, an infection that can damage the fallopian tubes, uterus and other parts of the pelvis. 
                      * Women who have had endometriosis, a condition in which cells that normally line the uterus implant and grow elsewhere in the body, such as the ovaries or bladder.
                      * Women who have had scars inside the pelvis from a burst appendix or past surgeries. 
                      * Women who have become pregnant while using an intrauterine device (IUD) or after having their "tubes tied," which is known as a tubal sterilization. 
                      * Women who smoked cigarettes prior to becoming pregnant. 
                      * Women with a history of multiple sexual partners because this may increase the risk of pelvic infections.
                

## Causes

An ectopic pregnancy is likely caused by a combination of prior medical
history and lifestyle factors, Kickham said. It is not genetic, she explained.

As described above, anything that affects the functioning of a woman's
fallopian tubes, such as prior tubal surgeries or pelvic infections, can
increase the risk of an ectopic pregnancy. In addition, factors that can slow
movement in the fallopian tube, such as cigarette smoking, can also make a
woman more likely to have an ectopic pregnancy.

## Diagnosis and tests

To diagnose an ectopic pregnancy, a woman who may be complaining of vaginal
bleeding and pelvic pain, may be given a blood test to determine her levels of
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), a hormone that's only present when a woman
is pregnant.

Home pregnancy tests measure hCG levels in the urine, but if an ectopic
pregnancy is suspected, doctors will look at the results from a blood test
instead to measure the amount of hCG present. In a normal pregnancy, hCG
levels will roughly double in a period of 48 to 72 hours, but levels may rise
more slowly in an ectopic pregnancy, Kickham said.

Besides measuring levels of hCG, women will also need a test known as a
transvaginal ultrasound, in which a wand-like device is inserted into a
woman's vagina to examine the reproductive organs, including the uterus,
ovaries, cervix and fallopian tubes. Ultrasound uses high-frequency sound
waves to create images that can identify whether a pregnancy is located inside
the uterus or somewhere else.

Sometimes transvaginal ultrasound can detect that this is not a normal
pregnancy and the embryo is growing outside of the uterus, and sometimes
ultrasound may not be able to pick up an ectopic pregnancy. But if levels of
hCG are between 1,500 and 2,000 mIU/mL, an ectopic pregnancy is suspected even
if it's not seen on ultrasound.

Once a diagnosis of an ectopic pregnancy is made, it can be upsetting for a
woman to learn that she is not having a normal uterine pregnancy, Kickham
said. Some woman may ask, "Is it possible to move the pregnancy to the
uterus?" she said, but unfortunately, there is no medical technology available
to move the pregnancy to the uterine cavity.

## Risks to mother

An ectopic pregnancy can be a gynecological emergency because it may be life
threatening to a woman, Kickham said. She said that ectopic pregnancies are
the leading cause of maternal death during the first trimester, accounting for
4 to 10 percent of all pregnancy-related deaths.

Although ectopic pregnancies usually happen in the first trimester, they can
occur later but these are typically the rarer kinds of ectopic pregnancies,
Kickham explained.

A woman who has had a prior ectopic pregnancy has an increased risk for having
another ectopic pregnancy, Kickham said. But she also added that a lot of
women do go on to have a normal intrauterine pregnancy.

## Treatment and medication

For a woman who has minimal symptoms, meaning that there is not a concern that
her fallopian tube will rupture, treatment for an ectopic pregnancy typically
involves medication, Kickham said. She said that women are given an injection
of methotrexate, a drug used in cancer treatment. This medication stops the
growth of the embryo, which then allows the body to resorb the tissue. A
benefit of this treatment is that it does not affect the fallopian tubes.

Methotrexate is typically given as a one-time injection. A woman needs to have
her blood drawn twice, on the fourth and seventh days after receiving the
drug, so that doctors can see that her levels of hCG have dropped by 15
percent or more during this time period, Kickham said.

If a woman's hCG levels have not been reduced by at least 15 percent, she will
need a second injection of methotrexate to make sure her hCG levels are
falling. An ectopic pregnancy ends when hCG levels have dropped to zero.

But not all women are good candidates for medication and some may need to
undergo surgery to remove the ectopic pregnancy, Kickham said.

Surgery may involve removing the entire fallopian tube, for example. This
operation can be done laparoscopically, which is a form of minimally invasive
surgery that requires a smaller incision. For that reason, the surgery can
typically be done without a woman needing to stay in the hospital overnight,
and she will have a shorter recovery time after the operation.

In some situations, a larger incision in the abdomen may be performed during
surgery to remove the ectopic pregnancy. Sometimes the fallopian tube may be
removed if its damaged and sometimes it can be surgically repaired.

When a woman has a heterotopic pregnancy, where one twin is growing in the
uterus and the other twin is an ectopic pregnancy usually in the fallopian
tube, it is too risky to treat the woman with medication. A mother will need
surgery to remove the ectopic pregnancy in the fallopian tube, but she will be
able to go into labor and give birth to the surviving twin developing in the
uterus, Kickham said.

Usually, a woman who has had an ectopic pregnancy is encouraged to wait at
least three months before attempting to becoming pregnant again, Kickham said.
Since an ectopic pregnancy is a type of early pregnancy loss, a woman should
take the time to heal from it, both physically and emotionally.

**Additional resources**

Learn more about ectopic pregnancy at:

                
                                      * March of Dimes
                      * Mayo Clinic
                      * National Library of Medicine
                

### You'd Also Like

                
                                      * #### Parkinson's Disease: Risks, Symptoms and Treatment
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Are You Pregnant? 12 Early Signs of Pregnancy
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Syphilis: Symptoms & Treatment
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Gonorrhea: Symptoms & Treatment
                

LiveScience __

Author Bio

* * *

Cari Nierenberg, Live Science Contributor

Cari Nierenberg has been a contributor to Live Science since 2012.

HomeAbout Us

Company

                
                                      * Company Info
                      * About Us
                      * Contact Us
                      * Advertise with Us
                      * Using Our Content
                      * Licensing & Reprints
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Copyright Policy
                      * Privacy Policy
                

Network

                
                                      * Top Ten Reviews
                      * Tom's Guide
                      * Laptop Mag
                      * Tom's Hardware
                      * Space.com
                      * Live Science
                      * AnandTech
                      * Dignifyed
                

FOLLOW US

Subscribe SUBMIT

![Purch](https://www.livescience.com/resources/img/purch-logo.png?5dba563)

Copyright (C) All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

