

Skip to main content

GET HELP 24/7:

CALL 800.656.HOPE (4673) | LIVE CHAT Donate

![](/sites/all/themes/rainn/RAINN_Logo_25th.png)

                
                                      * Sexual Violence
                

About Sexual Violence After Sexual Assault

                
                                      * Safety & Prevention
                      * Get Involved
                      * Public Policy
                      * Media & Resources
                

News Press Materials

                
                                      * Consulting & Training 
                      * About RAINN
                      * Call 800.656.HOPE
                      * Live Chat
                      * En Español
                

#

# Perpetrators of Sexual Violence: Statistics

                
                                      *           * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_facebook.svg)
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_twitter.svg)
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_pinterest.svg)
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_tumblr.svg)
                

### Perpetrators of Sexual Violence Often Know the Victim

![Circle graph explains that 3 out of 4 rapes are committed by someone known

to the victim. The number is broken down further by type of acquaintance. 43%

are committed by a friend or acquaintance, 27% by a current or former spouse,

boyfriend, or girlfriend, 7% are by someone the victim cannot remember or by

more than one offender, 2% are non-spouse relatives, and 21% are committed by

a stranger.](/sites/default/files/8_Out_of_10_Rapes_2.jpg)

The majority of children and teen victims know the perpetrator.

                
                                      * Of sexual abuse cases reported to law enforcement, 93% of juvenile victims knew the perpetrator:2
                        * 59% were acquaintances
                        * 34% were family members
                        * 7% were strangers to the victim
                

Victims of sexual violence who are incarcerated are most likely to be
assaulted by jail or prison staff.

                
                                      * In jail or prison, 60% of all sexual violence against inmates is perpetrated by the institution’s staff.4
                

* * *

### About Perpetrators

##### .

![Circle graph explains that half of perpetrators are 30 or older. The

statistic is broken down into four separate age demographics. 50% of

perpetrators are 30 and older, 25% are 21-29, 9% are 18-20, and 15% are 17 or

younger.](/sites/default/files/Half_of_Perpetrators_are_30_or_Older%20122016.png)

.

![5 circle graphs that represent the percentage of perpetrators by race or

ethnicity. 57% of perpetrators are white, 27% are black, 8% are of an unknown

ethnicity, 6% are other, and 1% are

mixed.](/sites/default/files/Race_of_Perpetrators%20122016.png)

* * *

### Perpetrators of Sexual Violence Often Have Criminal Histories

Perpetrators of rape are often serial criminals.

                
                                      * Out of every 1,000 suspected rape perpetrators referred to prosecutors:7
                        * 370 have at least one prior felony conviction, including 100 who have 5 or more
                        * 520 will be released—either because they posted bail or for other reasons—while awaiting trial
                        * 70 of the released perpetrators will be arrested for committing another crime before their case is decided
                

![Bar graph explaining that the majority of released prisoners are rearrested

for a new crime within 3 years. 21% within 6 months, 31% within 1 year, 44%

within 2 years, 51% within 3 years, 56% within 4 years, and 60% within 5

years.](/sites/default/files/A_Majority_Of_Released_Prisoners%20122016.png)

.

**![Infographic explains that more than half of alleged perpetrators have at

least one prior conviction. Statistic is broken down by convictions for rape,

robbery, and assault and battery per

1000.](/sites/default/files/More_Than_Half_of_All_Alleged%20122016.png)**

.

**![Infographic explains that suspects who are released pre-trail often commit

new crimes. Statistic broken down by three types of crime \(rape, robbery, and

assault and

battery\).](/sites/default/files/Suspects_Who_Are_Released%20122016.png)**

When convicted, perpetrators are spending more time in prison.

                
                                      * In 2013, there were 161,000 state inmates incarcerated as punishment for sexual violence crimes—that’s about 12% of all state inmates.9
                      * These inmates are staying in prison longer: the median time served for sexual violence convicts has increased 10 months since 2002 (from 38 to 48 months served).9
                

* * *

### Perpetrators Use Different Forms of Violence to Commit Sexual Assault

                
                                      * In 11% of rape and sexual assault incidents, the perpetrator used a weapon.6
                        * 6% Gun
                        * 4% Knife
                        * 1% Other
                      * Personal weapons—such as hands, feet or teeth—are used against victims of sexual violence in about 2 out of 3 cases.9 
                      * 90% of rapes and sexual assaults are perpetrated by one offender. 10% are perpetrated by two or more.6
                

* * *

### _View statistics on additional topics_.

### .

### _**Understanding RAINN’s statistics**_

_Sexual violence is notoriously difficult to measure, and there is no single
source of data that provides a complete picture of the crime. On RAINN’s
website, we have tried to select the most reliable source of statistics for
each topic. The primary data source we use is theNational Crime Victimization
Survey (NCVS), which is an annual study conducted by the Justice Department.
To conduct NCVS, researchers interview tens of thousands of Americans each
year to learn about crimes that they’ve experienced. Based on those
interviews, the study provides estimates of the total number of crimes,
including those that were not reported to police. While NCVS has a number of
limitations (most importantly, children under age 12 are not included),
overall, it is the most reliable source of crime statistics in the U.S._

_We have also relied on other Justice Department studies, as well as data from
the Department of Health and Human Services and other government and academic
sources. When assembling these statistics, we have generally retained the
wording used by the authors. Statistics are presented for educational purposes
only. Each statistic includes a footnote citation for the original source,
where you can find information about the methodology and a definition of
terms._

_Learn more aboutRAINN's statistics._

**Sources:** ​

                
                                      1. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime Victimization Survey, 2010-2016 (2017).
                      2. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Assault of Young Children as Reported to Law Enforcement (2000).
                      3. United States Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Administration on Children, Youth and Families, Children’s Bureau. Child Maltreatment Survey, 2012 (2013).
                      4. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-2012 (2013). 
                      5. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, American Indians and Crime, 1992-2002 (2004).
                      6. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Female Victims of Sexual Violence, 1994-2010 (2013).
                      7. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2009 (2013).
                      8. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 30 States in 2005: Patterns from 2005-2010 (2014).
                      9. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. Crime in the United States, 2013 (2014).
                

## The rape kit backlog is currently one of the biggest obstacles to

prosecuting perpetrators of sexual violence.

Read More

## Out of every 1,000 sexual assaults, 310 are reported to the police.

More Stats

## A $25 monthly gift can educate 15,000 people about preventing sexual

violence. Can you think of a better way to spend $1 a day?

Donate Monthly

Find help and the resources you need. Call 800.656.4673

###### Get RAINN Updates:

Submit

                
                                      * Contact
                      * Press
                      * Leadership
                      * Statistics
                      * Jobs
                      * News
                      * Volunteer
                      * Take Action
                      * About RAINN
                      * Store
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_facebook.svg)
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_twitter.svg)
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/glyph-logo_May2016.svg)
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn-new/img/icon_youtube.svg)
                      * Support RAINN with a donation today.
                      * ![](https://www.rainn.org/sites/all/themes/rainn/img/GuideStar.png)
                
                      * (C) RAINN 
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Federal Funding Disclaimer
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

