
                
                                      *           *           * Local
                      * US & World
                      * Sports
                      * Business
                      * A&E
                      * Life
                      * Jobs
                      * Cars
                      * Real Estate
                

Skip to main content.

                
                                      1. Small Business»
                      2. Business Technology & Customer Support»
                      3. Computers»
                

# Is RAM for Temporary Storage?

_by Micah McDunnigan_

![Sufficient RAM is essential for running multiple applications on your

computers.](//img-

aws.ehowcdn.com/340x221p/photos.demandstudios.com/getty/article/170/147/dv264003.jpg)

Sufficient RAM is essential for running multiple applications on your
computers.

Photodisc/Photodisc/Getty Images

### Related Articles

                
                                      * 1 What Is the Difference Between PC Memory & Hard Drive Capacity?
                      * 2 The Difference in SRAM & DRAM
                      * 3 How Does Hard Drive Size Affect a Computer?
                      * 4 How Full Can Your Hard Drive Be for Your Computer to Run Properly?
                

Computers store long-term data in two places: their storage drives, and the
read-only memory chips on the motherboards that store firmware. The RAM sticks
are for the processor to store the data programs need while they are running,
but are unnecessary after you exit the programs. Even though they are only for
temporary data, having a sufficient amount of RAM for your computers' workload
is essential for them to run properly.

## Random Access Memory

Random access memory, as its name suggests, is for your computer to store the
random data which programs generate and use during the course of their
execution. You can think of the RAM as scratch paper for your programs. Just
as you throw away scratch paper you use for calculations once you have your
final figure, your computer disregards the data it stores in its RAM once the
processes are complete.

## Limitations

RAM is both used for temporary storage, and from a technical perspective it is
only capable of temporary storage. The hard drive is capable of storing
information after the computer turns off, but RAM is not. Once your computer
turns off, any data that was in your RAM sticks is lost.

## Overflow

Some operating systems, such as UNIX-based systems and Windows, use a special
partition set aside on the hard drive called swap space as extra temporary
memory. When your computer runs out of space to store temporary data on the
RAM sticks, the extra data flows over into the swap space. It takes the
processor longer to read data from the hard drive than it does from RAM, but
still leads to better performance than the system running out of temporary
storage space entirely.

## Performance

The availability of memory for temporary storage has a huge impact on how your
computer operates. The more programs you have running, the more temporary data
your computer has to store. When your computer runs out of temporary storage,
then certain processes will have to stop until space opens up. You will see
this on your computer as sluggish performance and your machine occasionally
freezing up. The more RAM your computer has for temporary storage, the
smoother the computer will run.

#### References (3)

                
                                      * PCMag Encyclopedia: Definition of - RAM
                      * PCMag Encyclopedia: Definition of Dynamic RAM
                      * CentOS: What is Swap Space?
                

#### About the Author

Micah McDunnigan has been writing on politics and technology since 2007. He
has written technology pieces and political op-eds for a variety of student
organizations and blogs. McDunnigan earned a Bachelor of Arts in international
relations from the University of California, Davis.

#### Photo Credits

                
                                      * Photodisc/Photodisc/Getty Images
                

bibliography-icon icon for annotation tool Cite this Article

##### Choose Citation Style

MLA APA Chicago (B)

McDunnigan, Micah. "Is RAM for Temporary Storage?" _Small Business -
Chron.com_ , http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ram-temporary-storage-71143.html.
Accessed 06 June 2019.

McDunnigan, Micah. (n.d.). Is RAM for Temporary Storage? _Small Business -
Chron.com_. Retrieved from http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ram-temporary-
storage-71143.html

McDunnigan, Micah. "Is RAM for Temporary Storage?" accessed June 06, 2019.
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ram-temporary-storage-71143.html

Copy Citation

Note: Depending on which text editor you're pasting into, you might have to
add the italics to the site name.

### More Articles

                
                                      * ![How to Change Flash Video Buffering on Mac Snow Leopard](//img-aws.ehowcdn.com/137x77/photos.demandstudios.com/getty/article/251/11/80836368.jpg)
                

Change Flash Video Buffering on Mac Snow Leopard

                
                                      * ![Panda Cloud Antivirus System Requirements](//img-aws.ehowcdn.com/137x77/photos.demandstudios.com/getty/article/185/41/medfrd1248.jpg)
                

Panda Cloud Antivirus System Requirements

                
                                      * ![How to Defragment Cache Files](//img-aws.ehowcdn.com/137x77/photos.demandstudios.com/getty/article/189/40/86531160.jpg)
                

Defragment Cache Files

                
                                      * ![How to Make Your Computer Run Faster Without Administrative Privileges](//img-aws.ehowcdn.com/137x77/photos.demandstudios.com/getty/article/139/36/175747847.jpg)
                

Make Your Computer Run Faster Without Administrative Privileges

### Also Viewed

                
                                      * Delete an NTFS Partition 
                      * Ways to Increase RAM & HDD Transfer Rates 
                      * Remove HP Data Protector 
                      * Compare Processor Performance 
                      * The Average Merchandise Turnover for Clothing Stores 
                      * Will Adding a Second Hard Drive Increase My Memory on a Desktop Computer? 
                      * What Causes Excessive Hard Drive Activity in Windows XP Pro?
                

Logo Return to Top

### About

                
                                      * Privacy Notice
                      * Your California Privacy Rights
                      * Interest Based Ads
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Our Company
                      * Careers
                      * Advertise with Us
                      * Ad Choices
                

### Contact

                
                                      * Customer Service
                      * Newsroom Contacts
                

### Connect

                
                                      * Email Newsletter
                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Pinterest
                      * Google
                      * Instagram
                

### Subscribe

                
                                      * iPad app
                      * HoustonChronicle.com
                      * Houston Chronicle Archives
                      * eEdition Demo
                      * Today's eNewspaper
                

Hearst Newspapers © Copyright 2019 Hearst Newspapers, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

