

# Human fertilization

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

## Part of a series on

Human growth  
and development  
![Views of a Foetus in the Womb

detail.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2a/Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg/100px-

Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg)  
Stages  
* Zygote * Embryo * Fetus 
                
                                      * Infant
                      * Toddler
                
                      * Child
                      * Preadolescent
                      * Adolescent
                
                      * Young adult
                      * Middle adult
                      * Old adult
                

Biological milestones  
* Fertilization * Pregnancy * Childbirth * Walking * Language acquisition * Puberty * Menopause * Ageing * Death  
Development and psychology  
* Pre- and perinatal * Infant and child * Adolescent * Youth * Young adult * Adult * Maturity 

Developmental stage theories

                
                                      * Attachment
                      * Ecological
                      * Psychosocial
                      * Psychosexual development
                      * Moral
                      * Cognitive
                      * Cultural-historical
                      * Evolutionary  
                      * ![Psi2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6c/Psi2.svg/16px-Psi2.svg.png) Psychology portal
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/83/Acrosome_reaction_diagram_en.svg/400px-

Acrosome_reaction_diagram_en.svg.png)

The acrosome reaction for a sea urchin, a similar process. Note that the
picture shows several stages of one and the same spermatozoon - only one
penetrates the ovum

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Blausen_0404_Fertilization.png/220px-

Blausen_0404_Fertilization.png)

Illustration depicting ovulation and fertilization.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/The_sperm_and_ovum_during_fertilization.svg/220px-

The_sperm_and_ovum_during_fertilization.svg.png)

The sperm entering the ovum using the acrosome head to break down the zona
pellucida.

**Human fertilization** is the union of a human egg and sperm, usually
occurring in the ampulla of the fallopian tube.[1] The result of this union is
the production of a zygote cell, or fertilized egg, initiating prenatal
development. Scientists discovered the dynamics of human fertilization in the
nineteenth century.[2]

The process of fertilization involves a sperm fusing with an ovum. The most
common sequence begins with ejaculation during copulation, follows with
ovulation, and finishes with fertilization. Various exceptions to this
sequence are possible, including artificial insemination, _in vitro_
fertilization, external ejaculation without copulation, or copulation shortly
after ovulation.[3][4][5] Upon encountering the secondary oocyte, the acrosome
of the sperm produces enzymes which allow it to burrow through the outer jelly
coat of the egg. The sperm plasma, then fuses with the egg's plasma membrane,
the sperm head disconnects from its flagellum and the egg travels down the
Fallopian tube to reach the uterus.

In vitro fertilization (IVF) is a process by which egg cells are fertilized by
sperm outside the womb, _in vitro_.

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Anatomy
                        * 1.1 Corona radiata
                        * 1.2 Cone of attraction and perivitelline membrane
                        * 1.3 Sperm preparation
                        * 1.4 Zona pellucida
                          * 1.4.1 Cortical reaction
                      * 2 Fusion
                        * 2.1 Cell membranes
                        * 2.2 Transformations
                        * 2.3 Replication
                        * 2.4 Mitosis
                      * 3 Fertilization age
                      * 4 Diseases
                      * 5 See also
                      * 6 References
                      * 7 External links
                

## Anatomy[edit]

### Corona radiata[edit]

The sperm binds through the corona radiata, a layer of follicle cells on the
outside of the secondary oocyte. Fertilization occurs when the nucleus of both
a sperm and an egg fuse to form a diploid cell, known as zygote. The
successful fusion of gametes forms a new organism.

### Cone of attraction and perivitelline membrane[edit]

Where the spermatozoan is about to pierce, the yolk (ooplasm) is drawn out
into a conical elevation, termed the cone of attraction or reception cone.
Once the spermatozoon has entered, the peripheral portion of the yolk changes
into a membrane, the perivitelline membrane, which prevents the passage of
additional spermatozoa.[6]

### Sperm preparation[edit]

Further information: Acrosome reaction

At the beginning of the process, the sperm undergoes a series of changes, as
freshly ejaculated sperm is unable or poorly able to fertilize.[7] The sperm
must undergo capacitation in the female's reproductive tract over several
hours, which increases its motility and destabilizes its membrane, preparing
it for the acrosome reaction, the enzymatic penetration of the egg's tough
membrane, the zona pellucida, which surrounds the oocyte.

### Zona pellucida[edit]

After binding to the corona radiata the sperm reaches the zona pellucida,
which is an extra-cellular matrix of glycoproteins. A special complementary
molecule on the surface of the sperm head binds to a ZP3 glycoprotein in the
zona pellucida. This binding triggers the acrosome to burst, releasing enzymes
that help the sperm get through the zona pellucida.

Some sperm cells consume their acrosome prematurely on the surface of the egg
cell, facilitating the penetration by other sperm cells. As a population,
sperm cells have on average 50% genome similarity so the premature acrosomal
reactions aid fertilization by a member of the same cohort.[8] It may be
regarded as a mechanism of kin selection.

Recent studies have shown that the egg is not passive during this
process.[9][10]

#### Cortical reaction[edit]

Once the sperm cells find their way past the zona pellucida, the cortical
reaction occurs. Cortical granules inside the secondary oocyte fuse with the
plasma membrane of the cell, causing enzymes inside these granules to be
expelled by exocytosis to the zona pellucida. This in turn causes the glyco-
proteins in the zona pellucida to cross-link with each other — i.e. the
enzymes cause the ZP2 to hydrolyse into ZP2f — making the whole matrix hard
and impermeable to sperm. This prevents fertilization of an egg by more than
one sperm. The cortical reaction and acrosome reaction are both essential to
ensure that only one sperm will fertilize an egg.[11]

## Fusion[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Human_Fertilization.png/220px-

Human_Fertilization.png)

Fertilization and implantation in humans.

After the sperm enters the cytoplasm of the oocyte (also called ovocyte), the
tail and the outer coating of the sperm disintegrate and the cortical reaction
takes place, preventing other sperm from fertilizing the same egg. The oocyte
now undergoes its second meiotic division producing the haploid ovum and
releasing a polar body. The sperm nucleus then fuses with the ovum, enabling
fusion of their genetic material.

### Cell membranes[edit]

The fusion of cell membranes of the secondary oocyte and sperm takes place.

### Transformations[edit]

In preparation for the fusion of their genetic material both the oocyte and
the sperm undergo transformations as a reaction to the fusion of cell
membranes.

The oocyte completes its second meiotic division. This results in a mature
ovum. The nucleus of the oocyte is called a pronucleus in this process, to
distinguish it from the nuclei that are the result of fertilization.

The sperm's tail and mitochondria degenerate with the formation of the male
pronucleus. This is why all mitochondria in humans are of maternal origin.
Still, a considerable amount of RNA from the sperm is delivered to the
resulting embryo and likely influences embryo development and the phenotype of
the offspring.[12]

### Replication[edit]

The pronuclei migrate toward the center of the oocyte, rapidly replicating
their DNA as they do so to prepare the zygote for its first mitotic
division.[13]

### Mitosis[edit]

Usually 23 chromosomes from spermatozoon and 23 chromosomes from egg cell fuse
(half of spermatozoons carry X chromosome and the other half Y
chromosome[14]). Their membranes dissolve, leaving no barriers between the
male and female chromosomes. During this dissolution, a mitotic spindle forms
between them. The spindle captures the chromosomes before they disperse in the
egg cytoplasm. Upon subsequently undergoing mitosis (which includes pulling of
chromatids towards centrioles in anaphase) the cell gathers genetic material
from the male and female together. Thus, the first mitosis of the union of
sperm and oocyte is the actual fusion of their chromosomes.[13]

Each of the two daughter cells resulting from that mitosis has one replica of
each chromatid that was replicated in the previous stage. Thus, they are
genetically identical.

## Fertilization age[edit]

Fertilization is the event most commonly used to mark the zero point in
descriptions of prenatal development of the embryo or fetus. The resultant age
is known as _fertilization age_ , _fertilizational age_ , _embryonic age_ ,
_fetal age_ or _(intrauterine) developmental (IUD)[15] age_.

Gestational age, in contrast, takes the beginning of the last menstrual period
(LMP) as the zero point. By convention, gestational age is calculated by
adding 14 days to fertilization age and vice versa.[16] In fact, however,
fertilization usually occurs within a day of ovulation, which, in turn, occurs
on average 14.6 days after the beginning of the preceding menstruation
(LMP).[17] There is also considerable variability in this interval, with a 95%
prediction interval of the ovulation of 9 to 20 days after menstruation even
for an average woman who has a mean LMP-to-ovulation time of 14.6.[18] In a
reference group representing all women, the 95% prediction interval of the
LMP-to-ovulation is 8.2 to 20.5 days.[17]

The average time to birth has been estimated to be 268 days (38 weeks and two
days) from ovulation, with a standard deviation of 10 days or coefficient of
variation of 3.7%.[19]

Fertilization age is sometimes used postnatally (after birth) as well to
estimate various risk factors. For example, it is a better predictor than
postnatal age for risk of intraventricular hemorrhage in premature babies
treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.[20]

## Diseases[edit]

Various disorders can arise from defects in the fertilization process.

                
                                      * Polyspermy results from multiple sperm fertilizing an egg.
                

However, some researchers have found[ _citation needed_ ] that in rare pairs
of fraternal twins, their origin might have been from the fertilization of one
egg cell from the mother and eight sperm cells from the father. This
possibility has been investigated by computer simulations of the fertilization
process.

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * Spontaneous conception, the unassisted conception of a subsequent child after prior use of assisted reproductive technology
                      * Development of the human body
                

## References[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** _Spermatogenesis — Fertilization — Contraception - Molecular, Cellular and Endocrine Events in Male Reproduction | S. Nieschlag | Springer_.
                      2. **^** Garrison, Fielding. An Introduction to the History of Medicine, pages 566-567 (Saunders 1921).
                      3. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-12-22. Retrieved  2016-01-24.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
                      4. **^** "Can Pregnancy Occur - Pregnancy Myths on How Pregnancy Occurs". _americanpregnancy.org_. 23 April 2012. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved  30 April 2018.
                      5. **^** Lawyers Guide to Forensic Medicine SBN 978-1-85941-159-9 By Bernard Knight - Page 188 "Pregnancy is well known to occur from such external ejaculation ..."
                      6. **^** "Fertilization of the Ovum". _Gray's Anatomy_. Archived from the original on 2010-12-02. Retrieved  2010-10-16.
                      7. **^** "Fertilization". Archived from the original on 24 June 2010. Retrieved  28 July 2010.
                      8. **^** Angier, Natalie (2007-06-12). "Sleek, Fast and Focused: The Cells That Make Dad Dad". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on 2017-04-29.
                      9. **^** Suzanne Wymelenberg, _Science and Babies_ , National Academy Press, page 17
                      10. **^** Richard E. Jones and Kristin H. Lopez, Human Reproductive Biology, Third Edition, Elsevier, 2006, page 238
                      11. **^** "Fertilization: The Cortical Reaction". _Boundless_. Boundless. Retrieved  14 March 2013.
                      12. **^** Jodar, M.; Selvaraju, S.; Sendler, E.; Diamond, M. P.; Krawetz, S. A.; for the Reproductive Medicine Networks (2013). "The presence, role and clinical use of spermatozoal RNAs". _Human Reproduction Update_. **19** (6): 604–624. doi:10.1093/humupd/dmt031. PMC 3796946. PMID 23856356.
                      13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Marieb, Elaine M. _Human Anatomy and Physiology, 5th ed._ pp. 1119-1122 (2001). ISBN 0-8053-4989-8
                      14. **^** "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-10-06. Retrieved  2016-07-31.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
                      15. **^** Wagner F, Erdösová B, Kylarová D (December 2004). "Degradation phase of apoptosis during the early stages of human metanephros development". _Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub_. **148** (2): 255–6. doi:10.5507/bp.2004.054. PMID 15744391.
                      16. **^** Robinson, H. P.; Fleming, J. E. E. (1975). "A Critical Evaluation of Sonar "crown-Rump Length" Measurements". _BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology_. **82** (9): 702–710. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.1975.tb00710.x.
                      17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Geirsson RT (May 1991). "Ultrasound instead of last menstrual period as the basis of gestational age assignment". _Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol_. **1** (3): 212–9. doi:10.1046/j.1469-0705.1991.01030212.x. PMID 12797075.
                      18. **^** Derived from a standard deviation in this interval of 2.6, as given in: Fehring RJ, Schneider M, Raviele K (2006). "Variability in the phases of the menstrual cycle". _J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs_. **35** (3): 376–84. doi:10.1111/j.1552-6909.2006.00051.x. PMID 16700687.
                      19. **^** Jukic AM, Baird DD, Weinberg CR, McConnaughey DR, Wilcox AJ (2013). "Length of human pregnancy and contributors to its natural variation". _Hum. Reprod_. **28** (10): 2848–55. doi:10.1093/humrep/det297. PMC 3777570. PMID 23922246.
                      20. **^** Jobe, Alan H (2004). "Post-conceptional age and IVH in ECMO patients". _The Journal of Pediatrics_. **145** (2): A2. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.07.010.
                

## External links[edit]

                
                                      * Fertilization (Conception)
                      * Safe Time to Enjoy Sex While Avoiding Pregnancy
                      * IVF Center in India
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Human physiology of sexual reproduction

* * *

Menstrual cycle|

                
                                      * Menarche
                      * Menstruation
                      * Follicular phase
                      * Ovulation
                      * Luteal phase
                

Gametogenesis|

                
                                      * Spermatogenesis
                        * spermatogonium
                      * spermatocyte
                      * spermatid
                      * sperm)
                      * Oogenesis (oogonium
                      * oocyte
                      * ootid
                      * ovum)
                      * Germ cell
                        * gonocyte
                      * gamete)
                

Human sexual activity|

                
                                      * Sexual arousal
                      * Sexual intercourse
                      * Masturbation
                      * Erection
                      * Orgasm
                      * Ejaculation
                      * Insemination
                      * Fertilization / Fertility
                      * Implantation
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Postpartum period
                      * Mechanics of sex
                

Development of the reproductive system|

                
                                      * Sexual differentiation
                        * Sexual dimorphism
                        * Feminization
                        * Virilization)
                      * Puberty
                        * Gonadarche
                        * Tanner scale
                      * Pubarche
                      * Menarche
                      * Spermarche
                      * Adrenarche)
                      * Maternal age / Paternal age
                      * Menopause
                

Egg|

                
                                      * Ovum
                      * Oviposition
                      * Oviparity
                      * Ovoviviparity
                      * Vivipary
                

Reproductive endocrinology  
and infertility|

                
                                      * Hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis
                      * Hypothalamic–pituitary–prolactin axis
                      * Andrology
                      * Hormone
                

Breast|

                
                                      * Thelarche
                      * Development
                      * Lactation
                      * Breastfeeding
                

Human reproductive system|

                
                                      * Male
                      * Female
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_fertilization&oldid=900365304"

Categories:

                
                                      * Fertility
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2014
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * العربية
                      * Bosanski
                      * Čeština
                      * Deutsch
                      * فارسی
                      * Français
                      * Hrvatski
                      * Italiano
                      * Latviešu
                      * नेपाली
                      * Polski
                      * Português
                      * Русский
                      * Shqip
                      * Slovenčina
                      * Slovenščina
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 5 June 2019, at 05:35 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

