

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

                
                                      *           *           *           * JOIN MWU
                

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

                
                                      * GAMES
                      * BROWSE THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * MORE __
                

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

                
                                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

                
                                      * JOIN MWU
                      * GAMES
                      * THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# fetus

noun

fe·​tus | \ ˈfē-təs ![How to pronounce fetus \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Definition of _fetus_

**:** an unborn or unhatched vertebrate especially after attaining the basic
structural plan of its kind specifically **:** a developing human from usually
two months after conception to birth — compare embryo sense 1a

## Examples of _fetus_ in a Sentence

Recent Examples on the Web

The suit challenges laws to ban most abortions once a fetal heartbeat is
detected, and to ban the procedure for women seeking to end pregnancies due to
the gender, race or disability of the _fetus_. -- Bruce Schreiner, _The
Seattle Times_ , "Judge cautions lawyers to watch language in abortion case,"
25 Mar. 2019 At the same time, researchers are gaining new insights into
genetic and environmental influences on the _fetus_ , such as a mother’s
obesity or exposure to toxic substances. -- Laura Landro, _WSJ_ , "The New,
Improved World of Infant Care," 16 Sep. 2018 Certainly, a surgical delivery
can be lifesaving when, for example, the _fetus_ or the mother is at risk of a
serious or fatal complication from a vaginal delivery. -- Jane E. Brody, _New
York Times_ , "The Importance of Infants’ Exposure to Micro-Organisms," 5 Feb.
2018 To allow the implantation and development of a _fetus_ that could be
construed as a foreign invader, the immune system needs to selectively ease
its normal level of vigilance. -- Melissa Healy, _The Seattle Times_ ,
"Pregnancy and childbirth may protect some women from developing dementia," 23
July 2018 Without a placenta, which attaches the embryo to the uterine wall,
an embryo cannot develop into a _fetus_. -- Susan Scutti, _CNN_ , "Embryo-like
structure synthesized in a lab could help decipher infertility," 3 May 2018
Iron helps sustain a _fetus_ ’s growth and development, according to the Mayo
Clinic. -- Cassie Shortsleeve, _SELF_ , "Do I Really Need to Take Prenatal
Vitamins Before I’m Even Pregnant?," 19 Apr. 2018 The chemicals are among a
group of pollutants that are seen as emerging health concerns and have been
linked to illnesses ranging from some cancers to developmental problems in
_fetuses_. -- Lee Bergquist, _Milwaukee Journal Sentinel_ , "Firefighting foam
used by unit of Johnson Controls poses toxic threat to Green Bay," 19 Mar.
2018 Officials have said that the chemicals are particularly worrisome for
_fetuses_ , babies and breast-feeing mothers. -- Bob Shaw, _Twin Cities_ ,
"Water-drinking public worried — or not — about 3M pollution in Washington
County," 6 June 2017

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'fetus.' Views expressed in the
examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send
us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _fetus_

14th century, in the meaning defined above

## History and Etymology for _fetus_

Middle English, from Latin, act of bearing young, offspring; akin to Latin
_fetus_ newly delivered, fruitful — more at feminine

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _fetus_

Share _fetus_

Post the Definition of fetus to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of fetus on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _fetus_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

## Dictionary Entries near _fetus_

fettuccelle

fettuccine

fettuccine Alfredo

fetus

feu

feuar

feu charter

## Statistics for _fetus_

Last Updated

6 Jun 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _fetus_

## The first known use of _fetus_ was in the 14th century

See more words from the same century

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _fetus_

fetus

_noun_

![How to pronounce fetus \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _fetus_

**:** a human being or animal in the later stages of development before it is
born

See the full definition for _fetus_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

fetus

noun

fe·​tus | \ ˈfē-təs ![How to pronounce fetus \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Kids Definition of _fetus_

**:** an animal not yet born or hatched but more developed than an embryo

fetus

noun

fe·​tus

variants: or chiefly British foetus \ ˈfēt-​əs ![How to pronounce foetus

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

plural fetuses or chiefly British foetuses or foeti\ ˈfēt-​ˌī ![How to

pronounce foeti \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Medical Definition of _fetus_

**:** an unborn or unhatched vertebrate especially after attaining the basic
structural plan of its kind specifically **:** a developing human from usually
two months after conception to birth — compare embryo

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _fetus_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _fetus_

Spanish Central: Translation of _fetus_

Nglish: Translation of _fetus_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _fetus_ for Arabic Speakers

Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about _fetus_

Comments on _fetus_

What made you want to look up _fetus_? Please tell us where you read or heard
it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
                
                      * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
                
                      * nectarine tangerine
                      * orange clementine
                

![Spell

It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Syn

City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

                
                                      1. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
                
                      2. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
                
                      3. codify  Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade
                

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
                

Your poem could win $$

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
                

Going above and beyond

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
                

They sound alike but that's it

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
                

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

                
                                      * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
                

You all would not have guessed some of these

                
                                      * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
                

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

                
                                      * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
                

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

                
                                      * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
                

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
                

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
                

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Spell It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Spell It
                

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Syn City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Syn City
                

Build a city of skyscrapers—one synonym at a time.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

                
                                      * SPANISH CENTRAL
                      * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
                      * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
                      * VISUAL DICTIONARY
                      * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
                      * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
                      * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
                      * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
                

FOLLOW US

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * a
                      * b
                      * c
                      * d
                      * e
                      * f
                      * g
                      * h
                      * i
                      * j
                      * k
                      * l
                      * m
                      * n
                      * o
                      * p
                      * q
                      * r
                      * s
                      * t
                      * u
                      * v
                      * w
                      * x
                      * y
                      * z
                      * 0-9
                      * Home 
                      * Help 
                      * Apps 
                      * About Us 
                      * Shop 
                      * Advertising Info 
                      * Dictionary API 
                      * Contact Us 
                      * Video 
                      * Favorites 
                      * Word of the Year 
                      * Law Dictionary 
                      * Medical Dictionary 
                      * Privacy Policy 
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Browse the Thesaurus 
                      * Browse the Medical Dictionary
                      * Browse the Legal Dictionary
                      * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
                

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

