

![National Network of Abortion

Funds](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2016/08/logo-lg-web-

shadow.png)National Network of Abortion Funds

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

__

                
                                      * About
                      * Find A Fund
                      * Need an Abortion?
                      * News
                      * Contact
                      * Get Updates
                      *  __Shop
                      *  __Donate
                

# Will State or Government Insurance Cover My Abortion?

State or government insurance is called Medicaid. Medicaid covers abortion in
15 states in the U.S. If you live in one of the states below, click on the
state name to be taken to some instructions about how to enroll in Medicaid
quickly. If you want to use Medicaid to cover your abortion, you must live in
and have your abortion in the same state. Your Medicaid coverage will not
follow you if you need to travel out of state.

                
                                      * ____ALASKA
                

**_DenaliCare_** is Alaska’s state Medicaid program for pregnant people and it
covers abortion.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· your income is within 200% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines (click _here_
for more information)

· you can provide proof of pregnancy from your health care provider, AND

· you live in Alaska

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** DenaliCare requires proof of U.S. citizenship for
citizens. Legal immigrants may apply if they provide proof of immigration
status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· proof of income

· proof of pregnancy (a letter from your doctor)

· citizenship documentation/proof of immigration status, AND

· proof of identity

**HOW TO APPLY:** There are three ways to apply for DenaliCare. The Affordable
Care Act ensures there is no wrong door to apply for health insurance
coverage.

                
                                        1. Print an application;
                        2. Apply online at MyAlaska. Under _Service for Individuals
                

_ Click on ARIES Self-Service Portal; or

                
                                        3. Apply online at Healthcare.gov
                

**HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE?**

State law requires the application to be processed within 30 days, though the
office tries to do so within 10-14 days.

**CONTACT INFORMATION** for DenaliCare

If you have questions about DenaliCare, contact your nearest Public Assistance
office.

Please call **1-844-231-7880** , if you submitted an application for Medicaid
and someone is experiencing an **urgent need** for medical assistance.

DenaliCare website

**CLINICS ACCEPTING ALASKA MEDICAID:**  
Alaska Women's Health Services (Anchorage, AK)  
Colleen Murphy, MD FACOG (Anchorage, AK)  
Planned Parenthood of Alaska (Anchorage, AK; Fairbanks, AK)  
George C. Stransky, MD FACOG (Anchorage, AK)  
Michael Merrick, MD (Kenai, AK)  
Susan Lemagie (Palmer, AK)

                
                                      * ____CALIFORNIA
                

California’s state Medicaid program is called **_Medi-Cal_**. The requirements
and enrollment process will vary depending on the county where you live. Medi-
Cal covers abortion.

If you are receiving Social Security Income or CalWORKS, you automatically
receive Medi-Cal and do not need to apply separately.

There is a separate Medi-Cal program just for pregnant people and it is often
much faster and easier to get onto this program than regular Medi-Cal. This
program covers abortion. The program is sometimes called Medi-Cal for
Pregnancy, the 200% program, Restricted Medi-Cal for Pregnancy, or the
Pregnant Women’s Program.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· your income is within 200% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines, AND

· you are pregnant (you do not need to provide proof of pregnancy; you can
simply say that you are pregnant)

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** You do **NOT** need to provide proof of citizenship
if you are applying for Medi-Cal for Pregnancy. Sometimes Medi-Cal eligibility
workers get this wrong, though. If you run into a problem with someone asking
you for proof of citizenship, you can call your local abortion fund, ACCESS,
for help: 1-800-376-4636 (English) or 1-888-442-2237 (español).

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Proof of identity AND

· Proof of income

**HOW TO APPLY:** Go in person to your nearest county office. A list of
offices where you may apply for Medi-Cal is available here.

You may also go to a hospital or clinic where county eligibility workers are
located.

When applying for Restricted Pregnancy Medi-Cal, you do **not** need to say
that you plan to have an abortion.

You also may download an application online.

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**

Find out the phone number of your local county office here.

If you would like advice or counseling on how to apply for Medi-Cal, you may
call ACCESS, a non-profit reproductive justice organization, at 1-800-376-4636
(English) or 1-888-442-2237 (Spanish)

                
                                      * ____CONNECTICUT
                

The state Medicaid program for pregnant people in Connecticut is called
**HUSKY**. HUSKY covers abortion.

Connecticut’s **Healthy Start** program helps low-income pregnant people
obtain HUSKY coverage.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· You can determine your eligibility using this chart.

_Note: If your income is close to the cut-off point, go ahead and fill out an
application for HUSKY. The state may choose not to count all of your income
and you may qualify anyway._

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** There is a brochure on the HUSKY website
[English|Español] that explains what documents you will need as proof of
citizenship.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Proof of identity AND

· Proof of income

**HOW TO APPLY:**

You can apply for HUSKY A, HUSKY B, or HUSKY D.

(1) Online through Access Health CT at www.accesshealthct.com

(2) Over the phone by calling Access Health CT at 1-855-805-4325

**_We encourage you to apply online or over the phone in order to get the
fastest determination of whether you are eligible._**

(3) Using application form ‘AH3,’ available by calling Access Health CT at
1-855-805-4325 or in a Department of Social Services (DSS) office

(4) In person at a DSS field office (please note that you may have to wait to
see a worker)

**CONTACT INFORMATION** for HUSKY

For information: 1-877-284-8759

To apply by phone: 1-800-656-6684

**CLINICS ACCEPTING HUSKY STATE MEDICAID:**

Planned Parenthood (all)

Summit Medical Center Inc. (Bridgeport, Hartford)

Hartford GYN Center(Hartford)

Medical Options (Danbury)

                
                                      * ____HAWAI'I
                

The state Medicaid program of Hawai’i is called **QUEST** and it covers
abortion.

If you are a documented immigrant and are pregnant, you may qualify for the
**State Medical Assistance Program for Pregnant Immigrant Women**

**YOU ARE IF ELIGIBLE IF:**

· you are a Hawaii resident

· you are a U.S. citizen or documented immigrant

· you can’t receive health insurance from your employer, AND

· you are making less than $27,000 if no one else relies on your income. If
you have another person in the household, you are eligible if the household
income is under $33,900. If there are three people in the household, the
household income must be under $40,800. If there are four people living in the
household, the household income must be under about $48,000; if there are five
people in the household, the income must be under $54,600.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· proof of your citizenship status, alien status, and/or Social Security
Number

· proof of identity

· proof of income

**HOW TO APPLY:**

          1. Fill out Medical Assistance Application for pregnant people. You can download the application online.

          2. Deliver the completed application in person or send in the mail. For information on the local Med-QUEST offices in your area, click here.

**CONTACT INFORMATION** for Med-Quest:

Click here to find the number of your local Med-QUEST Eligibility Office.

                
                                      * ____MARYLAND
                

The state medicaid program in Maryland is called Maryland Medical Assistance.
If you are already enrolled in Medical Assistance, ask your clinic or hospital
if they will accept this coverage. Because of the amount of time it takes to
enroll in Medical Assistance, however, we do not recommend that you apply for
Medical Assistance if you are trying to raise money for your abortion.
Instead, search for abortion funds that may be able to assist you.

                
                                      * ____MASSACHUSETTS
                

There are three major public insurance options that cover abortion in
Massachusetts: MassHealth, Commonwealth Care, and Health Safety Net. **_All
three insurance options have the same application procedure._**

All MassHealth programs cover abortion with two exceptions: MassHealth Limited
and MassHealth Prenatal.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· you are a Massachusetts resident

· you are a citizen or an eligible noncitizen

· your income fits the program guidelines. The maximum income for any of these
programs is 300% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines. That means you can make
$33,510 and still qualify for Commonwealth Care. If other people rely on your
income, you can make more (look at the chart below). The state will look at
your income and decide when of the plans (MassHealth, Commonwealth Care, or
Health Safety Net) makes sense for you.

1 person: $34,470

2 people: $46,530

3 people: $58,590

4 people: $70,650

5 people: $82,710

6 people: $94,770

7 people: $106,830

8 people: $118,890

(You can use an unofficial online eligibility check to see if you are eligible
for MassHealth.)

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** U.S. citizens are required to provide proof of
citizenship. Noncitizens must provide proof of immigration status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

Specific requirements will be explained in the instructions of your
application. You may be required to submit some of the following with your
application:

· Proof of identity

· Proof of citizenship for U.S. citizens and nationals

· Proof of immigration status for noncitizens

· Birthdates for family members

· Social Security number (except for MassHealth Limited)

· Proof of disability (if you have a disability)

· Proof of wages/income

· Proof of self-employment, business or rental income

· Proof of unearned income

· Bank statements

· Copy of health insurance card (if you have another type of health insurance)

· Proof of medical condition for people applying based on HIV/AIDS status

**After you submit your application, MassHealth will decide which insurance
coverage program you will receive and then notify you.**

**HOW** **TO APPLY:**

The application process is the same for all of the state health care programs.
**The fastest way to apply is in person** at your local community health care
center. To find one near you, click here or call 617-426-2225.

Before going to a health care center, you should make sure that the center
offers insurance enrollment by consulting its website or calling.

For more information, look at the MassHealth website and check out the
application.

**CONTACT INFORMATION** for MassHealth:

MassHealth Customer Service Center:

1-877-623-6765

TTY:1-877-623-7773

Health Care for All’s Consumer Health HelpLine: 1-800-272-4232

Health Care for All is a non-profit, non-government group that helps people in
Massachusetts get health insurance. They are an excellent resource for
information or if you get confused by the process at any point.

                
                                      * ____MINNESOTA
                

Pregnant people who meet income guidelines are eligible for **Medical
Assistance** , which covers abortion. If you are currently enrolled in
MinnesotaCare (a different state health program that doesn't cover abortion),
please contact your social worker as soon as possible and let them know you
are pregnant and would like to have your insurance moved from MinnesotaCare to
Medical Assistance. Please note that this process may take a couple weeks. To
learn the differences between Medical Assistance and MinnesotaCare, click
here. (Medical Assistance is Minnesota's Medicaid program.)

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· You are a resident of Minnesota

· your income is 138% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines (FPG) or less, which
is $16,394 per year for an individual ($33,534 for a family of four). The
income limits are higher for pregnant women and children and are calculated
differently for disability-based MA.

                
                                        * MinnesotaCare is similar to MA, but you have to pay a monthly premium for it. It is for people who:
                          * Have income at or below 200% of FPG ($23,540 per year for an individual; $48,500 for a family of four), and
                          * Can’t get affordable health coverage through MA, Medicare, or their jobs.
                

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** U.S. citizens who are applying are required to show
proof of citizenship. **Pregnant non-citizens are NOT required to provide
proof of immigration status.** Click here for more information.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Confirmation of pregnancy from a clinic or doctor

· Proof of income, AND

· Proof of identity

**HOW TO APPLY:**

          1. Head over to MNSure. 

          2. If you choose to print out an application, take the completed application to county human services agency or a local doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital that processes applications. Click here for more information about how to apply. 

**HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE?**

You will be notified within 15 days of applying.

For **Medical Assistance,** coverage may begin in the month you became
pregnant, but no earlier than three months before you applied.

**CONTACT** **INFORMATION FOR MEDICAL ASSISTANCE:**

All contact information.

**At a glance:**

Department of Human Services Information Desk: (651) 431-2000 (TTY/TTD:
800-627-3529)

Medical Assistance: (651) 431-2670

Toll-free line: (800) 657-3739

MinnesotaCare: (651) 297-3862

Toll-free line: (800) 657-3672

**CLINICS ACCEPTING MEDICAL ASSISTANCE:**

Dr. Mildred Hanson (Minneapolis)

Planned Parenthood Minnesota (St. Paul)

Robbinsdale Clinic (Robbinsdale)

Whole Woman's Health (Minneapolis)

Women’s Health Center of Duluth (Duluth)

                
                                      * ____MONTANA
                

The full Medicaid program in Montana covers abortion for pregnant people. (The
“basic” Medicaid program does not cover abortion.)

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· you meet certain income guidelines (generally within 150% of the Federal
Poverty Guidelines, but you should contact your local Office of Public
Assistance for more information),

· you are a U.S. citizen or documented immigrant, AND

· you have a note from a doctor confirming your pregnancy

_(A pregnant person may apply for Presumptive Eligibility. This means that you
can enroll quickly because you are pregnant.)_

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** You must provide proof of citizenship or legal
immigrant status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Note from doctor confirming pregnancy

· Proof of citizenship or immigration status, AND

· Proof of income

**HOW TO APPLY:**

To apply in person ( **recommended** ), go to your local Office of Public
Assistance with required documents and fill out an application. You can also
apply online.

You may be able to apply at your provider’s office because **some** offices
process Medicaid applications. Check with your clinic/provider to see if you
may apply through its office.

**CONTACT INFORMATION for Montana Medicaid:**

Montana Citizens’ Advocate office: 406-444-3111

Website for Montana Medicaid program

**CLINICS THAT ACCEPT MEDICAID:**

Planned Parenthood (Billings)

Mountain Country Women’s Clinic (Livingston)

                
                                      * ____NEW JERSEY
                

Pregnant people may be eligible for the **NJ FamilyCare** /Medicaid program,
which covers abortion.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· You are a resident of New Jersey

· You are a U.S. citizen or documented immigrant, AND

· You have an income at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level. This is
about $22,980 for a single person with no children.

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** You must provide documentation of U.S. citizenship
or legal immigrant status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· proof of identity

· proof of residency

· proof of household income

· proof of disability (if applicable)

· proof of resources, AND

· proof of citizenship status and Social Security number

**HOW TO APPLY:**

Go in person to your local County Welfare Agency to apply OR

You may be able to apply at your clinic or doctor’s office (call to check if
they accept applications) and follow up with your local County Welfare Agency.

Because you are pregnant, you may fill out a shorter Medicaid application form
with an “outstation” worker at some New Jersey hospitals and Federally
Qualified Health Centers.

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**

Find contact information for local County Welfare Agency.

**CLINICS ACCEPTING MEDICAID:**

Cherry Hill Women's Center (Cherry Hill)

Planned Parenthood (look for clinics that list "Abortion Services")

                
                                      * ____NEW MEXICO
                

Medicaid **Presumptive Eligibility** (called Category 030) allows you to
receive immediate coverage from the date your pregnancy is confirmed until the
last day of the next month. This program covers abortion.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· You are a New Mexico resident

· Your family income is below 185% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** You must provide proof of U.S. citizenship or legal
immigrant status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· proof of U.S. citizenship or legal immigrant status

· proof of income

· proof of residence, AND

· proof of pregnancy. **Home pregnancy tests do not count.** Pregnancy may be
confirmed at your local county public health office or hospital, but **not** a
Crisis Pregnancy Center or Abortion Alternatives Center.

**HOW TO APPLY:**

First, gather all necessary documents. **Once you have the required documents,
you may:**

          1. Go to your local county public health office and say, “I’m pregnant and need to see a doctor.”

          2. Apply at the office.

**OR**

Go to the Planned Parenthood Surgical Clinic in Albuquerque to apply.

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**  
Medicaid **-** NM Human Services Department

Phone: (505) 827-3100 (local Santa Fe)

Toll free: 1-888-997-2583

For more information on Medicaid in New Mexico, check the state website.

                
                                      * ____NEW YORK
                

There are a number of state programs in New York that will assist you with
paying for an abortion if you qualify. These programs are **Medicaid for
Pregnant Women & Teens**, **Prenatal Care Assistance Program** , **Child
Health Plus** , and **Family Health Plus.**

Pregnant women may get Medicaid coverage through **Presumptive Eligibility**.
This program allows women to get Medicaid coverage quickly. Presumptive
Eligibility coverage begins the same day that you apply for it.

For those who do not qualify for Medicaid, the program **Prenatal Care
Assistance Program** (PCAP) may provide coverage of abortion if the
applicant’s income is less than the Federal Poverty Level. Women are eligible
regardless of citizenship or immigration status and may apply for presumptive
eligibility.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· You are a resident of New York.

· Your income is under 200% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines. This is about
$22,980 for a single woman.

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:**

Pregnant women may be eligible for Medicaid for Pregnant Women & Teens, PCAP,
or Child Health Plus (CHP) **regardless** of citizenship/immigration status.
**You do not need proof of citizenship or immigrant status.**

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· proof of identity

· proof of income

· proof of residence, AND

· insurance benefit card or policy (if you have health insurance)

**HOW TO APPLY:**

The fastest way to apply is to go **in person** to an abortion clinic or
health center that processes applications. Doing so will allow you to get
coverage the same day.

Clinics and abortion providers can often help arrange to enroll you in one of
these programs. In some cases, you may apply at a clinic and have a procedure
that will be covered in the same day. Contact your clinic to see if they
process applications.

Pregnant women can apply through many clinics, hospitals, and Prenatal Care
Assistance Program offices. You may contact your local Department of Social
Services to find out where you may apply or apply online.

OR

Phone or go in person to your local Department of Social Services.

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**

The Medicaid helpline is 1-800-541-2831

In New York City, you can try the Human Resources Administration at
1-718-557-1399

Five boroughs of NYC: 1-877-472-8411 (toll free)

**CLINICS THAT ACCEPT MEDICAID:**

Click here to contact NYAAF, who will help you find a clinic that accepts
Medicaid.

                
                                      * ____OREGON
                

There are two types of Oregon Health Plan -- Standard and Plus. Sometimes,
there is a waiting list for the Standard Oregon Health Plan, so you may want
to apply for the “OHP Plus” program, which prioritizes pregnant women and
which covers abortion. T

_You may consult the websitehttp://www.oregonhelps.org_ _to see if you might
be eligible for OHP Plus._

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** You must have proof of your U.S. citizenship.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Proof of income (paystubs)

· Proof of citizenship (birth certificate) AND

· Proof of pregnancy (Planned Parenthood or your county health department can
help you provide proof)

**HOW TO APPLY:**

· Use the online application or call 800-699-9075 to request a printed
application.

· Go to Department of Human Services Office with completed application and
required documents. If possible, **arrive early in the morning.**

· If you sense the case manager is anti-choice, ask to switch case managers.
Otherwise, tell her you have an abortion appointment so it is clear your
application is urgent. **Do not leave the office without completing and filing
your application.**

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**

To find a local Department of Human Services branch, call 1-800-699-9075.

The Network for Reproductive Options (NRO) may also be a source for
information about OHP and abortion coverage:

Hotline: (541) 543-6607

Toll-free: 1-866-355-9100

**CLINICS ACCEPTING MEDICAID:**

Downtown Women’s Center (Portland)

                
                                      * ____VERMONT
                

The health care program for low-income people is called Green Mountain Care.
There are two Green Mountain Care programs that cover abortion: **Dr.
Dynasaur** and **Medicaid.** You can fill out one application to be considered
for both programs.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

To determine if you are eligible, you may call 1-800-250-8427 or consult the
online screening tool. For more information, go to the Green Mountain Care
website.

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** U.S. citizens may be asked to provide proof of
citizenship if they cannot be found in state records. Noncitizens must provide
proof of legal immigrant status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· proof of identity

· proof of income, AND

· proof of citizenship/immigrant status

**HOW TO APPLY:**

You may download an application online or call to request one in the mail.
Online is faster, of course. You must sign up for a username if you have not
already and then apply.

Telephone: Call 1-800-250-8427 to determine which program to apply for and to
request an application. Make sure to ask for a Medicaid application.

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**

Green MountainCare, Health Access Member Services

Phone: 1-800-250-8427

TDD: 1-888-834-7898

                
                                      * ____WASHINGTON
                

A pregnant woman may qualify for Medicaid’s Pregnancy Medical program. This
program covers abortion.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· you are a resident of Washington AND

· you meet certain income requirements.

You may want to consult an online eligibility calculator.

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** U.S. citizens are required to show proof of
citizenship (unless you receive Social Security Income or Social Security
disability benefits).

Non-citizens are required to provide proof of immigration status.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Proof of income (pay stubs)

· Proof of citizenship or immigration status

· Proof of identity

· A positive proof of pregnancy from a clinic or physician

**HOW TO APPLY:**

          1. Go **in person** to your local Community Service Office (CSO). Arrive as early as possible. You may call the Family Planning Hotline to find the closest CSO: 1-800-770-4334. If you’d like to fill out the application before going to the CSO, you may get application info here.

          2. Ask for an expedited application process. If you have an appointment, tell your caseworker. 

          3. Do not leave until your application is complete! Make sure you have all the required documents. 

          4. Get your voucher. Your voucher will either be mailed to you (often within a business week, no later than 15 working days) or you **may request to pick it up** at your CSO. If you’d like to pick it up, ask your case worker if you can be notified when it is ready.

**Make sure the clinic you are going to accepts Medicaid!**

**CONTACT INFORMATION**

Health care benefits: 1-800-562-3022

                
                                      * ____WEST VIRGINIA
                

West Virginia’s Medicaid program for pregnant women is called the **Poverty-
Level Pregnant Women and Infants Under Age One.**

For information on Medicaid in West Virginia, click here.

**YOU ARE ELIGIBLE IF:**

· Your income is at or below 150% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines.

To self-screen your eligibility, click here.

**PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP:** U.S.citizens must provide proof of citizenship when
applying.

If you have declared yourself an alien and have satisfactory immigration
status, you do not need to provide this proof.

**REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:**

· Proof of identity

· Proof of citizenship or legal immigrant status AND

· Medical statement confirming pregnancy

**HOW TO APPLY:**

You may apply in person at local county office of the West Virginia Department
of Health and Human Resources. Also, many local hospitals and primary care
clinics have staff that may help you apply.

**CONTACT INFORMATION:**

For information, contact your local county office.

Department of Health and Human Resources website

Here are some things you need to know about applying for Medicaid:

                
                                      * Although in many states you can apply for Medicaid by mail or over the phone, we strongly recommend applying **in person** and early in the day (when the office opens) at your local enrollment office. This way is usually the most efficient and will help you enroll as soon as possible. 
                      * Be confident when you apply and know that, if you qualify for Medicaid, you have the right to receive abortion coverage and enroll in a timely manner.
                      * When applying, be sure to tell your caseworker that you are pregnant and would like the application process to be expedited. You do not need to tell them you are planning to have an abortion.
                      * Federal Poverty Guidelines are often used to determine Medicaid eligibility. However, in some states that cover abortion, pregnant women may have a higher income than the guidelines for other people. Check the specific income guidelines for your state below. 
                      * Proof of identity is not the same as proof of citizenship. If you need to prove that you are a U.S. citizen, you'll probably need a birth certificate or passport.
                

If you do not live in one of these 15 states or if you aren't enrolled in
Medicaid, Medicaid will not cover your abortion. However, many clinics offer
discounts for people who are enrolled in Medicaid.

_ **Please note:** The information provided on this site is intended to
provide a general overview of Medicaid specifically for abortion coverage.
**We aren 't the government** , so we've pulled this information from
government websites and from the experience of abortion fund activists. **The
information will change** (sometimes quickly) and we’ll do our best to keep
up, but you should always check with the Medicaid office in your state or call
a community health center for specific information._

#### Helpful Information

                
                                      * List of Abortion Funds
                      * Common questions about abortion funds
                      * How do I find the clinic that's right for me?
                      * Can I get a discount at my clinic?
                      * Will state or government insurance cover my abortion?
                      * Safe abortion using pills
                

#### Recent Posts

                
                                      * ![HK Gray and Busy Phillips](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2019/06/Image-from-iOS-2-771x1028-50x50.jpg)Youth Testify Abortion Storyteller Testifies Before Congress
                

June 4, 2019

                
                                      * ![National Network of Abortion Funds](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2019/05/WP-post-header-LIGHT-771x257-50x50.jpg)Paid Sick Days and Abortion Access: Know Your Rights
                

May 1, 2019

                
                                      * ![Spotlight on Fund Texas Choice](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2019/03/fund-texas-choice-board-e1554391064993-771x318-50x50.jpg)Spotlight on Fund Texas Choice
                

April 9, 2019

#### Latest Tweets

                
                                      * Are you passionate about abortion funds and committed to help build an infrastructure for abortion funds work? Work… twitter.com/i/web/status/1…
                

_14 mins ago_

                
                                      * Abortion bans are no doubt an attack on cis women. But they also affect trans, intersex & gender non-conforming peo… twitter.com/i/web/status/1…
                

_37 mins ago_

                
                                      * When so many forces are out to divide us, we are focused on our collective power. Demonstrate your commitment and p… twitter.com/i/web/status/1…
                

_2 hours ago_

→ Follow @abortionfunds

National Network of Abortion Funds

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

#### Mission

The National Network of Abortion Funds builds power with members to remove
financial and logistical barriers to abortion access by centering people who
have abortions and organizing at the intersections of racial, economic, and
reproductive justice.

P.O. Box 170280, Boston, MA 02117

Privacy Policy

Job Openings

#### RECENT STATEMENTS

                
                                      * ![National Network of Abortion Funds](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2019/05/WP-post-header-LIGHT-771x257-75x75.jpg)Paid Sick Days and Abortion Access: Know Your Rights
                

May 1, 2019

                
                                      * ![Just Released: Spring Newsletter 2019](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2019/04/Spring-newsletter-header-75x75.png)Just Released: Spring Newsletter 2019
                

April 9, 2019

                
                                      * ![A Statement from the National Network of Abortion Funds Board of Directors](https://abortionfunds.org/cms/assets/uploads/2019/03/BoD-statement-header-771x257-75x75.png)A Statement from the National Network of Abortion Funds Board of Directors
                

March 25, 2019

#### TWEETS

                
                                      * Are you passionate about abortion funds and committed to help build an infrastructure for abortion funds work? Work… twitter.com/i/web/status/1…
                

_15 mins ago_

                
                                      * Abortion bans are no doubt an attack on cis women. But they also affect trans, intersex & gender non-conforming peo… twitter.com/i/web/status/1…
                

_37 mins ago_

→ Follow @abortionfunds

(C) National Network of Abortion Funds 2019

Powered by WordPress • Themify WordPress Themes

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

