

Skip to main content

**United States Holocaust Memorial Museum**

                
                                      * Site
                
                        * English home page
                        * المصادر بالعربية
                        * Πηγές στα Ελληνικά
                        * Recursos en español
                        * منابع موجود به زبان فارسی
                        * Ressources en français
                        * Gyűjtemény és tudástár magyar nyelven
                        * Sumber Bahasa Indonesia
                        * Materiali e risorse in italiano
                        * 日本語のリソース
                        * 한국어 자료
                        * Recursos em Português (do Brasil)
                        * Материалы на русском языке
                        * Türkçe Kaynaklar
                        * اُردو ری سورسز
                        * 中文参考资料
                
                      * Events
                      * Plan Your Visit
                      * Support the Museum
                      * Connect
                      * Donate
                      * **Learn About** The Holocaust
                      * **Remember** Survivors and Victims
                      * **Confront** Genocide and Antisemitism
                

Search the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum site:

![](/a/titles/logo-alt-head.png)

![](/a/titles/logo-foremost.gif)

                
                                      * Home
                      * Learn about The Holocaust
                

**Holocaust Encyclopedia**

Search: Search in: Entire Encyclopedia Article ID Card Artifact Document
Historical Film Footage Oral History Animated Map Map Music Photograph

## Filter search results

                
                                      * (80)
                      * (1)
                
                      * Introduction to the Holocaust
                      * Information for Students
                      * Timeline of Events
                      * Holocaust Encyclopedia
                      * Holocaust and Related Maps
                      * The Holocaust: A Learning Site for Students
                

# Search Results  groups that were persecuted

Displaying: **1**  **25** / **81**

                
                                      * 1
                      * 2
                      * 3
                      * 4
                      * Next
                      * ###  1. Persecution of Homosexuals in the Third Reich
                

![Persecution of Homosexuals in the Third

Reich](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/df606ccb-213b-4c8b-b902-760bc95d3b7e.jpg)

concentration camps. Gay men _were_ targeted for _persecution_ because they
did not contribute to the ... many survivor accounts, homosexuals _were_ among
the most abused _groups_ in the camps ... Höss, commandant of Auschwitz, wrote
in his memoirs _that_ homosexuals _were_ segregated in order to ... other
_groups_. Without this help in mitigating brutality, homosexual prisoners
_were_ unlikely to survive

                
                                      * ###  2. Nazi _Persecution_ of Soviet Prisoners of War
                

![Nazi Persecution of Soviet Prisoners of

War](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/4d97b109-db10-4113-9859-dde434bdc01e.jpg)

the end of the war. Second only to the Jews, Soviet prisoners of war _were_
the largest _group_ of victims ... German soldiers _were_ reinforced by
Finnish, Romanian, Hungarian, Italian, Slovak, and Croatian troops

                
                                      * ###  3. Documenting Numbers of Victims of the Holocaust and Nazi _Persecution_
                

![Documenting Numbers of Victims of the Holocaust and Nazi

Persecution](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/632c26c5-5d44-43eb-888e-3a706f91acea.jpg)

Slavic peoples (especially Poles and Russians). Other _groups_ _were_
_persecuted_ on political, ideological ... The Nazis, who came to power in
Germany in January 1933, believed _that_ Germans _were_ "racially superior ...
document created by Nazi officials _that_ spells out how many people _were_
killed in the

                
                                      * ###  4. _Persecution_ of Roma (Gypsies), 1939-1945
                

![Persecution of Roma \(Gypsies\),

1939-1945](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/d44ebce0-dbb4-4f5d-9d08-76a96b0806b4.gif)

Roma (Gypsies) _were_ among the _groups_ singled out on racial grounds ... for
_persecution_ by the Nazi regime. Roma _were_ subjected to internment

                
                                      * ###  5. Mosaic of Victims: In Depth
                

![Mosaic of Victims: In

Depth](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/d9a5a812-0803-4b10-8059-a381b47944ba.jpg)

Jews _were_ one of four _groups_ racially targeted for _persecution_ in Nazi
Germany and in German ... of thousands of local Roma, often on trumped-up
justification _that_ the Roma _were_ engaged in espionage ... to survive so
_that_ their labor could be exploited, Soviet soldiers _were_ generally
incarcerated under ... killed by starvation and lethal overdoses of
medication. Other _Persecuted_ _Groups_

                
                                      * ###  6. Bystanders
                

![Bystanders](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/cebebc9c-0e2e-4735-8a7d-a9b167f2f2af.jpg)

events _that_ happened over a long period of time. Jews _were_ dehumanized,
deprived of many legal rights ... Involvement After the war many ordinary
Germans and Europeans claimed _that_ they _were_ “not involved”—in ...
essence, _that_ they _were_ “bystanders.” Refusal to take any responsibility
for what happened, however ... became the victims of both random and organized
violence, and _were_ socially if not physically isolated

                
                                      * ###  7. Political Prisoners
                

![Political

Prisoners](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/d9a5a812-0803-4b10-8059-a381b47944ba.jpg)

_voelkische Gemeinschaft_ , by which they meant a racial _group_ _that_ they
considered superior ... _persecuted_ non-Jewish German opponents, both real
and perceived. Whether they _were_ political (Communists ... racial theory
held _that_ they _were_ valuable members of the race. These non-Jewish German
opponents needed ... aims _that_ _were_ shared by a majority of the German
population, Hitler's political opponents _were_ the

                
                                      * ###  8. Atrocities against Burma's Rohingya Population
                

![Atrocities against Burma's Rohingya

Population](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/4b2f8888-5a90-4a7d-9b24-18cfc8e3367d.jpg)

they are not the only ethnic or religious _group_ _that_ experiences
discrimination in Burma. Other _groups_ ... The Rohingya are a Muslim minority
_group_ in Burma (also known as Myanmar). Considered one of the world ... ’s
most _persecuted_ peoples, Burma's Rohingya population has faced a long
history of severe discrimination ... and _persecution_ , violence, denial of
citizenship, and numerous restrictions at the hands of Burmese

                
                                      * ###  9. Jehovah's Witnesses in Germany: From the 1890s to the 1930s
                

![Jehovah's Witnesses in Germany: From the 1890s to the

1930s](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/e3d4b803-cf52-4254-b732-ea87fcb50807.jpg)

The Nazi regime targeted Jehovah's Witnesses for _persecution_ because they
refused, out of ... reasons, Jehovah's Witnesses had the option to avoid
_persecution_ and personal harm by submitting to state ... vast majority of
Jehovah's Witnesses refused to abandon their faith even in the face of
_persecution_ ... Pittsburgh in 1872 by Charles Taze Russell as the
International Bible Study Society, the _group_ took the name

                
                                      * ###  10. Flight and Rescue
                

![Flight and

Rescue](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/0fc23892-14d9-4151-abba-a92570b4567b.jpg)

Nazi genocide _that_ claimed the lives of three million Polish Jews. Their
experiences _were_ portrayed ... Jews, but _were_ concerned _that_ persons
supposed to be traveling through Japan did not end up staying ... based on
nationality, and did not involve _persecution_ of Jews as a _group_ , let
alone their mass murder ... because they fear _that_ they will be _persecuted_
on the basis of their “race, religion, nationality

                
                                      * ###  11. The Nazi Olympics Berlin 1936
                

![The Nazi Olympics Berlin

1936](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/0623da87-2aa7-4e7b-bec6-b2285030315e.jpg)

-party dictatorship _that_ _persecuted_ Jews, Roma (Gypsies), all political opponents, and others. The Nazi ... segregated facilities. But these Jewish sports facilities _were_ not comparable to well-funded German _groups_ ... of Nazi _persecution_ of Jews and other _groups_. In August 1936, the Nazi regime tried to ... Berlin. Most tourists _were_ unaware _that_ the Nazi regime had temporarily removed anti-Jewish signs
                
                                      * ###  12. United States Immigration and Refugee Law, 1921–1980
                

prove they _were_ escaping political or racial _persecution_. Had this
amendment been enacted, American ... soon as possible at the beginning of each
month, when new portions of the quota _were_ opened. Ships _that_ ... Jews
fleeing Nazi _persecution_ in Europe _were_ consistently referred to as
“refugees.” However, this term ... Americans _were_ in favor of the
immigration of German refugees—and these congressmen believed _that_

                
                                      * ###  13. The United States and the Nazi Threat: 1933-37
                

![The United States and the Nazi Threat:

1933-37](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/ca3ccd8f-e14f-4602-b58a-3dbcf6371f8d.jpg)

would tame Hitler’s bold and undemocratic pronouncements. Others worried
_that_ Jewish fears _were_ ... Globe_ , for example, reported on February 1
_that_ the Nazis _were_ already warning _that_ “Jews who got out ... _ and
others. Journalists also reported _that_ Americans _were_ being attacked by
Nazi storm troopers ... retaliate even more violently against Jews in Germany.
These _groups_ also worried _that_ such public protests

                
                                      * ###  14. HIAS
                

![HIAS](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/ede410f9-e0e5-4f4c-ae61-335c5897e04f.jpg)

organizations, including the aid _groups_ _that_ later would join to form
modern-day HIAS, helped these immigrants ... reported _that_ it had helped
250,000 men, women, and children escape Nazi _persecution_. When refugees ...
principles say _that_ “the right of a refugee is a universal human right” and
_that_ “hatred, bigotry, and ... xenophobia must be expressly prohibited in
domestic and international law.” HIAS estimates _that_ it has helped

                
                                      * ###  15. Women during the Holocaust
                

![Women during the

Holocaust](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/badcfd55-4bf4-4d81-9858-af5ce03ee7e6.jpg)

regime frequently subjected women, however, both Jewish and non-Jewish, to
brutal _persecution_ _that_ was ... "race experts" determined _that_ the child
was not capable of "Germanization," the women _were_ generally ... The Nazi
regime targeted all Jews, both men and women, for _persecution_ and eventually
death. The ... . Certain individual camps and certain areas within
concentration camps _were_ designated specifically for

                
                                      * ###  16. "Enemies of the State"
                

!["Enemies of the

State"](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/861b4cfc-e5fc-46b2-8dd6-e7cedea0bc94.jpg)

_persecuted_. Other individuals and _groups_ _were_ considered "undesirable"
and "enemies of the state." Once the ... of the State Although Jews _were_ the
main target of Nazi hatred, they _were_ not the only _group_ ... . Jehovah's
Witnesses, members of a small Christian _group_ , _were_ victimized not for
reasons of race but ... the first _groups_ _persecuted_ by the Nazis.

                
                                      * ###  17. Introduction to the Holocaust
                

![Introduction to the

Holocaust](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/6dfa4c3e-eed2-4031-bcea-5817a984a2ad.jpg)

(Poles, Russians, and others). Other _groups_ _were_ _persecuted_ on
political, ideological, and behavioral ... January 1933, believed _that_
Germans _were_ "racially superior" and _that_ the Jews, deemed "inferior,"
_were_ an ... -sponsored _persecution_ and murder of six million Jews by the
Nazi regime and its collaborators. _Holocaust ... authorities also targeted
other _groups_ because of their perceived racial and biological inferiority

                
                                      * ###  18. Introduction to the Definition of Genocide
                

_groups_ " _were_ protected by the Convention. In a later ruling, however, the
ICTY argued _that_ a ... decisions _that_ concern the _group_ , in whole or in
part, include the ICTY cases against Radislav Krstic and ... ." The Convention
designates certain _groups_ _that_ accorded with the common understanding of
... _persecuted_ _group_ is often defined by the perpetrators based on
perceived characteristics. The ICTY also

                
                                      * ###  19. Refugees Today
                

![Refugees

Today](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/aa011bb0-24b2-4316-9b7c-f04c7a577f4b.jpg)

they fear _that_ they will be _persecuted_ on the basis of their “race,
religion, nationality, membership ... Commissioner for Refugees estimated
_that_ by the end of 2017 more than 65 million individuals had been forcibly
... due to war crimes and crimes against humanity including _persecution_ ,
torture, the besieging of ... others. Since 2014, hundreds of thousands of
Iraqis have fled the campaign of religious _persecution_ and

                
                                      * ###  20. Polish Jewish Refugees in Lithuania, 1939–40
                

![Polish Jewish Refugees in Lithuania,

1939–40](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/ec8867ad-9fe1-4943-93c1-f53cf9c5fa6a.jpg)

refugees _were_ vulnerable. Many did not want the relative safety of assuming
Soviet citizenship because _that_ ... 1940 and early 1941, just months before
the Germans began to kill Jews on a mass scale, one _group_ of ... Jewish
refugee population in Vilna was composed largely of adult males, since they
_were_ the most likely ... to face _persecution_ in occupied Poland. It also
included families who had the financial means to

                
                                      * ###  21. German and Austrian Jewish Refugees in Shanghai
                

![German and Austrian Jewish Refugees in

Shanghai](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/93c41c1f-f4af-4cf8-805a-d71bbf47e404.jpg)

war in Europe, the International Settlement and French Concession _were_ home
to two main Jewish _groups_ ... clear _that_ most countries in the world
_were_ limiting or denying entry to Jews, it became the only ... headed by the
French consul general. Before the arrival of Jews fleeing Nazi _persecution_
and the ... The older and smaller _group_ consisted of about 700 Sephardic
Jews whose fathers and grandfathers had

                
                                      * ###  22. War Refugee Board: Background and Establishment
                

rescue and relief of the Jews of Europe and other victims of enemy
_persecution_.” An independent ... estimated _that_ they saved tens of
thousands of lives, and aided hundreds of thousands more. The ... Bergson
_Group_ and the Emergency Committee to Save the Jews of Europe In the United
States ... increased public knowledge about Nazi atrocities against Jews in
Europe prompted various _groups_ —both in the

                
                                      * ###  23. Mosaic of Victims: An Overview
                

![Mosaic of Victims: An

Overview](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/ac5078a5-bb22-425e-9596-4788aa632087.jpg)

Although the Jews _were_ their primary targets, the Nazis and their
collaborators also _persecuted_ ... thousands _were_ also imprisoned in Nazi
concentration camps. It is estimated _that_ the Germans killed at least ...
other _groups_ for racial or ideological reasons ... . Among the earliest
victims of Nazi discrimination in Germany _were_ political opponents—primarily

                
                                      * ###  24. Quakers
                

![Quakers](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/e4a3d564-c3b5-4efb-8863-9ab70138f6d8.jpg)

the 17th century. The _group_ took the name “Quakers” name from the "quaking"
_that_ is sometimes ... helping children and other vulnerable _groups_ whose
lives _were_ left in disarray by the war. Europe ... to show _that_ refugees
_were_ neither swarming the United States, nor would they worsen unemployment
in ... has never been very large—there _were_ an estimated 112,000 Quakers in
the United States in 1930, or

                
                                      * ###  25. Lesbians and the Third Reich
                

![Lesbians and the Third

Reich](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/images/thumb/9a0c94ef-70af-47d4-a5aa-c481819c45cd.jpg)

Erhard Eberhard wrote tracts against homosexuals, feminists, Republicans, and
Jews, _groups_ _that_ _were_ ... experienced hardships during the Third Reich,
the Nazis did not systematically _persecute_ them. Those who _were_ ...
lesbians _were_ not generally regarded as a social or political threat. Even
after the ... Nazi rise to power in 1933, most lesbians in Germany _were_ able
to live relatively quiet lives

                
                                      * 1
                      * 2
                      * 3
                      * 4
                      * Next
                

## Museum Information

                
                                      * Today at the Museum
                      * Plan Your Visit
                      * Exhibitions and Collections
                      * Traveling Exhibitions
                

## Resources for Academics and Research

                
                                      * Ask a Research Question
                      * Research in Collections
                      * Research about Survivors and Victims
                      * Academic Programs
                

## Resources for Educators

                
                                      * Teaching about the Holocaust 
                      * Programs for Teachers
                      * Teaching Materials
                      * Holocaust Encyclopedia
                

## Resources for Professionals and Student Leaders

                
                                      * Law Enforcement
                      * Military
                      * Judiciary
                      * Faith and Interfaith Communities
                

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum **United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum**

100 Raoul Wallenberg Place, SW  
Washington, DC 20024-2126  
Main telephone: 202.488.0400  
TTY: 202.488.0406

                
                                      * ![Facebook](/a/screen/social/icon-fb.png)
                      * ![Twitter](/a/screen/social/icon-twtr.png)
                      * ![Youtube](/a/screen/social/icon-ytube.png)
                      * ![Instagram](/a/screen/social/icon-inst.png)
                      * About the Museum
                      * Contact the Museum
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Privacy
                      * Accessibility
                      * Legal
                

![](https://www.ushmm.org/online/dor/2019/2019_DOR-Calendar_600x400.jpg)

×

**#WeRemember #HolocaustRemembrance**

## Days of Remembrance Commemoration

Watch Live

The ceremony at the US Capitol, featuring a candle-lighting and names reading,
is happening now.

![](https://www.ushmm.org/online/firstperson/2019/FirstPersonLightboxImage-

small.jpg)

×

![](https://www.ushmm.org/online/firstperson/2019/fp20-branding-tall.png)

## FirstPerson

#### Conversations with Survivors

of the Holocaust

Watch Now

Join us right now to watch a live interview with a survivor, followed by a
question-and-answer session.

×

**$25,000 MATCHING GIFT CHALLENGE**  
Join our #GivingTuesday challenge to make your tax-deductible gift go twice as
far. Help us teach about the consequences of unchecked hate and antisemitism.
Give today.

MATCH MY GIFT

![](https://www.ushmm.org/online/ihrd/ihrd-2019.jpg)

×

## International Holocaust Remembrance Day

The Museum's commemoration ceremony, including remarks by the German
ambassador and a Holocaust survivor, is happening now.

**#WeRemember**

Watch Now

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

