

# List of smoking bans in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This article **may betoo long to read and navigate comfortably**. Please
consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding
subheadings. _( September 2015)_

\---|---

The following is a **list of smoking bans in the United States**. For smoking
bans and restrictions outside the United States, see the worldwide list of
smoking bans.

The United States Congress has not attempted to enact any type of nationwide
federal smoking ban. Therefore, smoking bans in the United States are entirely
a product of first-level jurisdictional, local criminal, and occupational
safety and health laws.

In 1995, California was the first state to enact a statewide smoking ban;
throughout the early to mid-2000s, especially between 2004 and 2007, an
increasing number of states enacted a statewide smoking ban of some kind. As
of July 2018, the most recent statewide smoking ban is Alaska's, which was
signed into law on July 18, 2018, and went into effect on October 1, 2018.

As further detailed in this list, smoking laws vary widely throughout the
United States. Some places in the United States do not generally regulate
smoking at all, some ban smoking in certain areas and not others, and some ban
smoking nearly everywhere, even in outdoor areas (no state bans smoking in all
public outdoor areas, but some local jurisdictions do). As of July 1, 2017,
according to the American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation, 81.5% of the U.S.
population lives under a ban on smoking in "workplaces, and/or restaurants,
and/or bars, by either a state, commonwealth, or local law",[1] and 58.6% live
under a ban covering all workplaces _and_ restaurants _and_ bars.[2] A smoking
ban (either state or local) has been enacted covering _all_ bars and
restaurants in each of the 60 most populated cities in the United States
_except_ these 11: Atlanta, Jacksonville, Memphis, Miami, Las Vegas,
Nashville, Oklahoma City, Philadelphia, Tampa, Tulsa, and Virginia Beach. New
Hampshire allows smoking in some private member's clubs where alcohol is
served.[3][4]

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
    * 1.1 Statewide bans on smoking in all enclosed public places
    * 1.2 Statewide smoking bans exempting adult-only venues
    * 1.3 Unique statewide smoking bans
    * 1.4 States with no statewide smoking ban
    * 1.5 Smoking laws and non-states
    * 1.6 Smoking laws and the U.S. federal government
  * 2 Smoking laws of the United States by state or territory
    * 2.1 Alabama
    * 2.2 Alaska
    * 2.3 American Samoa
    * 2.4 Arizona
    * 2.5 Arkansas
    * 2.6 California
    * 2.7 Colorado
    * 2.8 Connecticut
    * 2.9 Delaware
    * 2.10 District of Columbia
    * 2.11 Florida
    * 2.12 Georgia
    * 2.13 Guam
    * 2.14 Hawaii
    * 2.15 Idaho
    * 2.16 Illinois
    * 2.17 Indiana
    * 2.18 Iowa
    * 2.19 Kansas
    * 2.20 Kentucky
    * 2.21 Louisiana
    * 2.22 Maine
    * 2.23 Maryland
    * 2.24 Massachusetts
    * 2.25 Michigan
    * 2.26 Minnesota
    * 2.27 Mississippi
    * 2.28 Missouri
    * 2.29 Montana
    * 2.30 Nebraska
    * 2.31 Nevada
    * 2.32 New Hampshire
    * 2.33 New Jersey
    * 2.34 New Mexico
    * 2.35 New York
    * 2.36 North Carolina
    * 2.37 North Dakota
    * 2.38 Northern Mariana Islands
    * 2.39 Ohio
    * 2.40 Oklahoma
    * 2.41 Oregon
    * 2.42 Pennsylvania
    * 2.43 Puerto Rico
    * 2.44 Rhode Island
    * 2.45 South Carolina
    * 2.46 South Dakota
    * 2.47 Tennessee
    * 2.48 Texas
    * 2.49 United States Virgin Islands
    * 2.50 Utah
    * 2.51 Vermont
    * 2.52 Virginia
    * 2.53 Washington
    * 2.54 West Virginia
    * 2.55 Wisconsin
    * 2.56 Wyoming
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

## Overview[edit]

### Statewide bans on smoking in all enclosed public places[edit]

As of July 2018, 26 states have enacted statewide bans on smoking in all
enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants: Alaska, Arizona,
California, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, New
Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont,
Washington, and Wisconsin. Twelve other states have enacted statewide smoking
bans but have carved out an exception for certain establishments and
workplaces: Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Louisiana, Nevada,
New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee.

However, these states exempt a variety of places from their respective smoking
bans. All except seven (California, Delaware, Montana, North Dakota, Utah,
Vermont, and Washington) exempt tobacconists. All except six (Alaska,
Michigan, Indiana, North Dakota, Vermont, and Wisconsin) allow hotels and
motels to designate a certain percentage of smoking rooms. Many also exempt or
do not cover casinos (10), private clubs (8), cigar bars (14), or certain
small workplaces (8). The following is a table of common exemptions from these
28 states' smoking bans:

States that exempt tobacconists | States that exempt cigar bars | States that
exempt private clubs | States that exempt casinos | States that exempt small
workplaces  
\---|---|---|---|---  
AK, AZ, CA, CO, CT, HI, KS, IL, IA, ME, MD, MA, MI, MN, NE, NJ, NM, NY, OH,
OR, RI, SD, TN, WI | AK, CA, CO, CT, MA, MI, NE, NJ, NM, NY, OR, RI, SD, TN,
WI | AK, AZ, CT, IA, KS, MA, NY, OH, TN | CT, IA, KS, ME, TN (OTB parlors,
beano and bingo halls), MI, MN, NJ (including OTB parlors), NM, RI (including
OTB parlors), WI | CO & TN (3 or fewer employees), CT (5 or fewer employees),
ND (1 employee), NM (1 employee), OH (family owned and operated), UT (1
employee), VT (1 employee)

In Connecticut, Oregon, Montana, Utah, and Wisconsin, the state law preempts
local governments from enacting stricter smoking bans than the state, though
some cities and/or counties in some of those states have enacted local
versions of the state's smoking ban. In the other 23 states with a statewide
general smoking ban, some cities and/or counties have enacted stricter local
smoking bans to varying degrees. In California, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Maine, New Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon, Utah, and Vermont, usage of
e-cigarettes is prohibited indoors. The strictest smoking ban in the United
States is in Calabasas, California, where smoking anywhere a non-smoker could
congregate, including public sidewalks and apartment complexes, is a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of at least $250.[5]

### Statewide smoking bans exempting adult-only venues[edit]

As of July 2017, six states ban smoking in most enclosed public places, but
permit adult venues such as bars (and casinos, if applicable) to allow smoking
if they choose: Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Louisiana, Iowa and Nevada. In
Florida, state law preempts local governments from enacting stricter smoking
bans than the state, though in Idaho, Indiana, and Louisiana, some cities
and/or counties have enacted stricter local smoking bans to varying degrees,
in some cases banning it in all enclosed workplaces. See individual state
listings below for details.

### Unique statewide smoking bans[edit]

As of July 2018, 5 states have enacted smoking bans in particular places that
do not fit in the other categories:

  * Alaska bans smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, but allows smoking in private clubs that were in existence prior to January 1, 2017, and allows for certain localities such as villages to opt out of the law bars (which can be 100% smoking) and small workplaces (which can have a designated smoking area); local governments in Idaho can regulate smoking more strictly than the state.
  * Nevada generally bans smoking in all public places and places of employment, but exempts bars, casinos, strip clubs, brothels, and retail tobacco stores, and restaurants that do not allow patrons under 21 years of age. In all other restaurants, smoking is relegated to separately ventilated designated smoking areas. Local governments in Nevada may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.
  * New Hampshire bans smoking in restaurants and some bars (those besides cigar bars and private clubs), schools, and certain common areas open to the public, but not anywhere else, and state law prohibits local governments from enacting local smoking bans.
  * North Carolina bans smoking in all restaurants and bars (excluding cigar bars and private clubs), as well as government buildings and vehicles, but does not regulate smoking anywhere else. Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, except in cigar bars, private clubs, tobacco shops, private residences/vehicles, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and theatrical performances involving smoking.

### States with no statewide smoking ban[edit]

As of July 2018, 12 states have not enacted any general statewide ban on
smoking in workplaces and/or bars and/or restaurants: Alabama, Arkansas,
Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas,
Virginia, West Virginia, and Wyoming. Instead, laws in most of these states
(see individual state listings below for further information) require
proprietors of certain places to designate smoking and non-smoking areas and
post warning signage.

In Oklahoma and Virginia state laws prohibit local governments from regulating
smoking more strictly than the state, making those states among the fewest in
the nation without any legislated smoking bans. In the other ten states,
cities and/or counties have enacted stricter smoking laws than the state, in
some cases banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces. In Alabama and
Mississippi, the state smoking law expressly allows all local governments to
do so. In Alaska, Kentucky, Missouri, South Carolina, Texas, and West
Virginia, a court has ruled that certain local governments have the power to
do so. See the individual state listings below for details.

### Smoking laws and non-states[edit]

In the District of Columbia, American Samoa, Puerto Rico and the United States
Virgin Islands, smoking is banned in all enclosed public places, including
bars and restaurants. Guam prohibits smoking in restaurants, but the ban
doesn't extend to workplaces or any other businesses. The Northern Mariana
Islands prohibits smoking in most workplaces and restaurants, but not in bars.

### Smoking laws and the U.S. federal government[edit]

Although Congress has not attempted to enact a general nationwide federal
smoking ban in workplaces, several federal regulations do concern indoor
smoking. Effective April 1998, inflight smoking is banned by the United States
Department of Transportation on all commercial passenger flights in the United
States, and/or by American air carriers.[6] This was long after Delta Air
Lines had banned smoking on all of its flights. On August 9, 1997, President
Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 13058, banning smoking in all interior
spaces owned, rented, or leased by the Executive Branch of the Federal
Government, as well as in any outdoor areas under executive branch control
near air intake ducts.[7]

## Smoking laws of the United States by state or territory[edit]

### Alabama[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Alabama's 2003 statewide smoking law, the Alabama Clean Indoor Air Act, generally prohibits smoking in public places and public meetings[8] unless a smoking area is designated that in certain places must be "enclosed and well ventilated."[9] Warning signs must be posted appropriately.[10] Bars, lounges, retail tobacco stores, limousines under private hire, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and psychiatric facilities are entirely exempt from the Act's regulation.[8] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act,[11] and the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals reiterated this in August 2009.[12]
    * Proposals to enact a statewide smoking ban in Alabama, all but one of which were sponsored only by State Senator Vivian Davis Figures, have **failed** in the Alabama Legislature every year since 2008. In May 2008, a bill by Sen. Figures to ban smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, failed when it did not receive a vote before the end of the legislative session.[13] In April 2009, Sen. Figures withdrew a similar bill after the Alabama Senate amended it to allow smoking in bars, the bar sections of restaurants, dog tracks, and gambling halls.[14] In April 2010, a bill by Sen. Figures to ban smoking statewide only in restaurants passed the Senate by a vote of 19–3 but did not receive a vote in the Alabama House of Representatives.[15] In April 2011, a bill by Sen. Figures to ban smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, failed when it did not receive a vote in a Senate committee, and a similar House bill by Rep. Mary Sue McClurkin failed the same way.[16] In 2012, two Senate bills (one by Sen. Figures) and another House bill by Rep. McClurkin to enact a statewide smoking ban in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants, also failed this way.
  * **Localities in Alabama with smoking bans that include all bars and restaurants (36 total):**
    * Albertville, November 12, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Anniston, July 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Atmore, November 13, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Auburn, November 15, 2006, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Bayou La Batre, August 31, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Birmingham, April 27, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; also includes private clubs and hotels/motels[4]
    * Chickasaw, December 26, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Citronelle, March 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Clay, January 6, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Cottonwood, December 11, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Creola, April 25, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Decatur, October 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * East Brewton, November 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Fairfield, February 1, 2006, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Flomaton, June 23, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Fultondale, September 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] also includes private clubs
    * Gadsden, January 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Gulf Shores, August 14, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Headland, May 1, 2005, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Homewood, November 19, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Jasper, November 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] exempts private clubs that are for non-profit.
    * Lanett, October 17, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Luverne, April 11, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Midfield, December 28, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Monroeville, March 19, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mountain Brook, October 19, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Orange Beach, August 9, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Oxford, January 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Phenix City, February 18, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Saraland, September 22, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Satsuma, August 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sheffield, October 31, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Talladega, September 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tallassee, December 16, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Troy, June 25, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Vestavia Hills, July 25, 2012, banned in workplaces, bars, restaurants, hotels/motels, and within 20 feet (6.1 m) of entrances and exits[4]
  * **Localities in Alabama with smoking bans that do not include all bars and restaurants (17 total):**
    * Alexander City, January 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Bay Minette, January 1, 2008, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Bessemer, November 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Center Point, June 25, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Daphne, May 18, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Fairhope, November 20, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Foley, November 23, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Fort Payne, April 1, 2009, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Geneva, July 4, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mobile, October 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Northport, October 12, 2007, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Opelika, May 22, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Opp, November 1, 2006, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Prichard, February 28, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Robertsdale, January 2, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Spanish Fort, September 15, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Tuskegee, June 9, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants, but exempting bars.[4]

### Alaska[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On October 1, 2018, after being signed into law on July 18, 2018, smoking was banned statewide in all enclosed public places, including bars, restaurants, private clubs, hotels/motels, outdoor arenas, playgrounds and parks. The law exempts (1) a vehicle that is a place of employment when the vehicle is used exclusively by one person, (2) on a vessel when the vessel is engaged in commercial fishing or sport charter fishing, (3) a private club if the private club has been in continuous operation at the same location since January 1, 2017; is not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages; and is not a place of employment, (4) at a private residence, except a private residence described in (b) of 27 section or while a health care provider is present, (5) in a stand-alone shelter if the stand-alone shelter meets the following requirements: food or drink may not be sold or served in the stand-alone shelter; and the stand-alone shelter meets the minimum distance requirements of 10 feet (3.0 m), and (6) allows smoking so long as it's not within 10 feet (3.0 m) of all places where smoking is prohibited. Localities may regulating smoking more stringently than the state, and the bill also allows for certain municipalities such as villages to exempt certain establishments, including bars and restaurants from the bill if they see fit.[17][18]

### American Samoa[edit]

  * **Territory-wide smoking ban.** On October 20, 2010 Governor Togiola Tulafono signed into law the **American Samoa Smoke Free Environment Act** , a Fono (Legislature) bill passed earlier in the year. The bill went into effect on January 20, 2011.[19]

### Arizona[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On May 1, 2007, the Smoke Free Arizona Act (Proposition 201) went into effect after passage by 54.7% of voters the prior November, banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces and within 20 feet (6.1 m) of an entrance or exit of such a place, including bars and restaurants, only exempting private residences, retail tobacco stores, private clubs, smoking associated with American Indian religious ceremonies, outdoor patios, and stage/film/television performances; local governments may enact stricter regulations than the state. The law does not cover businesses located on Indian Reservations, as the reservations are sovereign nations.[20][21][22]

### Arkansas[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Arkansas's statewide smoking law, the Arkansas Clean Indoor Air Act of 2006, bans smoking in most enclosed workplaces in Arkansas, exempting private residences, hotel and motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, workplaces with fewer than three employees, retail tobacco stores, designated areas in nursing homes, outdoor areas, workplaces of tobacco manufacturers (and importers and wholesalers), bars and restaurants that do not allow patrons younger than 21, and gaming floors of operations regulated by the Arkansas Racing Commission.[23] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law.[24] At the same time, the Arkansas Protection from Secondhand Smoke for Children Act of 2006 went into effect, prohibiting smoking in a motor vehicle carrying a child under age six years old who weighs less than 60 pounds and is in a car seat.[25]
  * **Localities in Arkansas with smoking bans that include all bars and restaurants (3 total):**
    * Fairfield Bay, January 29, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Helena-West Helena, November 7, 2008 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wooster, May 26, 2016 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in Arkansas with smoking bans that do not include all bars and restaurants (3 total):**
    * Fayetteville, March 11, 2004, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Highfill, July 12, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Pine Bluff, July 7, 2005, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]

### California[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Since January 1, 1995, smoking has been banned in all enclosed workplaces in California, including bars and restaurants (bars were excluded until January 1, 1998); these following areas were exempt until June 9, 2016: meeting and banquet rooms except while food or beverage functions are taking place (including set-up, service, and clean-up activities or when the room is being used for exhibit activities), retail or wholesale tobacco shops and private smokers lounges (i.e. cigar bars), truck cabs/tractors if no nonsmoking employees are present, theatrical production sites if smoking is an integral part of the story, medical research or treatment sites if smoking is integral to the research or treatment being conducted, private residences except homes licensed as family day care homes during the hours of operation and in those areas where children are present, and patient smoking areas in long-term health care facilities.[26]

Effective January 1, 2004, California bill AB846 bans smoking within 20 feet
(6.1 m) of the entrance or operable window of a public building ("public
building" means a building owned and occupied, or leased and occupied, by the
state, a county, a city, a city and county, or a California Community College
district.) The law also prohibits smoking in state owned vehicles.[27][28]

Additionally, effective January 1, 2008, smoking in a moving vehicle while in
the presence of a minor (18 years or younger) is an infraction; the charge is
not serious enough to be pulled over, and only can be cited along with a
stricter offense, such as a moving violation or traffic accident.[29][30]

Local jurisdictions may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Many
California communities have established smoke-free registries for private
residential apartment buildings, which range from complexes where smoking is
entirely prohibited (whether inside private dwellings or outside) to those
where certain sections of dwellings may be designated as smoking dwellings.
Most California cities allow landlords to regulate smoking at will.

  * Alameda, January 2, 2012, banned in commercial areas, recreation areas (parks, trails beaches, sports fields), service areas (bus stops, ticket lines, ATMs), dining areas, public event spaces, entryways, and many workplaces including 90% of hotel/motel guest rooms, small businesses with fewer than five employees, tobacco shops, hookah bars medical research sites, work vehicles, theatrical production sites, and all outdoor worksites. On January 1, 2013 the ban expanded to include all multi-unit housing.[31][32]
  * Belmont, October 9, 2007, banned in parks and other public places, as well as inside apartments and condominiums.[33]
  * Berkeley, March 26, 2008, banned on all commercially zoned sidewalks, and within 20 feet (6.1 m) of a bus stop[34][35]
  * Beverly Hills, October 1, 2007, banned in all outdoor dining areas.[36]
  * Burbank, April 2007, banned in most public places including Downtown Burbank, outdoor dining & shopping areas, parks, service lines, and within 20 feet (6.1 m) of all building entrances/exits.[37]
  * Calabasas, 2006, banned in all indoor and outdoor public places, except for a handful of scattered, designated outdoor smoking areas in town. Believed to be the strictest ban in the United States.[38]
  * Davis, The Davis City Code prohibits smoking in a wide variety of locations open to the public.[39]
  * El Cajon, August 14, 2007, banned on city streets, in outdoor patios in restaurants, and outside of the local shopping mall. Anyone caught smoking in public areas will faces a fine of up to $500. The city previously outlawed smoking in parks, and also requires businesses that sell tobacco products to obtain a city license.[40]
  * El Cerrito, January 1, 2015, banned in all public places, commercial areas, and multi-unit residences and within 25 feet of any of these.[41]
  * Escondido, in 2005, increased the state prohibition on smoking within 20 feet (6.1 m) of an entrance to a public place to 80 feet (24 m) outside city-owned buildings.[42][43] In 2009, the city, at the urging of local students, banned smoking in parks, city open spaces, and trails, including the parking areas for these city properties.[42][44]
  * Glendale, October 7, 2008, banned smoking[45] in/on and within 20 feet (6.1 m) from: all city property (except streets and sidewalks); city vehicles and public transportation vehicles; city public transit stations; places of employment; enclosed public places; non-enclosed public places; and common areas of multi-unit rental housing. Some of the areas where smoking is prohibited are authorized to have smoking-permitted areas, subject to regulations. Also, landlords in Glendale are required to provide disclosure to a prospective renter, prior to signing a lease, as to the location of possible sources of second-hand smoke, relative to the unit that they are renting.[ _citation needed_ ]
  * Hermosa Beach, March 1, 2012, banned at all of Hermosa's outdoor dining areas, the popular Pier Plaza, the city pier, the Strand, the greenbelt parkway, and all city parks and parking lots. Smoking already is outlawed on the city-owned beach.[46]
  * Loma Linda, July 25, 2008, banned on all sidewalks, streets, common areas in shopping centers, bus stops, parks, restaurant patios, theaters, City Hall, and 80% of motel rooms and apartment units. Exempts the federally controlled VA hospital grounds, and smoking in cars traveling in the city.[47]
  * Long Beach, California bans smoking in all city parks, at or within 20 feet of busstops, and at farmers' markets.
  * Los Angeles, 2007, banned in all city parks,[48] and, 2011, all outdoor dining areas.[49]
  * Marin County, May 23, 2012 banned in all condos and apartments, as well as all patios within residential units. Anyone caught smoking will face a $100 fine and will be sentenced to five community day services. A second offense warrants a $300 fine and ten community day services, and a third offense being $700 fine and fifteen community day services. Landlords may opt out of smoking restrictions by designating 20 percent of their units reserved for smoking and may permit e-cigarettes to be used inside apartments and condos. All other outdoor areas, including bar and restaurant patios, and private homes that are not of multi-unit residences and smoking in cars are exempt from the ban.[50]
  * Oakland, bans smoking within 25 feet of an entrance, exit, window, or air intake of the building of most enclosed places where smoking is prohibited (e.g., workplaces, service areas, common areas and no-smoking units of multi-unit housing); exemption is made outside of bars provided the smoke doesn't enter prohibited areas. Smoking is also banned in certain unenclosed areas, including service areas (e.g., bus stops, cab stands, ATMs).[51]
  * Palm Springs, April 2011, banned smoking in all city parks.
  * Pasadena, October 27, 2008, banned smoking in certain outdoor areas, including shopping malls, unenclosed areas of bars and restaurants, service waiting lines (e.g. ATMs, bus stops, etc.) and within 20 feet (6.1 m) from them, and within 20 feet (6.1 m) of doorways, windows, or ventilation areas of enclosed places where smoking is banned. Also banned smoking in multi-unit housing, owned and/or leased, and all public events, including the Rose Parade.[52]
  * San Diego, July 11, 2006, banned smoking at all City of San Diego beaches and parks, including all beaches from La Jolla to Sunset Cliffs.[ _citation needed_ ]
  * San Francisco, January 2005, banned smoking in all city parks.[53] January 2013, banned smoking at all outdoor "street fairs and festivals", with exceptions for legal medical marijuana and small neighborhood block parties.[54]
  * San Jose, October 2007, banned in all city parks.[55]
  * San Luis Obispo, August 2, 1990, became the first city in the world to ban smoking in all public buildings.[56] On January 15, 2010, the City's municipal code amendment included city parks and outdoor recreational facilities as smoke-free areas.[57] In April 2010, City Council adopted an ordinance that bans smoking in all areas frequented by the public, with limited exceptions, including unenclosed areas at certain drinking establishments.[58]
  * Santa Barbara & Goleta, Local laws in Santa Barbara County and in the City of Goleta prohibit smoking within 30 feet of any building or area where smoking is prohibited. Ashtrays are also banned within a 30-foot smoke-free area.[59]
  * Santa Monica, 2006, banned smoking within 20 feet (6.1 m) of entrances, exits, or operable windows of a public building (such as City Hall and the courthouse); in local parks (including parking lots); on the Third Street Promenade; on local beaches; and on the Santa Monica Pier (except within designated zones).[60]

In 2012, the California Legislature passed the following into law, California
Civil Code Section 1947.5. (a) A landlord of a residential dwelling unit, as
defined in Section 1940, or his or her agent, may prohibit the smoking of a
cigarette, as defined in Section 104556 of the Health and Safety Code, or
other tobacco product on the property or in any building or portion of the
building, including any dwelling unit, other interior or exterior area, or the
premises on which it is located, in accordance with this article. (b) (1)
Every lease or rental agreement entered into on or after January 1, 2012, for
a residential dwelling unit on property on any portion of which the landlord
has prohibited the smoking of cigarettes or other tobacco products pursuant to
this article shall include a provision that specifies the areas on the
property where smoking is prohibited, if the lessee has not previously
occupied the dwelling unit. (2) For a lease or rental agreement entered into
before January 1, 2012, a prohibition against the smoking of cigarettes or
other tobacco products in any portion of the property in which smoking was
previously permitted shall constitute a change of the terms of tenancy,
requiring adequate notice in writing, to be provided in the manner prescribed
in Section 827. (c) A landlord who exercises the authority provided in
subdivision (a) to prohibit smoking shall be subject to federal, state, and
local requirements governing changes to the terms of a lease or rental
agreement for tenants with leases or rental agreements that are in existence
at the time that the policy limiting or prohibiting smoking is adopted. (d)
This section shall not be construed to preempt any local ordinance in effect
on or before January 1, 2012, or any provision of a local ordinance in effect
on or after January 1, 2012, that restricts the smoking of cigarettes or other
tobacco products. (e) A limitation or prohibition of the use of any tobacco
product shall not affect any other term or condition of the tenancy, nor shall
this section be construed to require statutory authority to establish or
enforce any other lawful term or condition of the tenancy. (Added by Stats.
2011, Ch. 264, Sec. 2. Effective January 1, 2012.) [61]

### Colorado[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On July 1, 2006, the Colorado Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces statewide, including bars and restaurants. Casinos, initially exempt, were added to the ban January 1, 2008.[62] The Act only exempts private residences and automobiles unless used for the public transportation of children or as part of healthcare or daycare, limousines under private hire, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, cigar bars, designated areas in airports, outdoor areas, workplaces not open to the public where the employer employs three or fewer employees, private nonresidential buildings on a farm or ranch that has annual gross income of less than $500,000, and designated areas in nursing homes.[63] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[64] A judge has ruled that a bar sharing common indoor space with a tobacco shop is also exempt from the ban.[65]

### Connecticut[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On October 1, 2003, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Connecticut, including bars and restaurants (bars, cafes, and bowling alleys were exempt until April 1, 2004.[66] The Act exempts correctional and psychiatric facilities, public housing projects, private clubs whose liquor permit was issued on or before May 1, 2003, areas of businesses where tobacco products are developed and tested, and cigar bars (a business that has a liquor permit and generated at least 10% of its 2002 gross income from on-site sales of tobacco products or humidor rentals and has not changed its size or location after December 31, 2002).[66] If a business has five or fewer employees (except bars and restaurants), the employer and all employees can agree to designate 20% of the place's enclosed space as a smoking area, provided that it is separately ventilated and adequate breakroom space for nonsmokers is allocated.[66] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking at all.[66] Smoking is also permitted in hotel rooms but must be designated.

Two large casinos on Mohegan and Mashantucket Pequot tribal land, Mohegan Sun
and Foxwoods, allow smoking in many areas of their properties. Employers may
also designate an on-site designated smoking area for employees.

### Delaware[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On November 1, 2002, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Delaware, including bars, restaurants, and casinos.[67] The Act exempts private homes and automobiles not used for childcare or daycare or the public transportation of children, rented social halls while being rented, limousines under private hire, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, fundraising activities sponsored by an ambulance or fire company while on property owned or leased by the company, and fundraising activities sponsored by a fraternal benefit society taking place upon property owned or leased by the society.[67] Local governments can regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Bethany Beach has outlawed smoking on the boardwalk and beach.[4][67] In Rehoboth Beach, smoking is banned in parks, playgrounds, the beach, the boardwalk, and adjacent public areas.[68][69]

### District of Columbia[edit]

  * **District-wide smoking ban** : Effective January 2007, smoking is banned in bars, restaurants, and other public places in the District of Columbia; exempts outdoor areas, designated hotel/motel rooms, retail tobacco stores, cigar bars, hookah bars, and businesses that can show they receive 10% or more of their annual revenue from tobacco sales, excluding cigarette machines.[70]

### Florida[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban excluding bars** : On July 1, 2003, a constitutional amendment passed by voters came into effect which banned smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Florida, exempting private residences, retail tobacco shops, designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels, stand-alone bars with no more than 10% of revenue from food sales, rooms used for quit-smoking programs and medical research, and designated smoking areas in customs transit areas under the authority of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.[71] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking.[72][73]

See also: Tobacco Free Florida

### Georgia[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Georgia's 2005 statewide smoking law, the Georgia Smokefree Air Act, prohibits smoking in all enclosed public places in Georgia, except each of the following: designated smoking areas in non-work areas of businesses that are separately ventilated, bars and restaurants where persons under 18 years of age are not employed or permitted to enter, separately enclosed smoking rooms in any bar or restaurant, private residences not used as healthcare or child daycare facilities, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, nursing homes, outdoor areas, designated areas in international airports, workplaces of a tobacco manufacturer or other tobacco business, privately owned meeting and assembly rooms during private functions where persons under 18 are not allowed, and areas of private places of employment (other than medical facilities) that are open to the general public by appointment only.[74] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[75] Buildings in which smoking is banned under the Act may have an outdoor smoking area that is located a reasonable distance from any entrance, exit, window, vent, or air intake system, but any ashtrays located there must be placed a reasonable distance away.[75] A violation of the Act is punishable by a fine of between $100 and $500.[75]
  * **Localities in Georgia with smoking bans that include all bars and restaurants (11 total):**
    * Athens, July 7, 2005, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Buena Vista, April 2, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Chatham County, February 24, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, private clubs, restaurants, and retail tobacco stores.[4]
    * Effingham County, November 21, 2002, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Gainesville, July 1, 2005, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Morrow, September 22, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pooler, January 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Richmond County, January 1, 2019, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, except for the cities of Blythe and Hephzibah[4]
    * Savannah, January 1, 2011, banned in bars and restaurants and even service queues[76]
    * Snellville, April 1, 2004, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Tift County, December 5, 2004, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
  * **Localities in Georgia with smoking bans that do not include all bars and restaurants (16 total):**
    * Berkeley Lake, May 1, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Clarkston, September 3, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars but exempting restaurants[4]
    * Columbia County, January 1, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Cordele, June 1, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Decatur, April 1, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * DeKalb County, February 17, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces, except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Douglas, June 26, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Douglas County, March 1, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Douglasville, May 1, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Dunwoody, December 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Loganville, May 10, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Madison, November 8, 2004 banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Peachtree City, October 18, 2004, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * South Fulton, February 27, 2018, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[77]
    * Tifton, October 18, 2004, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Valdosta, February 16, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]

### Guam[edit]

  * **Territory-wide ban on smoking in restaurants only** : On February 6, 2007, the Natasha Protection Act went into effect after the Supreme Court of Guam lifted an injunction on it, banning smoking in all restaurants, as well as in bars that double as restaurants between 4:00 am and 10:00 pm; the ban does not cover either stand-alone bars or workplaces in general.[78] In 2009, a new act went into effect, additionally banning smoking within 20 feet of public buildings.[79]

### Hawaii[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On November 16, 2006, smoking was banned statewide in all enclosed or partially enclosed workplaces in Hawaii, including the indoor and outdoor portions of all bars and restaurants.[80] The law exempts private residences not used as a healthcare or daycare facility, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, designated rooms in nursing homes, outdoor places of employment not part of bars or restaurants, any place where smoking is part of a production being filmed, and state correctional facilities.[81] Smoking is prohibited within 20 feet (6.1 m) of the entrance/exit of a place where the law prohibits smoking indoors.[82] Fines range from $50 for a person caught smoking in violation of the law, to between $100 and $500 for an establishment caught allowing smoking in violation of the law.[83] In 2010, several bills were introduced attempting to exempt bars.[84] Counties may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[85]
  * Kalawao County, October 4, 2002, banned smoking in all public buildings.[86] The ban did not apply to private homes or Kalawao County's only bar at the time.[86]
  * Hawaii County, March 13, 2008, banned in public recreational areas, such as parks and beaches.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Idaho[edit]

  * **Statewide ban on smoking in restaurants and some workplaces** : On July 1, 2004, the Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed public places, except in bars, retail tobacco stores, private clubs, designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels, theatrical productions, areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees besides the owner not open to the general public, offices (other than childcare facilities) within private homes, veterans homes, and designated breakrooms in businesses with fewer than five employees (as long as they are separately ventilated and minors are not allowed in that room).[87] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[88]
  * Boise, January 2, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and private clubs, as well as in any public outdoor space accessible to children and in all spaces owned by the public, including parks.[89]
  * Moscow, August 4, 2009, banned in bars and private clubs, but not other workplaces [4]
  * Ketchum, April 15, 2013, banned in a long list of areas that include all bars, city-owned facilities, parks, and indoor public places and places of employment, including hotel and motel rooms.[90]

### Illinois[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On January 1, 2008, the Smoke Free Illinois Act went into effect, banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, and casinos, and within 15 feet (4.6 m) of such places; exempts certain retail tobacco stores, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied exclusively by smokers, no more than 25% of designated smoking rooms in hotels/motels on the same floor, and private residences.[91] Smoking is prohibited in private residences when defined as a place of employment such as when used for child care or foster care.[91] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[91]

HB 1310: a proposal in January 2012 to once again permit smoking in bars,
casinos, adult entertainment venues, and private clubs failed in the Illinois
House 30-82.

Chicago has had its own Clean Indoor Air Ordinance since 1988.[92] The Chicago
Clean Indoor Air Act was updated to mention e-cigarettes in 2014, making it
the first major U.S. city to legislate e-cigarette use.[93] The Chicago Park
District's Board of Commissioners has discussed banning all forms of smoking
in Chicago parks, beaches, play lots and other facilities, but there is not
yet a municipal ordinance.

As of January 1, 2018, the minimum legal age to purchase tobacco products and
e-cigarettes in unincorporated areas of Lake County, Illinois is 21 years.[94]

### Indiana[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban excluding bars, and casinos.** Effective July 1, 2012, after having been signed into law by Governor Mitch Daniels on March 19, 2012, Indiana's 1993 statewide Clean Indoor Air Law was repealed and replaced by a new chapter of the Indiana Code titled "Prohibition on Smoking." The new chapter bans smoking in all enclosed public places and workplaces in Indiana and within 8 feet (2.4 m) of an entrance thereto, except as exempted.[95] The law exempts: (1) horse racing facilities including off-track betting parlors; (2) riverboats; (3) all indoor portions of casinos and other licensed gaming facilities; (4) cigar bars and hookah lounges; (5) private clubs; (6) retail tobacco stores; (7) bars and taverns (defined as _any business with a liquor license_ that does not allow in persons under 21 years of age); and (8) cigar manufacturers.[95] The law expressly allows local governments to enact more stringent smoking restrictions.[95]
  * Attempts in the Indiana General Assembly to enact a ban on smoking in all workplaces in Indiana, including all bars and restaurants, have **failed** every year since 2007. In April 2007, the Indiana Senate removed a smoking ban from a health care funding bill passed by the Indiana House of Representatives, and in January 2008, a proposed statewide smoking ban introduced by Rep. Charlie Brown died in a House committee without a vote or debate.[96] In April 2009, another proposed statewide ban introduced by Rep. Brown was passed in the House by a vote of 70–26 after being amended to exempt restaurants, bars, and casinos, and then did not receive a committee hearing in the Senate.[97] In February 2010, another proposed ban by Rep. Brown was denied a committee hearing or vote in the Senate after having been passed by the House, 73-26.[98] In April 2011, a Senate committee voted 8–1 to reject a statewide ban exempting bars, casinos, private clubs, retail tobacco shops, and nursing homes, which also had been introduced by Rep. Brown and previously had passed the House, 68-31.[99] The ban that ultimately was enacted in 2012 passed the House as a complete ban on smoking in all workplaces in Indiana, including all bars and restaurants (and authored again by Rep. Brown), but was amended by the Senate to include the above exemptions, upon which the House agreed to the Senate's exemptions.[100]
    * Austin, December 10, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * Ball State University, August 1, 2013, banned on campus, except for designated areas.[101]
  * Bloomington, January 1, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4] Smoking is allowed only outside at a "reasonable distance" from doors, vents, and windows – measured by whether smoke can drift inside.
  * Columbus, June 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, and private clubs[4]
  * Cumberland, January 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4]
  * Delaware County, August 11, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, bars, private clubs and restaurants[4]
  * Elkhart, May 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempted existing bars until May 1, 2009, with a grandfather clause[4]
  * Franklin, June 8, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * Fort Wayne, June 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4][102]
  * Greencastle, September 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4]
  * Hancock County, March 15, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4]
  * Howard County, July 1, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne, April 1, 2014, banned on campus.[103]
  * Indiana State University, July 1, 2009, banned on campus, except for designated areas.
  * Indiana University, banned on campus; Bloomington campus extends this to all outdoor areas.
  * Indianapolis, June 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] exempts cigar and hookah bars, retail tobacco stores, off-track betting facilities and private clubs and veterans halls.[ _citation needed_ ]
  * Lawrence, October 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * Monroe County, February 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants. Ban also applies to drivers carrying children aged 13 or younger.[4][104]
    * North Manchester, August 31, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * Plainfield, February 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4] but exempting private clubs; nursing homes were exempt until July 1, 2012 when the new statewide smoking ban took effect[4]
  * Purdue University, banned on West Lafayette campus, except for designated areas.[105]
  * South Bend, January 2, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[106]
  * Terre Haute, July 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4]
  * Vanderburgh County, July 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars & restaurants; under new provisions, smoking is prohibited within 10 feet (3.0 m) of entrances where smoking is banned to ensure that no smoke can drift inside; excludes retail tobacco stores, fraternal clubs and private clubs that prohibit persons younger than 18[4]
  * Vigo County, June 26, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants and private clubs[4]
  * West Lafayette, July 1, 2007 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4] but exempting tobacco bars, private residences, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, private clubs, and outdoor areas in the city, including Purdue University's main campus.[4]
  * Zionsville, July 5, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants,[4] and private clubs.[ _citation needed_ ]
  * **Localities in Indiana with a smoking ban that was _rejected_ in some manner (1 total):**
  * Evansville, April 1, 2012 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, private clubs and fraternal organizations, but excluded casino gaming floors.[107] But **struck down** by Supreme Court of Indiana on February 11, 2014, as unconstitutional due to the casino exemption, which was held to violate the Indiana Constitution and could not be severed from the ordinance.[108]

### Iowa[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On July 1, 2008, the Iowa Smokefree Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all workplaces in Iowa, including bars and restaurants, as well as the outdoor areas of schools, stadia, restaurants, and public transit areas (including bus shelters).[109] The Act does not legislate smoking in public parks.[110] The Act exempts private residences while not being used as a childcare or healthcare facility, outdoor areas where smoking is not specifically prohibited, hotel/motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied by smokers, private clubs, limousines under private hire, private work vehicles where only one employee is located, places where a quit-smoking program is taking place, farm vehicles, casino gaming floors, the state-run veterans' home in Marshalltown, and designated areas of correctional facilities.[111] Fines for individuals found in violation of the Smokefree Air Act are $50 per violation.[112] Fines for businesses range anywhere from $100 to $500 for each violation with the eventual possibility of revocation of liquor and/or business license for habitually offending businesses.[112]

### Kansas[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On July 1, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Mark Parkinson on March 12, 2010, an amendment to Kansas' 1987 statewide smoking law took effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed, indoor workplaces in Kansas.[113] The law will exempt only (1) casino and racetrack gaming floors, (2) the entire area of a private club that was in existence on January 1, 2009, (3) designated areas in any private club where persons under 18 are prohibited, (4) tobacconists, (5) designated hotel and motel smoking rooms, (6) designated smoking areas in nursing homes and healthcare facilities, (7) and all outdoor areas, unless within a 10' radius of an entryway to a public building.[113] The amendment will not change the original law's provision allowing local governments to regulate smoking more stringently than the state,[113][114] which the Kansas Supreme Court reiterated in 2007 upon a bar owner's challenge to Lawrence's local smoking ban.[115] On June 30, 2010, the District Court of Shawnee County, Kansas, issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting the statewide smoking ban from taking effect in 31 private clubs established after January 1, 2009, until it settles a lawsuit against the state by those clubs.[116]

### Kentucky[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, in Kentucky, the only state laws dealing with smoking prohibit smoking in government offices, universities, and the state capitol, except in designated smoking areas.[117][118] In 2004, the Kentucky Supreme Court ruled that the state's food and tobacco sales laws do not preempt cities and counties from enacting smoking regulations of any kind.[119] In 2011 and 2012, bills to enact a statewide smoking ban in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars, restaurants, and gaming facilities, as well as a bill in 2011 to ban smoking in cars in which minors are riding, all **failed** before the Kentucky General Assembly when they did not receive a committee hearing in the Kentucky House of Representatives.[120][121][122]
  * **Localities in Kentucky with smoking bans that include all bars and restaurants (37 total):**
    * Ashland, October 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants,[4] as well as outdoor venues and outdoor patio areas of bars and restaurants. [ _citation needed_ ]
    * Bardstown, June 17, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Berea, September 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Bowling Green, April 28, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4]
    * Campbellsville, June 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Clarkson, May 18, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Corbin, November 23, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Danville, June 27, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants,[4] as well as within ten feet of the entrance of any such place[ _citation needed_ ]
    * Elizabethtown, December 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Frankfort, August 7, 2006, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Franklin County, May 4, 2012, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Georgetown, October 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Glasgow, June 20, 2010, banned in bars and restaurants, but not all other workplaces[4]
    * Hardin County, April 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, in unincorporated areas of the county[4]
    * Leitchfield, January 1, 2017, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Lexington, November 6, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * London, August 3, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Louisville, July 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[123]
    * Manchester, January 29, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Martin, June 26, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Midway, August 18, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Middlesborough, August 17, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants; this municipality is dry[4]
    * Morehead, August 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Murray, September 12, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Oldham County, April 17, 2018, banned in enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Owensboro, October 15, 2014, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Paducah, May 10, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Prestonburg, November 1, 2009 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Radcliff, April 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Richmond, September 9, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Salyersville, April 1, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Somerset, November 14, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts private clubs when not open to the public[4][124]
    * Stanford, April 19, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Versailles, October 6, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Williamsburg, February 11, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Williamstown, September 18, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Woodford County, December 4, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in Kentucky with smoking bans that _do not_ include _all_ bars and restaurants (5 total)** : 
    * Henderson, October 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, excluding bars and restaurants[4]
    * Kenton County, April 15, 2011, banned in all workplaces, except for establishments with a liquor license.
    * Letcher County, July 1, 2006, banned in restaurants, but not bars or other workplaces[4]
    * Paintsville, January 31, 2007, banned in restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Pikeville, November 1, 2007, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces[4]
  * **Localities in Kentucky with smoking ban in vehicles** : 
    * Bullitt County, banned in private vehicles in the presence of children under the age of 18.[125]
  * **Localities in Kentucky in which a smoking ban was _rejected_ in some manner (1 total):**
    * Boone County, July 2010, bowed out of multi-county discussions due to a lack of votes to support a ban[126]
    * Campbell County, December 2010, banned in enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants, but then **repealed** in February 2011 by 3-1 vote of County Fiscal Court[127]

### Louisiana[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban excluding bars** : On January 1, 2007, SB 742 went into effect, banning smoking in all schools, workplaces, and public places, including restaurants.[128] The law exempts bars (food establishments where the majority of sales are derived from alcohol), private residences and automobiles except those when used as a healthcare or childcare facility, limousines under private hire, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco shops, outdoor areas, private and semiprivate rooms of nursing homes occupied exclusively by smokers, casino gaming floors, workplaces of tobacco-related businesses such as manufacturers and distributors, convention and banquet facilities rented out to a private party, designated areas in nursing homes, and correctional facilities (until August 1, 2009).[128] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state. Prior to this ordinance, six localities had smoking provisions that exempted restaurants, but were later superseded by the Act once it had gone into effect, and localities were prohibited from regulating or prohibiting smoking in bars and restaurants as well.[4][128] Universities in Louisiana now prohibit smoking anywhere on campus. This includes but is not limited to cigarettes, cigars and e-cigarettes as well as smokeless tobacco products. This went into effect August 1, 2014 for most universities in accordance with Act 211 of the 2013 Louisiana State Legislative session.
  * Since 2009, attempts to further ban smoking statewide in Louisiana have **failed** every year before the Louisiana State Legislature. In June 2009, the Louisiana House of Representatives rejected ending the exemption for bars and casinos by a vote of 79–21.[129] In May 2010, a House committee rejected a bill to ban smoking in casinos,[130] and then rejected a bill to ban smoking in bars, casinos, and the remainder of restaurants that the Louisiana Senate had passed by a vote of 23–12.[131] In June 2011, the Senate rejected a bill to ban smoking in bars by a vote of 22–15.[132] In May 2012, the Senate rejected a bill to prohibit smoking within 25 feet (7.6 m) of all places where smoking is banned by a vote of 18-12, and instead chose to amend the bill to prohibit smoking within 25 feet (7.6 m) of entrances to state-owned government buildings.[133]
  * Abbeville, January 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Alexandria, January 2, 2012, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Baton Rouge, June 1, 2018, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[134]
  * Bogalusa, December 21, 2016, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Cheneyville, June 7, 2014, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Colfax, June 8, 2017, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Glenmora, March 15, 2017, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Hammond, July 20, 2015, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Lafayette Parish, April 27, 2017, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Lecompte, December 10, 2017, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * McNary, July 4, 2018, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Monroe, January 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * New Orleans, April 22, 2015, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Ouachita Parish, January 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Pineville, February 12, 2019, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Roseland, August 19, 2018, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Ruston, April 1, 2019, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * West Monroe, January 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]
  * Woodworth, April 15, 2012, banned in all enclosed public places, including bars and gaming establishments[4]

### Maine[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Effective January 1, 2004, laws from 1985 and 1999 were expanded such that smoking is banned statewide in all workplaces and public places in Maine, including bars and restaurants.[135] The law exempts places open to the public during hours when it is closed, stage performances involving smoking, smoking for religious rituals, factories where labor unions have contracted to have smoking areas, designated areas in hospitals, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private residences except when used as a childcare or healthcare facility, beano and bingo halls, tobacco specialty stores, and off-track betting parlors that were in existence on June 30, 2003.[135] The state law exempts private clubs (Elks, American Legion, VFW etc.) under certain conditions. The state law is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, though as of April 2009 no local government in Maine has done so.[4] Effective September 1, 2008, smoking is banned in any car when a person under the age of 16 is present, though no driver may be pulled over or searched solely for violation of this law.[136]

### Maryland[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On February 1, 2008, the Maryland Clean Indoor Air Act of 2007 went into effect, banning smoking in all public transportation vehicles, enclosed public places, and enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, casinos, and private clubs.[137] The Act exempts private residences and vehicles while not being used as a childcare or healthcare facility, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, cigar lounges and hookah bars, other tobacco-related workplaces such as importers and distributors, facilities where smoking research is conducted, psychiatric facilities, long-term care facilities, hospitals where a doctor has authorized a patient to smoke, and any business that has applied for and received a waiver allowing smoking (though all waivers expired on January 1, 2011).[137] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, though not less strictly.[137]

### Massachusetts[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Effective July 1, 2004, smoking is banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[138] The law exempts private clubs when not open to the public, private residences except when used as a business for healthcare or childcare, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco stores, licensed cigar or hookah bars, stage performances involving smoking, places where smoking-related scientific research is occurring, religious ceremonies involving smoking, outdoor areas, designated areas in nursing homes as approved by the state, and other tobacco-related workplaces such as farms and distributors.[138] Local governments and boards of health may regulate smoking more strictly than the state.[138]
  * Boston, February 9, 2009, banned by the Boston Public Health Commission on outside patios of bars and restaurants; also banned on February 9, 2019 (10 years later than the other new restrictions) in cigar and hookah bars, unless the establishment obtains an additional 10-year exemption. Additionally, smoking is banned in all hotel rooms in the city of Boston. Tobacco products can not be sold at educational institutions or health care institutions including pharmacies and stores having pharmacies within.[139][140][141][142]

### Michigan[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On May 1, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Jennifer Granholm on December 18, 2009, the Dr. Ron Davis Law took effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed, indoor workplaces in Michigan, as well as the outdoor patios of bars and restaurants.[143][144] The law exempts only cigar bars, retail tobacco stores, private home offices, company vehicles including commercial trucks, and Detroit's three casinos' gambling floors.[143] The law is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the state, though it prohibits state or local health departments from enacting any smoking rules different than the law.[143]

### Minnesota[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On October 1, 2007, the Freedom to Breathe Act went into effect, expanding the existing Clean Indoor Air Act of 1975 so as to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Minnesota, including public transportation, bars, and restaurants.[145] The Act exempts designated rooms in nursing homes, designated areas in psychiatric facilities, places where scientific studies related to smoking occur, private homes and residences not in use as a place of employment, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, retail tobacco shops, heavy commercial vehicles, farm vehicles and construction equipment, buildings on family farms, the Minnesota disabled veterans' rest camp, smoking by American Indians as part of a traditional spiritual or cultural ceremony, stage performances involving smoking, and outdoor areas.[146] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state.[147]
  * Carlton County, June 1, 2007, banned on 50% of outdoor patio seating in bars and restaurants.[ _citation needed_ ]
  * Duluth, March 7, 2010, banned within 15 feet (4.6 m) of a bus shelter or transit center.[148]
  * Golden Valley, March 31, 2009, banned within 25 feet (7.6 m) of entrances, exits, and ventilation openings of all areas of bars and restaurants; also in public parks and recreational facilities.[ _citation needed_ ]
  * Rochester, June 2010 Downtown smoke-free zone includes the block of Second Avenue Southwest between Gonda and the Kahler, and the two-block pedestrian mall known as the Peace Plaza. The zone was extended in June 2010 to include two blocks of West Center Street between the Kahler Grand Hotel, Methodist Hospital and the Gonda Building.[149]

### Mississippi[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Mississippi's 2006 statewide smoking law, the Clean Indoor Air Act, prohibits smoking only inside any state or local government building (except designated areas in the state's veterans' homes) or inside any university or college classroom building.[150] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[151] In 2011 and 2012, three separate bills before the Mississippi Legislature seeking to enact some form of a statewide smoking ban all **failed** when they did not receive a committee hearing.[152][153][154][155]
  * **Localities in Mississippi with smoking bans that include _all_ bars and restaurants (146 total):**
    * Aberdeen, March 22, 2007, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Alligator, July 5, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Amory, November 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Anguilla, April 27, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Arcola, May 10, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Artesia, May 5, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Baldwyn, July 5, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Bassfield, March 4, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Batesville, March 4, 2010 banned in all bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Belzoni, July 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Beulah, September 3, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Blue Mountain, December 7, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Booneville, June 30, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants; this municipality is dry[4]
    * Brandon, May 4, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Brooksville, July 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Bruce, January 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Byram, December 10, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Calhoun City, September 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Canton, January 19, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Cary, December 8, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Centreville, December 17, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Charleston, March 7, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Clarksdale, September 10, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Clinton, August 14, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Crenshaw, October 17, 2018, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Coahoma County, November 16, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Coldwater, March 3, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Collins, June 5, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Corinth, November 6, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants, by vote of the Board of Aldermen;[156] this municipality is dry[4]
    * Courtland, April 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Crawford, May 28, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Cruger, April 6, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Crystal Springs, November 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Drew, April 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Duck Hill, April 9, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Duncan, April 5, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Durant, May 3, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ecru, March 12, 2008, banned in bars and restaurants, but not in all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Eden, August 13, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Edwards, December 15, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ellisville, November 5, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ethel, November 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Falcon, April 13, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Farmington, February 20, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Fayette, June 11, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Floria, December 13, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Florence, September 20, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Forest, September 6, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Friars Point, January 8, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Fulton, March 18, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Georgetown, April 11, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Greenwood, August 17, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Grenada, January 8, 2009, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Gunnison, May 3, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hatley, September 6, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hattiesburg, January 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hernando, March 8, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hollandale, December 3, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Holly Springs, October 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Houston, September 3, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Indianola, November 7, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Isola, September 4, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Issaquena County, June 6, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Itta Bena, January 16, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Iuka, January 1, 2015 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Jackson, July 2, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Jonestown, October 13, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Kosciusko, November 2, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lambert, March 7, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Laurel, December 4, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lexington, October 11, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Louise, October 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Louisville, April 3, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lucedale, February 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lula, December 4, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lumberton, July 3, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lyon, October 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Macon, September 17, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Madison, June 3, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Madison County, July 19, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Magee, November 19, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mantachie, September 9, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Marks, June 14, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mayersville, September 17, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Meadville, March 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mendenhall, March 4, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Meridian, February 19, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Metcalfe, September 3, 2002, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Monticello, January 18, 2012, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Moorhead, January 11, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Morton, October 31, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Moss Point, June 14, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Nettleton, February 5, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * New Albany, December 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * New Augusta, May 31, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Noxapater, May 1, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Oakland, March 9, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurans[4]
    * Okolona, April 15, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Oxford, October 16, 2006, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Pascagoula, July 18, 2013, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Petal, December 20, 2007, banned in nearly all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Picayune, July 26, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pickens, July 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pittsboro, June 4, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Plantersville, July 6, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pontotoc, May 1, 2008, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Poplarville, January 3, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Prentiss, April 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Quitman, March 23, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Renova, September 2, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Richland, November 2, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ridgeland, July 19, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Rolling Fork, December 12, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Roxie, July 6, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Saltillo, September 18, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Scooba, October 14, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sebastopol, September 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Senatobia, November 20, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sharkey County, March 7, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Shaw, October 24, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Shubuta, December 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Shuqualak, May 31, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sidon, February 5, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sledge, June 4, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Southaven, August 4, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Starkville, May 20, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * State Line, July 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Summit, March 16, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sumner, July 5, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sumrall, July 3, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tchula, August 13, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tremont, February 2, 2019, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tupelo, October 5, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tutwiler, April 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Utica, September 8, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Vaiden, January 3, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Verona, May 3, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Walnut, December 5, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Walnut Grove, April 2, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Webb, March 9, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Weir, April 10, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wesson, July 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wiggins, January 17, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Woodland, December 3, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Woodville, December 30, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Yalonusha County, July 3, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in Mississippi with smoking bans that _do not_ include _all_ bars and restaurants (10 total):**
    * Diamondhead, January 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Flowood, May 4, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Goodman, June 3, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Gulfport, May 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars & casinos[4]
    * Hazlehurst, January 19, 2019, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Leakesville, March 3, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Pearl, September 29, 2010, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Rienzi, October 5, 2010, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Walls, August 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * West, December 6, 1996, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]

### Missouri[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Missouri's 1992 statewide smoking law, the Indoor Clean Air Act, prohibits smoking in all enclosed public places (including workplaces) and public meetings, except in designated smoking areas, which may occupy no more than 30% of the place's enclosed area.[157] Warning signs must be appropriately posted either way.[158] Local governments may prohibit smoking in schools, child daycare facilities, and school buses,[159] as well as in public places.[157] Bars, restaurants that seat fewer than 50 people, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, retail tobacco shops, rooms and halls used for private social functions, limousines and taxicabs where the driver and all passengers agree to smoking, stage performances including smoking, indoor sports stadiums seating more than 15,000 people, and private residences "are not considered a public place".[160] On June 23, 2009, the Western District of the Missouri Court of Appeals ruled that Kansas City's 2008 local ban on smoking in all workplaces, including bars and billiard parlors, did not conflict with this statute and was not preempted.[161] The Supreme Court of Missouri later declined to hear an appeal from that decision.[162]
    * Attempts in the Missouri General Assembly to enact some form of statewide smoking ban have **failed** every year since 2008, except for 2015, when one was not even introduced: 
    * Bills to ban smoking statewide by Senator Joan Bray before the Missouri Senate in 2008, 2009, and 2010 and by Rep. Walt Bivens before the Missouri House of Representatives in 2010 all failed without receiving a committee hearing.[163][164][165][166] In 2009, a proposal by Rep. Joe Fallert to amend the Constitution of Missouri to ban smoking statewide and a bill by Rep. Jill Schupp proposing .1% a tax on all non-smoke-free businesses also both failed this way.[167][168]
    * In 2011, a bill by Rep. Jill Schupp received a hearing before a House committee, but the committee did not put it up for a vote.[169]
    * In 2012, respective bills by Rep. Schupp and Sen. Maria Chappelle-Nadal to ban smoking statewide both failed without receiving a committee hearing,[170][171] while a bill by Rep. Melissa Leach to undo the Court of Appeals' 2009 smoking ban decision underwent a committee hearing, though no vote was held.[172]
    * In 2013, respective bills by Rep. Schupp and Sen. Chapelle-Nadal to ban smoking statewide both failed without even being referred to a committee,[173][174] while a bill by Rep. Bill Otto to prohibit localities from banning smoking in riverboat casinos underwent a committee hearing but without a vote,[175] and a bill by Rep. Kathie Conway to deprive localities banning smoking of their sales and property tax revenue from smoking-banned private businesses was passed by the House Local Government Committee, but did not advance to a vote before the full House of Representatives.[176]
    * In 2014, respective bills by Reps. Schupp and Courtney Curtis and Sen. Chapelle-Nadal to ban smoking statewide all failed without a committee hearing,[177][178][179] while a bill by Rep. Conway to deprive localities banning smoking of their sales and property tax revenue from smoking-banned private businesses was passed by the House Local Government Committee, but did not advance to a vote before the full House of Representatives.[180]
    * For 2013, the periodic "Freedom in the 50 States" study prepared by the Mercatus Center at George Mason University ranked Missouri first in the nation in tobacco freedom (also #3 for alcohol freedom and #7 for freedom overall).[181] As of December 2013, Missouri has the lowest cigarette excise taxes in the United States, at 17 cents per pack,[182] and the state electorate previously voted in 2002, 2006, and 2012 to keep it that way.[183][184] According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 2012 Missouri had the seventh highest percentage of adult smokers among U.S. states, at 25%.[185] In both January 2011 and January 2013, the Missouri House of Representatives voted to continue allowing smoking in its half of the Missouri State Capitol.[186][187] In October 2008, a statewide survey by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services found that only 27.5% of Missourians support a statewide ban on smoking in all bars and cocktail lounges.[188] Missouri also has one of the most permissive approaches to alcohol in the United States (see Alcohol laws of Missouri).[181]
    * As detailed below, of the 961 cities in Missouri, only 36 (3.7%) have enacted comprehensive smoking bans, though all of Missouri's municipalities exceeding 100,000 residents have adopted comprehensive no smoking ordinances. St. Louis County bans smoking in many places, though exempting bars and casinos and is the lone county in the state with smoking provisions of any kind. Nine cities and one county have rejected a smoking ban in some manner, and eight other municipalities have provided exceptions for workplaces and/or bars and/or restaurants. On April 5, 2011, Cape Girardeau became one of the few cities in the United States ever to have rejected a smoking ban in a public vote.
  * **Localities in Missouri with a smoking ban that includes _all_ bars and restaurants (37 total):**
    * Ballwin, January 2, 2006, banned in all workplaces, including bars, and restaurants; exempts private clubs with no employees.[189][190][4]
    * Belton, August 5, 2009, banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces, by public vote in April 2009; exempts business vehicles where all occupants agree to allow smoking, any businesses occupied exclusively by one smoker, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes, retail tobacco stores, and private clubs; all existing businesses that allowed smoking were exempt until August 5, 2012; existing bars and restaurants that allowed smoking were exempt until August 5, 2016.[191][4] aces by unanimous Board of Aldermen vote in October 2014; exempts up to 20% of designated hotel and motel smoking rooms, tobacco shops, smoking lounges in tobacco-related businesses, private homes, outdoor areas in places of employment, outdoor patios of restaurants, and golf courses.[192][193][4]
    * Branson, July 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces by unanimous Board of Aldermen vote in October 2014; exempts up to 20% of designated hotel and motel smoking rooms, tobacco shops, smoking lounges in tobacco-related businesses, private homes, outdoor areas in places of employment, outdoor patios of restaurants, and golf courses.[194][193][4]
    * Brentwood, January 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces, by City Council vote of 7–1 in August 2010; exempts designated hotel and motel smoking rooms, tobacco shops, private homes, and private vehicles.[195][4]
    * Clayton, July 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants; exempts tobacco shops, 20% of hotel and motel rooms, and outdoor areas[196][4]
    * Clinton, March 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Chillicothe, January 1, 2008, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not all other workplaces by City Council vote of 4–1, after 56% of voters approved of the idea in a referendum; exempts separately ventilated offices occupied exclusively by smokers.[197][198][4]
    * Columbia, January 9, 2007, banned in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts rented social halls, separately ventilated offices occupied exclusively by smokers, stage performances, retail tobacco shops, and private clubs with no employees.[199][200]
    * Creve Coeur, January 2, 2011, banned by unanimous city council vote in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts cigar bars, private clubs, tobacco shops, and hotel/motel designated smoking rooms[201][4]
    * Excelsior Springs, July 4, 2013, banned by unanimous City Council vote in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, and private clubs; exempts private residences, 25% of hotel and motel rooms, and retail tobacco shops[202][203][4]
    * Farmington, November 13, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, after public vote of 59%-41% and including within 15 feet (4.6 m) of entrances; exempts cigar bars, hotel rooms, private clubs, and nursing homes[4]
    * Fulton, January 31, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, after public vote of 53.85%–46.15%.[204][4]
    * Gainesville, June 9, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4][4]
    * Grandview, January 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants; bars were exempt until August 2016; exempts private residences and vehicles, nursing homes, outdoor areas, private clubs, and designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels[205][4]
    * Hannibal, October 4, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, after public vote of 55.8%–44.2%; exempts designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels, private residences, private clubs, outdoor areas, and retail tobacco stores.[206][4]
    * Higginsville, May 1, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts smoking in an entire room or hall which is used for private social functions, a private ventilated offices, onstage performers, and patios[4][207]
    * Independence, March 17, 2007, banned in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, per referendum in November 2006; exempts private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied exclusively by smokers.[208][209][4]
    * Jefferson City, January 31, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, after public vote of 58%–42%.[204][4]
    * Kansas City, June 7, 2008, banned in all indoor workplaces, except casino gaming floors and establishments receiving more than 80% of their revenue from tobacco but neither sell nor serve food or beverages, after public vote of 52%–48%[210][211] but **halted** by the Circuit Court of Jackson County on June 4, 2008, after businesses sued Kansas City on the grounds that state law permitted them to allow smoking;[212] and then **reinstated** by the court on June 21, 2008.[213] On June 23, 2009, the Missouri Court of Appeals ruled that Kansas City's ban on smoking did not conflict with the state's Indoor Clean Air Act,[161] and the Supreme Court of Missouri declined to hear an appeal from that decision.[162][4]
    * Kearney, October 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; smoking is allowed only on patios of businesses as well as outdoor areas of the Kearney Amphitheater; vaping is allowed in all smoke-free areas[214][4]
    * Kennett, April 16, 2014, banned by 8-1 vote of city council in all enclosed workplaces, including all restaurants; exempts bars and taverns, outdoor areas, retail tobacco shops, 25% of hotel and motel rooms, and private residences[215][4]
    * Kirksville, July 1, 2007, banned in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts private clubs.[216][217][4]
    * Kirkwood, January 2, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants, after public vote of 65%–35%; exempts private clubs, private residences, private vehicles, smoking rooms in hotels and motels, and retail tobacco stores.[218][4]
    * Lake Saint Louis, September 30, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants, by Board of Aldermen vote of 4–2 on March 15, 2010; exempts designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private clubs with no employees, outdoor areas, cigar bars, and retail tobacco stores.[219][220][221][4]
    * Lee's Summit, December 8, 2006 banned in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, per referendum in November 2006; exempts private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied exclusively by smokers, retail tobacco stores, and private clubs.[222][223]
    * Liberty, January 2, 2010, banned in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, and in public parks, by public vote of 2,684 yes to 1,127 no; exempts outdoor patios, private residences, and smoking rooms in hotels and motels.[224][4]
    * Maryville, October 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, by a city council vote of 3–2.[225][4]
    * Nevada, January 1, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, and private clubs; exempts 20% of hotel/motel rooms contiguous and all on one floor and provide no infiltration of smoke to other rooms anywhere within the premises.[4]
    * North Kansas City, July 10, 2008, banned in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts casinos and retail tobacco shops[226][227][228][4][229]
    * O'Fallon, June 4, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars restaurants, after public vote of 73%–27% on April 5, 2011; exempts cigar bars, private clubs, retail tobacco stores, private residences, outdoor areas, and 20% of hotel and motel rooms.[230][231][4][4]
    * Rolla, January 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, by a city council vote of 8–4 on June 6, 2011; exempts private clubs with no employees, outdoor areas, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and private homes and vehicles[232][4]
    * Sedalia, September 1, 2013, banned in most enclosed workplaces, including most areas of bars and restaurants, as well as city parks and outdoor recreation areas, by a city council vote of 6-2 on June 17, 2013; exempts 50% of undefined "patio area" space in any bar or restaurant, private clubs, small workplaces (those with one employee), work vehicles where all passengers consent to allow smoking, private residences, private vehicles, designated hotel and motel smoking rooms, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes, and retail tobacco stores.[233][4]
    * St. Joseph, June 7, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces and public places, including all bars, restaurants, and private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes, after public vote of 52.75%–47.25%; exempts private vehicles and residences, 10% of hotel and motel rooms designated as smoking, private clubs (when no employees are present), and casino gaming areas (including bars, restaurants, and lounges within those gaming areas).[234][235][4]
    * St. Louis, January 2, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; indefinitely exempts casino gaming floors and VIP lounges (unless St. Louis County and St. Charles County and/or St. Charles city also prohibit casino gaming floors), private clubs with no employees, retail tobacco stores, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private residences, and outdoor areas; bars in existence on January 2, 2011, that were less than 2,000 square feet (190 m 2) and did not allow under-21 patrons were exempt until January 2, 2016.[236] On September 14, 2012, the St. Louis Health Department issued an order further permanently exempting the Missouri Athletic Club from the city's smoking ban.[237][4]
    * Springfield, June 11, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all restaurants, bars, and retail tobacco shops, after public vote of 53%–47% on April 5, 2011; exempts only private residences and 20% of hotel and motel rooms,[238][239] but **partially repealed** by unanimous vote of the City Council on May 7, 2012, to exempt cigar bars, tobacco shops, and private clubs.[240][4][4]
    * Warrensburg, November 30, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts private clubs, retail tobacco stores, any stores whose revenue is at least 80% from tobacco, stage performances involving smoking, designated smoking areas in institutions of higher education, outdoor patios, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and private residences.[241][4]
    * Washington, April 15, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants by unanimous city council vote; also banned in private rooms in nursing homes; exempts only private residences not serving as a workplace and designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels; exempts hookah lounges until April 15, 2014.[242][4]
  * **Localities in Missouri with a smoking ban that _does not_ include all bars and restaurants (9 total):**
    * Arnold, November 1, 2004, banned in all restaurants/restaurant-bars seating 50 people or more, except in separately ventilated smoking rooms; does not touch standalone bars or other places; exempts any establishment otherwise classified as a restaurant, that receives 70% or more of its revenue from alcohol sales[243][244][4]
    * Blue Springs, May 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including most restaurants; exempts bars, restaurants that seat less than 50 people, restaurants that receive less than 60% of their revenue from food sales, bowling alleys, bingo halls during bingo games, rented social halls, private dances open to the public, and retail tobacco shops.[245][246][4]
    * Gladstone, May 24, 2009, banned by City Council vote of 4–1 in all enclosed workplaces and city parks; exempts any business existing and licensed to serve liquor on January 1, 2009, that customarily allows smoking and remains under the same ownership; further exempts all bars, taverns, restaurants seating less than 50 people, billiard parlors, bowling alleys, retail tobacco shops, rented social halls, taxicabs and limousines where both driver and passengers agree to allow smoking, stage performances involving smoking, private clubs, private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes occupied exclusively by smokers, and a percentage of hotel and motel rooms.[247][248][4]
    * Hazelwood, January 19, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and some restaurants; exempts private clubs, smoking during stage productions, nursing homes, retail tobacco stores, designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels, cigar bars, and any liquor licensee that receives less than 25% of its revenue from food sales[249][4]
    * Nixa, June 8, 2007, banned in all workplaces, including restaurants; exempts rented social halls, taxicabs and limousines where both driver and passengers agree to allow smoking, stage performances, designated areas of shopping malls, retail tobacco shops, and designated employee smoking areas not accessible to the general public.[250][251][4]
    * Parkville, October 2, 2009, banned in all enclosed public places and workplaces by Board of Aldermen; exempts all bars, taverns, restaurants seating less than 50 people, billiard parlors, bowling alleys, retail tobacco shops, rented social halls, taxicabs and limousines where both driver and passengers agree to allow smoking, stage performances involving smoking, and private clubs.[252][253][4]
    * Raymore, August 22, 2008, banned in all public places and within 100 feet (30 m) of the entrance to public places (except on outdoor patios), including most restaurants; exempts bars, restaurants with bars, private clubs, stage performances, restaurants that seat fewer than 50 people, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, taxicabs and limousines where both driver and passengers agree to allow smoking, and retail tobacco shops.[254][4]
    * St. Louis County, January 2, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants, after public vote of 65%–35% on November 3, 2009; exempts certain drinking establishments (bars having 25% or less gross sales of food, were in existence on January 2, 2011 and have applied for a smoking exemption certificate), cigar bars, casino gaming floors, private clubs, performing on stage as part of a theatrical production, private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and rest homes, retail tobacco shops, smoking rooms in hotels and motels, and smoking lounges at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport.[255][4]
    * West Plains, May 1, 2016, banned in all restaurants; exempts limousines for hire and taxicabs, where the driver and all passengers affirmatively consent to smoking in such vehicle, performers upon the stage, provided the smoking is part of a theatrical production, any licensed establishment which serves liquor on the premises for which not more than ten percent (10%) of the gross sales receipts of the business are supplied by food purchases, either for consumption on the premises or elsewhere, private residences, except when used as a childcare facility, adult day care, or health care facility, and not more than twenty percent (20%) of hotel and motel rooms as defined in this ordinance and designated as smoking rooms, which must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited.
  * **Localities in Missouri where a smoking ban or other smoking restriction was _rejected_ in some manner (9 total):**
    * Cape Girardeau, April 5, 2011, ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars, restaurants, and casinos, **rejected** by public vote of 52%–48%.[256]
    * Carthage, February 2, 2009, ban on smoking in all restaurants **indefinitely tabled** by City Council committee because it was local, rather than regional[257]
    * Joplin, October 18, 2010, City Council **rejected** a proposed ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants, by a vote of 5–4[258]
    * Raytown, October 7, 2008, Board of Aldermen **rejected** even taking up the issue of a new smoking ordinance, by a vote of 6–4;[259] on September 8, 2009, the Board of Aldermen **rejected** a proposed smoking ban on all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants, by a vote of 7–3.[260]
    * Riverside, June 16, 2009, Board of Aldermen **rejected** taking up the issue of a smoking ordinance, by a vote of 4–2.[261]
    * Smithville, December 18, 2007, Board of Aldermen unanimously **rejected** a ban on smoking in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants[262]
    * St. Charles, May 2008, City Council **rejected** even taking up the issue of a ban on smoking in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, by a vote of 6–4, and also **rejected** sending the proposed ban to voters;[263] July 2013, City Council again **rejected** taking up any smoking ban and instead voted to introduce a mandatory warning signage ordinance[264][265]
    * St. Charles County, June 2011, County Executive **vetoed** a proposed referendum on a countywide smoking ban including all bars and restaurants but exempting casinos and cigar bars;[266] November 29, 2011, County Council **rejected** sending a proposed ban on smoking in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, to voters by a vote of 3–3;[267] September 15, 2012, County Council **removed** two competing proposed bans, one including bars and casinos and one excluding them, from the November 2012 county ballot[268]
    * Webb City, April 11, 2011, City Council **rejected** a ban on smoking in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, by vote of 5–3;[269] June 13, 2011, City Council again **rejected** the same proposal, 5-3[270]

### Montana[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On October 1, 2005, the Montana Clean Indoor Air Act (MCIAA) went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Montana including restaurants, though bars were exempt until October 1, 2009;[271] the word "bar" is defined in the Act as also including taverns, night clubs, cocktail lounges, and casinos.[272] The act exempts private residences not used as a daycare facility or healthcare facility, private motor vehicles, tobacco demonstrations in schools, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and American Indian religious and cultural activities.[271] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than the Act.[273]

### Nebraska[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On June 1, 2009, the Nebraska Clean Indoor Air Act passed in February 2008 went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Nebraska, including all bars and restaurants.[274] The Act exempts tobacco retail stores, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private residences, and places where scientific research about smoking is occurring.[275] In April 2009, the Act was amended to further exempt cigar bars, as well.[276] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[277]

### Nevada[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban excluding bars, casinos, and designated restaurant smoking rooms** : On December 8, 2006, after passage by 54% of voters on November 7, 2006, the Nevada Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces. The act passed by voters initially included all restaurants as well as bars that serve food.[278] The Act permits smoking without limitation in areas within casinos where minors are already prohibited, stand-alone bars that do not serve food, strip clubs and brothels, retail tobacco stores, and private residences (including those that serve as an office workplace, unless used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility).[278] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act,[278] though no city or county in Nevada has chosen to do so.[4] In 2009 Nevada partially repealed the ban to allow smoking in tobacco-related trade conventions.[ _citation needed_ ] The ban was further amended in 2011 to allow smoking in taverns that serve alcohol and food as long as patrons under 21 are not allowed in. Smoking is also now allowed in designated areas of family restaurants if the smoking area is physically enclosed and separated from the non-smoking area and minors are prohibited inside.[ _citation needed_ ]

### New Hampshire[edit]

  * **Statewide ban on smoking in bars, restaurants, and some other workplaces** : On September 17, 2007, the Indoor Smoking Act went into effect, banning smoking in schools, child daycare facilities, hospitals, grocery stores, elevators and public conveyances (except when rented for private purposes), restaurants, bars, and private clubs when open to the public.[279] Private clubs and religious and fraternal organizations (including bars and restaurants inside these places), hotel and motel rooms, rented halls and rooms under control of the renter, college dormitory rooms, public housing, nursing homes, areas designated by hospitals, and alcohol/drug rehabilitation facilities are exempt from smoking regulation and can allow smoking indoors freely.[280] All other places must designate smoking and nonsmoking areas and post appropriate signs.[281] On January 1, 2010, House Bill 392 went into effect. It established an on-premises cigar, beverage, and liquor license and allowed for cigar smoking at public cigar bars.[282] Towns only can regulate smoking more strictly with regard to fire safety and sanitation.[283] In 2003, the New Hampshire Supreme Court ruled that this means state law preempts towns from enacting stricter local smoking bans for health reasons.[284]

### New Jersey[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On April 15, 2006, the New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act went into effect, city park and beaches banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New Jersey, including all bars and restaurants, strip clubs, hospitals, psychiatric facilities, as well as outside portions of school grounds.[285] The Act exempts cigar bars, tobacco retail stores, tobacco manufacturing facilities, private residences and private automobiles, off-track betting parlors, and designated hotel/motel smoking rooms.[286] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[287] On January 16, 2019, smoking was outlawed on all public beaches and in state parks. [288] Violating the Act can result in a fine of between $250 and $1,000, depending how many violations one has incurred within a year.[289]
  * Atlantic City, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4] as well as 75% of casino gaming floors.[290]
  * Pequannock, banned in public parks with ball-fields or playgrounds in July 2011 through ordinance introduced by Mayor Rich Phelan.[291]

See Smoke-Free Air Act.

### New Mexico[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On June 15, 2007, the Dee Johnson Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New Mexico, including all bars and restaurants, as well as within a "reasonable distance" of the entrances to those places.[292][293] The Act exempts (1) private residences except when being used to provide commercial childcare, adult care, and/or healthcare, (2) retail tobacco stores, (3) cigar bars, (4) tobacco manufacturing facilities, (5) casinos, (6) quit-smoking programs, (7) designated outdoor smoking areas, (8) private clubs, (9) limousines under private hire, (10) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (11) enclosed areas within restaurants, bars, and hotel/motel conference/meeting rooms that are being used for private functions, (12) cultural or ceremonial activities by American Indians, (13) non-bar/restaurant businesses with fewer than two employees that is not usually accessible to the public and all employees agree to allow smoking, and (14) stage, motion picture, or television productions involving smoking as part of the production.[294] Penalties are $100 for a first violation, $200 for a second violation within 12 months and $500 for the third and subsequent violations.[295] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[296] UNM campuses are tobacco-free as of August 2009.[297]

### New York[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Effective July 24, 2003,[298] smoking is banned statewide in all enclosed workplaces in New York, including all bars and restaurants and construction sites.[299] The law exempts (1) private homes and automobiles, (2) hotel/motel rooms, (3) retail tobacco businesses, (4) private clubs, (5) cigar bars (A cigar bar that makes 10 percent of its gross income from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including vending machines sales are exempt from the ban), (6) outdoor areas of bars and restaurants, and (7) enclosed rooms in restaurants, bars, convention halls, etc., when hosting private functions organized for the promotion and sampling of tobacco products.[300] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law.[301] Breaking the state law can result in a fine of between $200 and $2,000, depending how many violations one has had within a year.[300]
    * Albany, On January 1, 2015, the following ordinance took effect. "No person shall smoke within the City's parks, sport fields, swimming pools, or playgrounds. For purposes of this section, to 'smoke' means to burn a lighted cigar, cigarette, or pipe or to use any other substance which contains tobacco."[302]
    * Great Neck, Adopted January 4, 2011, smoking was banned on sidewalks in front of commercial buildings, Village Green park, and the Housing Authority.[303]
    * New York City, From May 18, 2014 everyone under the age of 21 was banned from buying cigarettes, tobacco products and e-cigarettes.[304] Effective May 23, 2011, smoking was banned in all parks, boardwalks, beaches, recreation centers, swimming pools and pedestrian plazas.[305] On March 30, 2003, smoking was banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts tobacco bars, owner-operated bars, separately ventilated smoking rooms in bars, private clubs with no employees, private functions organized for the promotion and sampling of tobacco products, and retail tobacco shops.[306] Shortly after, on July 24, 2003, the statewide smoking ban came into effect. New York City may suspend or revoke a business's license if it has been found guilty of violating this law three times within 12 months.[307]

On January 21, 1908, the New York City Council had passed the Sullivan
Ordinance, which would have banned women from smoking anywhere except their
homes, but was vetoed by the Mayor within two weeks of its passage.

### North Carolina[edit]

  * **Statewide ban on smoking in bars, restaurants, and some other workplaces** : On January 2, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Bev Perdue on May 19, 2009, North Carolina Session Law 2009-27 went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all bars and restaurants in North Carolina, as well as in government buildings and vehicles.[308] The law exempts cigar bars, private clubs that are not-for-profit (including country clubs), designated hotel/motel smoking areas, and medical research facilities studying tobacco.[308] The law generally allows local governments to regulate smoking more strictly beginning July 5, 2009 (as long as it is approved by the county, too), but preempts local governments from regulating smoking in cigar bars, retail tobacco shops, tobacco manufacturer facilities, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, private clubs (including country clubs), theatrical productions involving smoking, private residences, or private vehicles.[308]
  * **Other statewide smoking regulation in North Carolina:**
    * North Carolina Department of Correction, January 2006, banned in all state prisons.[309]
    * Orange County, January 1, 2012, banned on all sidewalks owned, operated, or maintained by the municipalities incorporated within the county.
    * UNC Hospitals, August 2007, banned on all hospital grounds.[310]
    * University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, January 2008, banned on all university grounds except 100 feet (30 m) from any school building.[311]
    * Waynesville, May 23, 2015, banned on sidewalks, public parks, parking lots, greenways, city vehicles and the area in and surrounding town buildings[312]

### North Dakota[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On November 6, 2012, by a vote of 66%-34%, North Dakota voters ratified Initiative Measure Four, which, upon taking effect in December 2012, amends North Dakota's existing partial smoking ban so as to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed public places and places of employment, including all bars, restaurants, and tobacco stores.[313][314] The ban exempts only (1) private residences except when operating as a childcare or adult day care facility, (2) outdoor areas except within 20 feet of the entrance to a public place or place of employment, (3) businesses not open to the public with no employees besides the owner, and (4) American Indian religious and cultural rituals.[314] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state.[314] As noted above, North Dakota is one of only six states that ban smoking in tobacco stores and is one of only four that prohibit hotels and motels from designating a certain percentage of rooms for smoking. 
    * North Dakota State University, 2008, banned outdoors on campus within 50 feet (15 m) of buildings.[ _citation needed_ ]
    * University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, October 5, 2007, banned anywhere on campus grounds[315]

### Northern Mariana Islands[edit]

  * **Partial territory-wide smoking ban**. Since September 29, 2009, smoking has been banned for most workplaces and restaurants, but not bars.[316]

### Ohio[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On December 7, 2006, after passage by Ohio voters on November 7, 2006, Chapter 3794 (titled "Smoking Ban") of the Ohio Revised Code went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Ohio, including bars and restaurants.[317] The law exempts (1) private residences except when being used as a business when employees other than the owner are present, (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) family-owned and operated businesses not open to the public where all employees are related to the owner, (4) designated smoking areas in nursing homes, (5) retail tobacco stores, (6) outdoor patios, (7) private clubs with no employees.[317] The law is enforced by the Ohio Department of Health, which began enforcement on May 3, 2007.[317] A business may be fined up to $2,500 and individuals $100 for violation of the ban.[317] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state.[317]
  * A ruling by the 10th District Court of Appeals in Columbus upheld the law, stating that a bar owner had intentionally violated it. The bar owner, facing violations and fines totaling $33,000, brought suit, claiming the ban is unconstitutional. On May 23, 2012, The Supreme Court of Ohio affirmed the ruling of the Tenth District Court of Appeals.[318]
  * North Royalton, April 16, 2008, passed Ordinance 08-69 banning smoking in public outdoor places owned by the city. Smoking areas may be designated at the mayor's discretion.[319]
  * Oberlin, June 2010, Oberlin, banned smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco in city parks.[320]

### Oklahoma[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Oklahoma's statewide smoking law prohibits smoking in any indoor workplaces – including restaurants and hotels – unless a separate ventilation system under negative pressure is installed for ventilating the smoking area, but permits smoking without limitation in bars, private clubs, bingo halls, retail tobacco stores, small family-owned workplaces, workplaces occupied exclusively by smokers, veterans' halls, and designated employee smoking areas.[321][322] The Oklahoma law expressly preempts local governments from enacting any local smoking regulations that are not exactly the same as the state law.[323] In February 2009, a committee of the Oklahoma Senate **rejected** a proposed ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, and a similar bill before the Oklahoma House of Representatives **failed** when it was denied a committee hearing.[324] In May 2009, a bill before the Oklahoma House of Representatives to repeal the preemption on stricter local smoking regulation **failed** when it did not receive a committee hearing.[325]

### Oregon[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Effective January 1, 2009, after being signed into law on June 26, 2007, the 1981 Oregon Indoor Clean Air Act (as previously amended in 2001) was amended to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Oregon, including bars and restaurants, as well as within 10 feet (3.0 m) of the entrances, exits, or windows of such places.[326] The Act exempts (1) private residences except when serving as a childcare or adult care facility,[327] (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) spaces designated for traditional American Indian religious and cultural ceremonies, (4) retail tobacco shops, and (5) cigar bars.[328] Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act;[329] and the Oregon Court of Appeals reiterated this in 2000.[330]

### Pennsylvania[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban excluding bars, casinos and some restaurants**. Effective September 11, 2008, after being signed into law by Governor Ed Rendell on June 13, 2008, Pennsylvania's 1988 Clean Indoor Air Act was amended to ban smoking statewide in all restaurants and other enclosed workplaces in Pennsylvania, except as exempted.[331] The Act exempts (1) eating/drinking establishments where 20% or less of sales come from food AND persons under 18 are not allowed, (2) private homes and vehicles, except those used as a child daycare or adult care facility, (3) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (4) full service truck stops, (5) retail tobacco shops, (6) workplaces of tobacco manufacturers and wholesalers, (7) nursing homes, (8) designated smoking areas in day treatment facilities, psychiatric facilities, and healthcare facilities, (9) private clubs when public events are not being held, including volunteer fire, ambulance, and rescue stations, (10) tobacco-related fundraisers, (11) places rented for tobacco exhibitions, (12) cigar bars, (13) 25% of a casino gaming floor, and (14) outdoor areas.[332] Local governments except Philadelphia are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than the Act.[332] Philadelphia's smoking ordinance, which went into effect on January 8, 2007, bans smoking in all restaurants, exempting bars where food accounts for less than 10% of sales and alcohol accounts for more than 90% of sales, and persons under 18 are prohibited.[333] Philadelphia's ordinance is the only local smoking ban in Pennsylvania.[4] On April 29, 2014, Mayor Michael Nutter passed an executive order banning smoking in all city parks.[334] Allegheny County enacted a smoking ban October 2006, but it was immediately challenged in court as violating the 1988 Clean Indoor Air Act's preemption of all local smoking regulations.[335] In May 2007, the ban was overturned by the Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court.[335]
  * **'Smoking-Free Beaches' Program:** Pennsylvania's 'Smoke-Free Beaches' program was initiated by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources. This program places smoking constraints at designated parks to eliminate smoking on beaches and swimming areas. For visitors who smoke and still want to use these beaches, designated areas adjacent to the beach are provided. The restriction includes cigarettes, pipes, cigars and the increasingly popular e-cigarettes. Staff at newly affected parks have been preparing for the change by purchasing and installing butt disposal units; installing new signage; establishing designated smoking areas with seating; and informing park user and support groups. 
    * In 2016, 12 state parks initiated new "Smoke Free Beaches." They were: Hills Creek, Tioga County; Lyman Run, Potter County; R.B. Winter, Union; Presque Isle, Erie; Pymatuning, Crawford, Laurel Hill, Somerset County; Whipple Dam, Huntingdon County; Gifford Pinchot, York County; Cowans Gap, Fulton County; Gouldsboro, Monroe County; Ricketts Glen, Luzerne County; and Worlds End, Sullivan.

### Puerto Rico[edit]

  * **Territory-wide smoking ban:** Effective March 2, 2007, smoking is banned territory-wide in all enclosed workplaces in Puerto Rico, including bars and restaurants, as well as private vehicles when either a minor in a car seat or a child under 13 is present.[336] The law exempts (1) retail tobacco stores, (2) theater and film productions and presentations in which actors smoke as part of their character, (3) private homes except when serving as a workplace, and (4) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms.[337]

### Rhode Island[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On March 1, 2005, the Public Health and Workplace Safety Act went into effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Rhode Island, including bars and restaurants.[338][339] The Act exempts (1) smoking bars (income over 50% tobacco products), (2) outdoor areas, (3) private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes, (4) retail tobacco stores, (5) stage performances involving smoking, (6) hotel and motel rooms designated as smoking rooms, (7) private residences, except used as a licensed child care, adult daycare, or healthcare facility,[340] and (8) the two state-licensed gambling facilities, Newport Grand and Twin River Casino.[341] Local governments may regulate smoking more strictly than the Act,[342] though as of April 2009 none have chosen to do so.[4]

### South Carolina[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, South Carolina's 1990 statewide smoking law, the Clean Indoor Air Law, generally prohibits smoking only in (1) public schools, excluding offices and teacher lounges (unless a local school board says otherwise), (2) childcare facilities, (3) healthcare facilities, except in designated employee smoking areas (unless the facilities chooses to be smoke-free), (4) government buildings, except in designated employee smoking areas (and except the State Capitol and legislative office buildings), (5) elevators, (6) public transportation vehicles, and (7) public theatres and arenas, except in designated smoking areas in common areas,[343] and in any such designated smoking area warning signs must be appropriately posted.[344] The Act covers no other places. On March 31, 2008, the South Carolina Supreme Court ruled that local governments generally may regulate smoking more stringently than the Act.[345] On September 8, 2008, the South Carolina Supreme Court ruled that the maximum fine a city or town constitutionally can impose for breaking a local smoking ban is $25.[346] As of July 1, 2016, 61 local governments in South Carolina have enacted local smoking bans.[347] In May 2008, four bills before the South Carolina General Assembly that sought to ban smoking statewide in all bars and restaurants **failed** when they did not receive a committee hearing before the end of the legislative session.[348]
  * **Localities in South Carolina with smoking bans that include _all_ bars and restaurants (63 total as of April 1, 2019):**
    * Aiken, July 14, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Aiken County, September 16, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[4]
    * Atlantic Beach, May 2, 2011, prohibited in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Beaufort, May 27, 2008, prohibited in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[349]
    * Beaufort County, January 10, 2007, prohibited in all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, within unincorporated areas of Beaufort County.[4]
    * Blacksburg, September 12, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Blackville, September 19, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Camden, September 22, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Cayce, June 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Chapin, August 3, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Charleston, July 23, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts cigar bars, theatrical performances involving smoking, and 25% of designated hotel and motel smoking rooms.[347]
    * Charleston County, September 1, 2012, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Chesnee, August 9, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Clemson, July 1, 2008, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Clinton, March 1, 2015 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Colleton County, July 28, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Columbia, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Denmark, August 18, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Duncan, November 17, 2015, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Easley, January 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Edisto Beach, March 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Estill, May 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Florence, November 1, 2011 banned in bars and restaurants but allows workplaces and other privately owned businesses to establish designated break rooms for smoking that are enclosed and separately ventilated from the rest of the establishment in order to be exempt from the law[4][350]
    * Fort Mill, August 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Goose Creek, July 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Greenville, January 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4] and has placed a ban for outdoor smoking within city limits
    * Hampton, January 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hartsville, October 10, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Heath Springs, May 28, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hilton Head Island, May 1, 2007, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Hollywood, July 26, 2010 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Inman, April 8, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Isle of Palms, January 1, 2009, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Kershaw, March 18, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lancaster, October 22, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lancaster County, March 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lexington, October 3, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lexington County, January 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mount Pleasant, September 1, 2007, banned in all bars, restaurants, and private clubs, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * North Augusta, August 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * North Myrtle Beach, March 7, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; theatrical performances and tobacco bars are exempt from the ordinance; further exempts use of e-cigarettes[4][351]
    * Pendleton, February 1, 2012, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in other workplaces[4]
    * Pickens, May 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[347]
    * Pine Ridge, January 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Prosperity, January 16, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Quinby, March 1, 2012, banned in bars and restaurants but allows workplaces and other privately owned businesses to establish designated break rooms for smoking that are enclosed and separately ventilated from the rest of the establishment in order to be exempt from the law[4]
    * Ravenel, April 27, 2010, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Richland County, October 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Rock Hill, May 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[347]
    * Simpsonville, September 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * South Congaree, May 18, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Spartanburg, September 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants as well as outdoor functions such as Spring Fling[4][352][353]
    * Springdale, January 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sullivan's Island, July 20, 2006, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Summerville, July 12, 2011, banned in bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Sumter, April 20, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Surfside Beach, October 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Timmonsville, March 1, 2012, banned in bars and restaurants but allows workplaces and other privately owned businesses to establish designated break rooms for smoking that are enclosed and separately ventilated from the rest of the establishment in order to be exempt from the law
    * Walterboro, August 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * West Columbia, June 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * West Pelzer, July 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * Yemassee, August 9, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including all bars and restaurants[4]
    * York County, May 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[347]
  * **Localities in South Carolina with a smoking ban that does not include all bars and restaurants (1 total):**
    * Liberty, October 9, 2006, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
  * **Localities in South Carolina that _rejected_ a smoking ban in some manner (2 total):**
    * North Charleston, May 14, 2008, **rejected** a ban on smoking in enclosed workplaces.[354]
    * Folly Beach, May 28, 2008, **rejected** a ban on smoking in enclosed workplaces.[355]

### South Dakota[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : South Dakota voters passed 2009 H.B. 1240 on November 10, 2010. The bill bans smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in South Dakota, including bars and restaurants,[356] exempting only private residences unless used for child daycare,[356] cigar bars, retail tobacco shops, and a percentage of hotel and motel rooms.[357] The bill was passed in the South Dakota State Legislature and signed into law by Governor Mike Rounds. It was scheduled to take effect in July 2009, but on June 22, 2009, a group of casino and video lottery operators presented the Secretary of State with a petition for a referendum over H.B. 1240 that they claimed to bear 25,000 valid signatures.[358] On June 25, 2009, the Secretary of State certified that the petition indeed bore at least the required 16,776 valid signatures, putting H.B. 1240 to the November 2010 public referendum.[359] On July 24, 2009, the Secretary of State declared that after further review, the number of valid signatures on the petition fell short of the required number to put the issue on the ballot.[360] On November 13, 2009, however, Circuit Judge Kathleen Trandahl ruled that the petition _did_ have enough valid signatures, and ordered the Secretary of State to put the issue to a public vote on November 2, 2010,[361] which ultimately passed. H.B. 1240 is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more stringently, though as of November 2010 no local governments in South Dakota have done so.

### Tennessee[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Tennessee's 2007 statewide smoking law, the Non-Smoker Protection Act, prohibits smoking statewide in all public places in Tennessee, except as exempted;[362] (1) any business, including a bar or restaurant, that does not serve persons under 21, (2) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (3) tobacco industry-related facilities, (4) outdoor areas and areas with an open garage door, (5) nursing homes, (6) designated smoking areas not accessible to the general public in businesses with three or fewer employees, (7) private clubs, (8) private residences and vehicles unless it is being used for child care, daycare, or public transportation of children, (9) retail tobacco stores, and (10) commercial vehicles occupied solely by the operator.[363] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking.[364]

### Texas[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Texas' 1997 statewide smoking law only prohibits smoking in activities of public schools on or off school property,[365] elevators, theatres, libraries, museums, hospitals, buses, airplanes, and trains, as long as these areas are open to the general public, unless the proprietor designates the place for smoking and posts appropriate warning signs.[366] Violation of this law is a class C misdemeanor.[366] Texas law is silent as to whether local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state, and on December 9, 2004, the Texas Court of Appeals upheld El Paso's municipal ban on smoking in all bars and restaurants.[367] As of April 1, 2018, 133 cities in Texas have enacted local smoking bans to varying degrees. 
    * Attempts to ban smoking statewide have **failed** twice before the Texas Legislature, first in May 2007 when a bill to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants passed the Texas House of Representatives by a vote of 91–48 after being amended to allow any business owner to opt out of the ban by posting signs saying smoking is permitted, and then did not receive a vote in the Texas Senate,[368][369] and then again in May 2009, when a similar bill was passed by a Senate committee but did not receive the 21 votes necessary to reach the Senate floor.[370]
  * **Localities in Texas with a smoking ban including _all_ bars and restaurants (111 total):**
    * Abilene, January 3, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Alamo, August 10, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Alton, April 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Anthony, October 23, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Arlington, May 19, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Austin, September 1, 2005, after passage by 52% of voters, [ _citation needed_ ] banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] exempts bingo halls, fraternities, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, separately ventilated smoking rooms in bars and restaurants constructed before September 2005, and nursing homes.[ _citation needed_ ] Struck down as unconstitutionally vague by the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas in 2006,[371] but reinstated on appeal by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in March 2008.[372]
    * Baytown, November 20, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Beaumont, August 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Beeville, February 22, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Benbrook, November 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants,[4] as well as within 25 feet (7.6 m) of the entrances and exits of such places.[ _citation needed_ ]
    * Bonham, May 11, 2015, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Brookshire, June 1, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Brownsville, December 5, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants
    * Burkburnett, May 21, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Burnet, January 15, 2015, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * College Station, February 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces including bars, restaurants, and within a 20-foot (6.1 m) radius of entryways except in theater performances or tobacco shops.[373]
    * Combes, May 16, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Copperas Cove, May 18, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] exempts bingo halls (if enclosed non-smoking area is provided), fraternal organizations, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, and private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes.[ _citation needed_ ]
    * Corpus Christi, April 14, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Dallas, April 10, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Del Rio, June 13, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Denison, July 1, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Denton, August 19, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Desoto, January 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Donna, January 3, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Duncanville, May 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Eagle Pass, September 28, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Edcouch, January 18, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Edinburg, December 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * El Cenizo, March 22, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * El Lago, January 19, 2009, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * El Paso, January 2, 2002, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Elsa, October 27, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ennis, June 21, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4]
    * Escobares, July 9, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Falfurrias, July 6, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Flower Mound, January 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Fort Worth, December 12, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[374]
    * Frisco, November 17, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants and within 20 feet of entrances to places where smoking is prohibited; exempts hotels/motels that have designated smoking rooms, and retail tobacco stores that have an enclosed, separately ventilated smoking room that exhausts directly to the outside environment[4][375]
    * Garland, April 3, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Granbury, April 15, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Harlingen, March 23, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hidalgo, September 10, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Highland Village, June 1, 2011 banned in all enclosed public places as well as restaurants; this municipality is dry[4]
    * Horseshoe Bay, August 25, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Houston, September 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] exempts retail tobacco shops, cigar bars, and private function events not open to the public.[4][376]
    * Huntsville, May 12, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Joshua, August 21, 2014, banned in all enclosed public places as well as restaurants; this municipality is dry[4]
    * La Grulla, January 4, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * La Joya, August 12, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lancaster, July 23, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Laredo, July 3, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lewisville, October 1, 2012, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Little Elm, June 17, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lufkin, April 16, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lyford, March 24, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Manor, January 3, 2018, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Marshall, August 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * McAllen, January 1, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * McKinney, September 4, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] exempts retail tobacco shops and country club smoking rooms, but includes all outdoor areas of parks with the exception of parking lots.[377]
    * Mercedes, February 21, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mesquite, June 14, 2009, banned in bars and restaurants but not other workplaces[4]
    * Mission, September 25, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Missouri City, October 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants and within 25 feet of entrances to public places; smoking is also prohibited at youth sporting events at city parks as well as within 20 feet[4][378]
    * Mont Belvieu, October 8, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Nacogdoches, August 27, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * New Braunfels, March 13, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] also includes private clubs
    * Nolanville, November 24, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Palmhurst, June 30, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Palmview, May 4, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Panorama Village, January 26, 2010, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Patton Village, November 20, 2014, banned in all enclosed public places as well as restaurants; this municipality is dry[4]
    * Pearland, November 30, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] includes city-owned parks and playgrounds and within 25 feet (7.6 m) of entrances, operable windows and ventilation systems of places where smoking is banned.[ _citation needed_ ]
    * Penitas, April 30, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pharr, September 13, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Plano, June 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Portland, October 3, 2006, banned in all enclosed public places as well as restaurants; this municipality is dry[4]
    * Port Isabel, August 9, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Port Lavaca, November 3, 2015, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Prairie View, March 15, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Progreso, June 13, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Raymondville, April 7, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Red Oak, December 14, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Richardson, September 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Rio Grande City, August 17, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Rio Hondo, June 24, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Robinson, November 11, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Rollingwood, June 4, 2001, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Rowlett, May 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * San Angelo, December 2, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants.[379]
    * San Antonio, August 19, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants; exempts cigar bars, outdoor restaurants and bar patio areas, the River Walk, Alamo Plaza, and Main Plaza.[380]
    * San Benito, October 21, 2017, banned in all enclosed workpklaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * San Elizario, June 26, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * San Juan, March 16, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * San Marcos, January 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Seagoville, March 3, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sherman, July 20, 2015, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Socorro, December 8, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Southlake, June 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants;[4] does not exempt hotel/motel rooms.[ _citation needed_ ]
    * Spring Valley, November 14, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sullivan City, April 19, 2018, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tyler, June 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Universal City, September 16, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * University Park, February 16, 2010, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces[4]
    * Vernon, July 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Victoria, June 21, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Waco, January 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Waxahachie, September 18, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Weslaco, May 3, 2017, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wichita Falls, June 17, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[381]
    * Woodway, August 14, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in Texas with a smoking ban that _does not_ include _all_ bars and restaurants (37 total):**
    * Alpine, July 12, 2010, banned in bars, but not restaurants or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Angleton, March 1, 2007 banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces[4]
    * Athens, April 23, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Bedford, January 1, 2015, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Boerne, March 27, 2007, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces[4]
    * Brenham, July 20, 2007, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces;[4] exempts manufacturing facilities [ _citation needed_ ]
    * Caldwell, June 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Conroe, March 1, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Coppell, September 13, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Forney, January 31, 2013, banned in restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Gainesville, June 6, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Galveston, January 1, 2010, banned by City Council in all enclosed workplaces; but on September 23, 2010, City Council **repealed** smoking ban on bars, private clubs, fraternal organizations, and restaurants. The ban that took effect in 2010 originally included bars, private clubs fraternal organizations, and restaurants.[382]
    * Grand Prairie, January 21, 2014, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Harlingen, April 2, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[383]
    * Hewitt, November 14, 2010, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Humble, February 23, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars [384]
    * Irving, August 19, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Kaufman, October 8, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Kerrville, June 24, 2008, banned in bars, but not restaurants or other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Kilgore, July 9, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants that make more than 50% of annual revenue from alcohol sales; also prohibits smoking within 30 feet of places where smoking is prohibited, and provides no exceptions for outdoor patios within bars and restaurants that are non-smoking[4][385]
    * Killeen, June 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * North Richland Hills, January 1, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Leander, June 1, 2001, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Palestine, October 26, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, but exempting bars, restaurants, private clubs, designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, bingo halls, and fraternal organizations.[4]
    * Paris, March 24, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Pasadena, January 2, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Port Arthur, May 9, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Prosper, September 20, 2007, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces[4]
    * Richardson, September 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Rockwall, May 1, 2007, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces[4]
    * Rosenberg, April 5, 2011 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Round Rock, February 1, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Stafford, August 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants[4]
    * Sugar Land, January 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Sweeny, January 1, 2008, banned in all restaurants, but not in bars or all other enclosed workplaces[4]
    * Yoakum, May 12, 2007 voters approved a referendum banning smoking in all enclosed workplaces, exempting bars and restaurants [ _citation needed_ ]
    * Weatherford, April 26, 2014, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or other enclosed workplaces[4]
  * **Localities in Texas where a smoking ban was _rejected_ in some manner (1 total):**
    * Amarillo, May 2008, ban **rejected** by 238 votes in a May 2008 referendum.[386]

### United States Virgin Islands[edit]

  * **Territory-wide smoking ban** : Effective February 10, 2011, smoking is banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants, and in outdoor service lines.[387]

### Utah[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Effective January 1, 2007, as passed in March 2006 (amended in 2012),[388] Utah's 1995 Indoor Clean Air Act was expanded to ban smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Utah, including bars and restaurants (bars and private clubs were exempt until January 1, 2009), exempting only (1) designated hotel/motel smoking rooms, (2) areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees besides the owner,[389] and (3) American Indian religious and cultural ceremonies.[390] Since the state law supersedes any ordinances passed by political subdivisions of the state (i.e., cities, counties, school districts, agencies, etc.), such political subdivisions are preempted from regulating _indoor_ smoking any more or less stringently than the Act.[391] Utah is one of the few states with a statewide smoking ban that does not exempt tobacconists. 
    * _Local outdoor smoking bans_ : Notwithstanding the preemption against political subdivisions modifying the restrictions on _indoor_ smoking, the Act expressly allows such political subdivisions to regulate "smoking in _outdoor_ places of public access which are owned or operated by" (emphasis added) a political subdivision (specifically including state institutions of public or higher education).[391] Accordingly, some political subdivisions have enacted local ordinances prohibiting smoking in certain outdoor areas such as schools, parks,[392] and public transit facilities.[393]

### Vermont[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : Effective September 1, 2005, smoking is banned in all enclosed workplaces in Vermont, including all bars and restaurants,[394] except in areas of owner-operated businesses with no employees that are not open to the public,[395] although separately ventilated designated smoking areas in businesses where employees are not required to be were exempt until July 1, 2009.[396] Designated unenclosed smoking areas in businesses where the layout of the workplace is such that smoking would not be a physical irritation to any nonsmoking employee and three-fourths of the employees agreed were also exempt until July 1, 2009.[396] The Vermont Veterans Home in Bennington is the only non-owner-operated workplace in the state permitted to allow smoking.[396] Vermont is one of the few states with a statewide smoking ban that does not expressly exempt tobacconists, and is one of four states that does not allow the designation of hotel/motel smoking rooms. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the state law.[397][398]

Illegal to smoke in a car with a passenger under age 8.

### Virginia[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Virginia's 2009 statewide smoking law, the 2009 Indoor Clean Air Act prohibits smoking statewide in enclosed public elevators, public school buses, primary and secondary schools, hospital emergency rooms, health department offices, polling places, indoor service lines and cashier lines, public restrooms in government buildings and hospitals, child daycare centers except where located in a private home, and public restrooms of health care facilities, and relegating smoking in restaurants (including bars) to separately ventilated designated smoking rooms that are structurally separated from the rest of the establishment.[399][400] The Act exempts private clubs, retail tobacco stores, tobacco warehouses, tobacco manufacturing facilities, prisons, designated smoking areas in government offices, food preparation facilities for catering services, restaurants located on the premises of tobacco manufacturers, rented private rooms in restaurants; requires the reasonable designation of non-smoking areas in educational facilities where smoking is not banned, hospitals, retail stores bigger than 15,000 square feet (1,400 m2), and recreational facilities.[399]

Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking more stringently than
the Act.[399] Effectively, the cost and complexity involved with complying
with the law's requirements for separately ventilated smoking areas has meant
that nearly all Virginia bars and restaurants operate completely smoke-free.
Since 2006, smoking in state offices, vehicles, and buildings (except for
correctional facilities) has been banned by executive order issued by the
Governor of Virginia.[401] A law which came into effect on July 1, 2016 banned
smoking in private cars with any occupants who are 8 years or younger.[402]

  *     * Norfolk, March 25, 2008, **repealed** a ban on smoking in restaurants, which was passed in October 2007 but had not yet gone into effect, by City Council vote of 5–2, because the City Attorney advised the Council that its ban would violate Virginia state law and could not withstand a legal challenge.[403]

### Washington[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On December 8, 2005, after ratification by a majority of Washington voters in a statewide initiative referendum, an amendment to Washington's 1985 Clean Indoor Air Act became effective banning smoking statewide in all public places and places of employment in Washington (except 25% of hotel/motel rooms),[404] as well as within 25 feet (7.6 m) of doors, windows, or ventilation intakes to such places.[405] The act exempts private enclosed workplaces[406] and private residences except when being used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care.[407] Washington does not provide exemptions for tobacconists or businesses whose sole purpose is to provide an environment for smoking (e.g. hookah lounges, cigar bars). However, private clubs in enclosed spaces with no employees, and businesses on tribal lands, are exempt. Local governments may regulate smoking more stringently than the act,[406] and local health boards are authorized to enforce the act locally.[408]
    * Mason County, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]

### West Virginia[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, West Virginia's statewide smoking laws generally prohibit smoking in (1) public transportation vehicles where a "no smoking" sign is posted,[409] (2) areas of public school except teacher's lounges not accessible to students (unless a local education board rules differently),[410] (3) workplaces where a "no smoking" sign is posted,[411] (4) areas near surface magazines for explosives used in mining,[412] (5) mines and structures around mines,[413][414] (6) nonsmoking sections in bingo halls,[415] and (7) nonsmoking areas in nursing homes.[416] No West Virginia law requires the designation of nonsmoking areas generally in enclosed workplaces. In 2003, the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia ruled that county health boards may regulate smoking more stringently than the state, except in bingo halls and retirement homes.[417] As of April 2009, 51 counties and two cities in West Virginia have enacted local smoking bans to varying degrees.[4] In 2008, a proposed statewide smoking ban **failed** in the West Virginia Legislature.[418]
  * **Localities in West Virginia with a smoking ban that includes _all_ bars and restaurants (37 total):**
    * Barbour County, October 1, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Berkeley County, July 1, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Braxton County, July 1, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Brooke County, July 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Cabell County, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Calhoun County, October 1, 2008 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Doddridge County, September 29, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants [4]
    * Grant County, September 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Greenbrier County, September 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hampshire County, January 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Hancock County, July 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Harrison County, January 1, 2009, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Jackson County, July 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Kanawha County, July 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lewis County, July 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Lincoln County, September 29, 2002, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Marlinton, November 8, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mason County, July 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Mineral County, January 2, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Monongalia County, March 9, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Monroe County, January 1, 2015, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Morgantown, January 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Nicholas County, August 15, 2014, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ohio County, June 26, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pendleton County, January 1, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pleasants County, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Pocahontas County, August 1, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Preston County, April 1, 2016, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Randolph County, September 30, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Ritchie County, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Roane County, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Summers County, January 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Taylor County, July 22, 2012, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Tucker County, May 30, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Upshur County, September 9, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wirt County, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wood County, October 1, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in West Virginia with a smoking ban that _does not_ include _all_ bars and restaurants (15 total):**
    * Boone County, August 31, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Clay County, June 17, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Fayette County, May 31, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Hardy County, April 1, 2000, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Jefferson County, October 31, 2003, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Marion County, July 30, 2004 banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Marshall County, April 1, 2013, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * McDowell County, July 1, 2006, banned in all restaurants, but not bars or all other workplaces[4]
    * Mercer County, December 30, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Mingo County, July 1, 2006, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Morgan County, July 30, 2007, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Raleigh County, February 22, 2005, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Wayne County, December 9, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
    * Webster County, October 13, 2004, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including restaurants but exempting bars[4]
    * Wyoming County, January 31, 1998, banned in all enclosed workplaces except bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in West Virginia where a smoking ban was _rejected_ in some manner (1 total):**
    * Putnam County, August 21, 2007, County Health Board **repealed** a September 2006 ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[419]

### Wisconsin[edit]

  * **Statewide smoking ban** : On July 5, 2010, after being signed into law by Governor Jim Doyle on May 18, 2009, S.B. 181 (2009 Wisconsin Act 12) took effect, banning smoking statewide in all enclosed workplaces in Wisconsin, including all bars, restaurants, lodging establishments, and private clubs, as well as within a "reasonable distance" outdoors from any such place, except in bar/restaurant outdoor patios.[420] The Act exempts only cigar bars or retail tobacco stores already in existence, private residences, and rooms in nursing homes in which the occupants agree to allow smoking; it does not cover casinos run by American Indian tribes, as those casinos are in the tribes' sovereign territory.[420] Local governments are preempted from regulating smoking more strictly than the Act.[420] Prior to this law taking effect, several localities in Wisconsin had local smoking bans in effect.

[421]

### Wyoming[edit]

  * **No statewide smoking ban.** Instead, Wyoming state law only prohibits smoking where it could cause an explosion[422][423][424] and in underground mines.[425] Wyoming has no state laws concerning indoor smoking in general, and thus local governments can regulate general indoor smoking as they see fit. As of July 2017, six cities in Wyoming have enacted local smoking bans, all covering all bars and restaurants, but varying otherwise.[4] In February 2009, a bill before the Wyoming Legislature that would have enacted a statewide ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces, except in private offices and in bars and restaurants serving only patrons over 21 years of age (and except in any local community that chose to opt out) **failed** when it was passed by the Wyoming House of Representatives in a vote of 31–29 but then was denied a committee hearing in the Wyoming Senate.[426]
  * **Localities in Wyoming with a smoking ban that includes _all_ bars and restaurants (6 total):**
    * Burlington, October 9, 2008, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
    * Casper, September 1, 2012, banned in bars and restaurants, but not other workplaces; on June 28, 2013, the Casper City Council **repealed** the ban on smoking in bars by a vote of 5-4 but left the restaurant ban in place;[427] On November 4, 2015, the ban on smoking in bars was reinstated on a special election vote by 54 percent of voters[428]
    * Cheyenne, August 15, 2006, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces;[4] ban includes private clubs. [ _citation needed_ ]
    * Evanston, September 4, 2007, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces[4]
    * Laramie, April 6, 2005, banned in all bars and restaurants, but not in all other workplaces;[4] ban includes private clubs.[ _citation needed_ ]
    * Mountain View, June 1, 2011, banned in all enclosed workplaces, including bars and restaurants[4]
  * **Localities in Wyoming with a smoking ban that does not include all bars and restaurants (1 total):**
    * Rock Springs, March 1, 2008, banned in all restaurants, but not bars, private clubs, and other workplaces.[429]

## See also[edit]

  * Alcohol laws of the United States by state
  * Electronic cigarette
  * List of smoking bans worldwide
  * Smokeasy
  * Tobacco control
  * Smoking in the United States
  * Smoking ban

## References[edit]

  1. **^** "Overview List – How many Smokefree Laws?, Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights, January 2, 2014" (PDF). Retrieved January 12, 2014.
  2. **^** "Summary of 100% Smokefree State Laws and Population Protected by 100% U.S. Smokefree Laws, Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights, 1 January 2, 2014" (PDF). Retrieved January 2, 2014.
  3. **^** "States, Commonwealths, and Municipalities with 100% Smokefree Laws in Workplaces, Restaurants, or Bars, American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation, January 2, 2014" (PDF). Retrieved January 12, 2014.
  4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _**m**_ _**n**_ _**o**_ _**p**_ _**q**_ _**r**_ _**s**_ _**t**_ _**u**_ _**v**_ _**w**_ _**x**_ _**y**_ _**z**_ _**aa**_ _**ab**_ _**ac**_ _**ad**_ _**ae**_ _**af**_ _**ag**_ _**ah**_ _**ai**_ _**aj**_ _**ak**_ _**al**_ _**am**_ _**an**_ _**ao**_ _**ap**_ _**aq**_ _**ar**_ _**as**_ _**at**_ _**au**_ _**av**_ _**aw**_ _**ax**_ _**ay**_ _**az**_ _**ba**_ _**bb**_ _**bc**_ _**bd**_ _**be**_ _**bf**_ _**bg**_ _**bh**_ _**bi**_ _**bj**_ _**bk**_ _**bl**_ _**bm**_ _**bn**_ _**bo**_ _**bp**_ _**bq**_ _**br**_ _**bs**_ _**bt**_ _**bu**_ _**bv**_ _**bw**_ _**bx**_ _**by**_ _**bz**_ _**ca**_ _**cb**_ _**cc**_ _**cd**_ _**ce**_ _**cf**_ _**cg**_ _**ch**_ _**ci**_ _**cj**_ _**ck**_ _**cl**_ _**cm**_ _**cn**_ _**co**_ _**cp**_ _**cq**_ _**cr**_ _**cs**_ _**ct**_ _**cu**_ _**cv**_ _**cw**_ _**cx**_ _**cy**_ _**cz**_ _**da**_ _**db**_ _**dc**_ _**dd**_ _**de**_ _**df**_ _**dg**_ _**dh**_ _**di**_ _**dj**_ _**dk**_ _**dl**_ _**dm**_ _**dn**_ _**do**_ _**dp**_ _**dq**_ _**dr**_ _**ds**_ _**dt**_ _**du**_ _**dv**_ _**dw**_ _**dx**_ _**dy**_ _**dz**_ _**ea**_ _**eb**_ _**ec**_ _**ed**_ _**ee**_ _**ef**_ _**eg**_ _**eh**_ _**ei**_ _**ej**_ _**ek**_ _**el**_ _**em**_ _**en**_ _**eo**_ _**ep**_ _**eq**_ _**er**_ _**es**_ _**et**_ _**eu**_ _**ev**_ _**ew**_ _**ex**_ _**ey**_ _**ez**_ _**fa**_ _**fb**_ _**fc**_ _**fd**_ _**fe**_ _**ff**_ _**fg**_ _**fh**_ _**fi**_ _**fj**_ _**fk**_ _**fl**_ _**fm**_ _**fn**_ _**fo**_ _**fp**_ _**fq**_ _**fr**_ _**fs**_ _**ft**_ _**fu**_ _**fv**_ _**fw**_ _**fx**_ _**fy**_ _**fz**_ _**ga**_ _**gb**_ _**gc**_ _**gd**_ _**ge**_ _**gf**_ _**gg**_ _**gh**_ _**gi**_ _**gj**_ _**gk**_ _**gl**_ _**gm**_ _**gn**_ _**go**_ _**gp**_ _**gq**_ _**gr**_ _**gs**_ _**gt**_ _**gu**_ _**gv**_ _**gw**_ _**gx**_ _**gy**_ _**gz**_ _**ha**_ _**hb**_ _**hc**_ _**hd**_ _**he**_ _**hf**_ _**hg**_ _**hh**_ _**hi**_ _**hj**_ _**hk**_ _**hl**_ _**hm**_ _**hn**_ _**ho**_ _**hp**_ _**hq**_ _**hr**_ _**hs**_ _**ht**_ _**hu**_ _**hv**_ _**hw**_ _**hx**_ _**hy**_ _**hz**_ _**ia**_ _**ib**_ _**ic**_ _**id**_ _**ie**_ _**if**_ _**ig**_ _**ih**_ _**ii**_ _**ij**_ _**ik**_ _**il**_ _**im**_ _**in**_ _**io**_ _**ip**_ _**iq**_ _**ir**_ _**is**_ _**it**_ _**iu**_ _**iv**_ _**iw**_ _**ix**_ _**iy**_ _**iz**_ _**ja**_ _**jb**_ _**jc**_ _**jd**_ _**je**_ _**jf**_ _**jg**_ _**jh**_ _**ji**_ _**jj**_ _**jk**_ _**jl**_ _**jm**_ _**jn**_ _**jo**_ _**jp**_ _**jq**_ _**jr**_ _**js**_ _**jt**_ _**ju**_ _**jv**_ _**jw**_ _**jx**_ _**jy**_ _**jz**_ _**ka**_ _**kb**_ _**kc**_ _**kd**_ _**ke**_ _**kf**_ _**kg**_ _**kh**_ _**ki**_ _**kj**_ _**kk**_ _**kl**_ _**km**_ _**kn**_ _**ko**_ _**kp**_ _**kq**_ _**kr**_ _**ks**_ _**kt**_ _**ku**_ _**kv**_ _**kw**_ _**kx**_ _**ky**_ _**kz**_ _**la**_ _**lb**_ _**lc**_ _**ld**_ _**le**_ _**lf**_ _**lg**_ _**lh**_ _**li**_ _**lj**_ _**lk**_ _**ll**_ _**lm**_ _**ln**_ _**lo**_ _**lp**_ _**lq**_ _**lr**_ _**ls**_ _**lt**_ _**lu**_ _**lv**_ _**lw**_ _**lx**_ _**ly**_ _**lz**_ _**ma**_ _**mb**_ _**mc**_ _**md**_ _**me**_ _**mf**_ _**mg**_ _**mh**_ _**mi**_ _**mj**_ _**mk**_ _**ml**_ _**mm**_ _**mn**_ _**mo**_ _**mp**_ _**mq**_ _**mr**_ _**ms**_ _**mt**_ _**mu**_ _**mv**_ _**mw**_ _**mx**_ _**my**_ _**mz**_ _**na**_ _**nb**_ _**nc**_ _**nd**_ _**ne**_ _**nf**_ _**ng**_ _**nh**_ _**ni**_ _**nj**_ _**nk**_ _**nl**_ _**nm**_ _**nn**_ _**no**_ _**np**_ _**nq**_ _**nr**_ _**ns**_ _**nt**_ _**nu**_ _**nv**_ _**nw**_ _**nx**_ _**ny**_ _**nz**_ _**oa**_ _**ob**_ _**oc**_ _**od**_ _**oe**_ _**of**_ _**og**_ _**oh**_ _**oi**_ _**oj**_ _**ok**_ _**ol**_ _**om**_ _**on**_ _**oo**_ _**op**_ _**oq**_ _**or**_ _**os**_ _**ot**_ _**ou**_ _**ov**_ _**ow**_ _**ox**_ _**oy**_ _**oz**_ _**pa**_ _**pb**_ _**pc**_ _**pd**_ _**pe**_ _**pf**_ _**pg**_ _**ph**_ _**pi**_ _**pj**_ _**pk**_ _**pl**_ _**pm**_ _**pn**_ _**po**_ _**pp**_ _**pq**_ _**pr**_ _**ps**_ _**pt**_ _**pu**_ _**pv**_ _**pw**_ _**px**_ _**py**_ _**pz**_ _**qa**_ _**qb**_ _**qc**_ _**qd**_ _**qe**_ _**qf**_ _**qg**_ _**qh**_ _**qi**_ _**qj**_ _**qk**_ _**ql**_ _**qm**_ _**qn**_ _**qo**_ _**qp**_ _**qq**_ _**qr**_ _**qs**_ _**qt**_ _**qu**_ _**qv**_ _**qw**_ _**qx**_ _**qy**_ _**qz**_ _**ra**_ _**rb**_ _**rc**_ _**rd**_ _**re**_ _**rf**_ _**rg**_ _**rh**_ _**ri**_ _**rj**_ _**rk**_ _**rl**_ _**rm**_ _**rn**_ _**ro**_ _**rp**_ _**rq**_ _**rr**_ _**rs**_ _**rt**_ _**ru**_ _**rv**_ _**rw**_ _**rx**_ _**ry**_ _**rz**_ _**sa**_ _**sb**_ _**sc**_ _**sd**_ _**se**_ _**sf**_ _**sg**_ _**sh**_ _**si**_ _**sj**_ _**sk**_ _**sl**_ _**sm**_ _**sn**_ _**so**_ _**sp**_ _**sq**_ _**sr**_ _**ss**_ _**st**_ _**su**_ _**sv**_ _**sw**_ _**sx**_ _**sy**_ _**sz**_ _**ta**_ _**tb**_ _**tc**_ _**td**_ _**te**_ _**tf**_ _**tg**_ _**th**_ _**ti**_ _**tj**_ _**tk**_ _**tl**_ _**tm**_ _**tn**_ _**to**_ _**tp**_ _**tq**_ _**tr**_ _**ts**_ _**tt**_ _**tu**_ _**tv**_ _**tw**_ _**tx**_ _**ty**_ _**tz**_ _**ua**_ _**ub**_ _**uc**_ _**ud**_ _**ue**_ _**uf**_ _**ug**_ _**uh**_ _**ui**_ _**uj**_ _**uk**_ _**ul**_ _**um**_ _**un**_ _**uo**_ _**up**_ _**uq**_ _**ur**_ _**us**_ _**ut**_ _**uu**_ _**uv**_ _**uw**_ _**ux**_ _**uy**_ _**uz**_ _**va**_ _**vb**_ _**vc**_ _**vd**_ _**ve**_ _**vf**_ _**vg**_ _**vh**_ _**vi**_ _**vj**_ _**vk**_ _**vl**_ _**vm**_ _**vn**_ _**vo**_ _**vp**_ _**vq**_ _**vr**_ _**vs**_ _**vt**_ _**vu**_ _**vv**_ _**vw**_ _**vx**_ _**vy**_ _**vz**_ _**wa**_ _**wb**_ _**wc**_ _**wd**_ _**we**_ _**wf**_ _**wg**_ _**wh**_ _**wi**_ _**wj**_ _**wk**_ _**wl**_ _**wm**_ _**wn**_ _**wo**_ _**wp**_ _**wq**_ _**wr**_ _**ws**_ _**wt**_ _**wu**_ _**wv**_ _**ww**_ _**wx**_ _**wy**_ _**wz**_ _**xa**_ _**xb**_ _**xc**_ _**xd**_ _**xe**_ _**xf**_ _**xg**_ _**xh**_ _**xi**_ _**xj**_ "Municipalities with Local 100% Smokefree Laws, American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation, January 2, 2014" (PDF). Retrieved January 12, 2014.
  5. **^** Taub, Daniel (March 17, 2006). "Daniel Taub, "California Town Makes It Tougher to Smoke in Public," Bloomberg.com, March 17, 2006". Bloomberg. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  6. **^** 14 C.F.R. Part 252
  7. **^** Executive Order 13058, August 9, 1997
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ala. Code § 22-15A-4". Legislature.state.al.us. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  9. **^** "Ala. Code § 22-15A-6". Legislature.state.al.us. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  10. **^** "Ala. Code § 22-15A-7". Legislature.state.al.us. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  11. **^** "Ala. Code § 22-15A-10". Legislature.state.al.us. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  12. **^** _Gann v. City of Gulf Shores_ , 29 So. 3d 244 (Ala. Crim. App. 2009)
  13. **^** "Time runs out in Alabama Legislature on statewide smoking ban, ''The Birmingham News'', May 20, 2008". Al.com. May 20, 2008. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  14. **^** "Phillip Rawls, "Alabama senator delays her anti-smoking bill", AP, April 3, 2009". News.ino.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  15. **^** (Press-Register/Victor Calhoun). "George Altman, "Ban on smoking in Alabama restaurants fails in Legislature," ''Press-Register'' (April 23, 2010)". Blog.al.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  16. **^** "Our View: Strong smoke-free laws are spreading across the country, but in the Alabama Legislature, they may not be going anywhere, ''Press-Register'' (April 27, 2011)". Blog.al.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  17. **^** https://legiscan.com/AK/text/SB63/2017
  18. **^** http://www.webcenter11.com/content/news/Governor-signs-Senate-Bill-to-ban-indoor-public-smoking-488693241.html
  19. **^** "Governor Togiola Signs American Samoa Smoke Free Environment Act, American Samoa Community Cancer Coalition, October 22nd, 2010". Asccancercoalition.org. October 22, 2010. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  20. **^** "Ariz. Rev. Stat § 36-601.01". Azleg.state.az.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  21. **^** "Comply with the Law". Azdhs.gov. Retrieved August 2, 2017.
  22. **^** "Amanda J. Crawford, "Smoking ban compliance is expected to be gradual", ''The Arizona Republic'', May 1, 2007". Azcentral.com. May 1, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  23. **^** Ark. Code. Ann. §§ 20-27-1801 through 20-27-1809
  24. **^** Ark. Code Ann. § 20-27-1808
  25. **^** Ark. Code. Ann. § 20-27-1903
  26. **^** Times, Los Angeles. "California's smoking age raised from 18 to 21 under bills signed by Gov. Brown". Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  27. **^** "City of Lodi, California, "AB 846 Expands Smoking Restrictions". Lodi.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  28. **^** Vargas. "California State Senate: AB 846 Assembly Bill – Chaptered". Info.sen.ca.gov. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  29. **^** Governor Signs into Law Measure to Outlaw Smoking in Cars with Kids Archived January 14, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, October 2007
  30. **^** "Cal. Health  & Safety Code § 118974". Leginfo.ca.gov. Archived from the original on January 26, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  31. **^** "Secondhand Smoke Ordinance". Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  32. **^** Tough smoking ban takes effect in city of Alameda, ABC7, January 2, 2012
  33. **^** California Town Approves Ban Making Smoking Illegal in Condos, Apartments Fox News, October 2007
  34. **^** "Berkeley approves smoking ban". Abclocal.go.com. March 25, 2008. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  35. **^** "KCBS.com". Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  36. **^** "LG-PD-Press_Release_Smoking_Ban". Beverlyhills.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  37. **^** Burbankca.org Archived March 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
  38. **^** Broder, John M. (March 19, 2006). "Smoking Ban Takes Effect, Indoors and Out". _The New York Times_. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  39. **^** "Davis Municipal Code/34.02.010". Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  40. **^** "San Diego Metro News | SignOnSanDiego.com – El Cajon bans smoking in most public places". SignOnSanDiego.com. August 14, 2007. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  41. **^** "Comprehensive Smoke Pollution Protection Ordinance".
  42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Escondido Municipal Code, Chapter 22A, Smoking Regulations, Section 2 Prohibitions". Qcode.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  43. **^** ADAM KAYE – North County Times (November 18, 2007). "North County Times, November 18, 2007, Adam Kaye, "Smoking bans spreading in North County – Encinitas, Carlsbad are latest to investigate ordinances", Escondido, CA". Nctimes.com. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  44. **^** "North County Times, May 21, 2007, Paul Eakins, "Students to ask Escondido council to consider smoking ban", Escondido, CA". Nctimes.com. May 21, 2007. Archived from the original on March 28, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  45. **^** Ci.glendale.ca.us
  46. **^** Aggressive Hermosa Beach outdoor smoking ban to begin, March 2, 2012
  47. **^** Enforcement of Loma Linda's more restrictive smoking ban does not appear to be priority in first day Archived September 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, July 25, 2007
  48. **^** "Los Angeles County Bans Smoking at Public Parks, Golf Courses". _Cigarettesreviews.com_. Retrieved May 17, 2010.
  49. **^** http://clkrep.lacity.org/onlinedocs/2008/08-1544_ord_181065.pdf
  50. **^** "Marin smoking ban stretches into the home". _SFBay_. Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  51. **^** "Oakland Municipal Code, chapter 8.30". Retrieved April 10, 2013.
  52. **^** "Ci.pasadena.ca.us". Ci.pasadena.ca.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  53. **^** Herel, Suzanne (January 26, 2005). "SF Board of Supervisors votes to ban smoking in all city parks". _The San Francisco Chronicle_. Retrieved August 21, 2013.
  54. **^** Sankin, Aaron (January 15, 2013). "San Francisco Smoking Ban: Board of Supervisors passes two anti smoking bills". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved August 21, 2013.
  55. **^** San José Municipal Ordinance 9.44.030F and 9.44.010A and Parks Ordinance 13.44.130
  56. **^** "Letter to Nebraska Senators from San Luis Obispo Chamber of Commerce in favor of Smokefree Legislation". _Tobacco.org_. Retrieved April 7, 2007.
  57. **^** "Outdoor Smoking Ban in San Luis Obispo".
  58. **^** "Smoking ban approved in SLO". Archived from the original on April 24, 2010.
  59. **^** "Public Health Department-Santa Barbara County". Countyofsb.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  60. **^** "Santa Monica Municipal Code".
  61. **^** "California Civil Code Section 1947.5". California Legislature. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  62. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Colo. Rev. Stat. § 25-14-204". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  63. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Colo. Rev. Stat. § 25-14-205". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  64. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Colo. Rev. Stat. § 25-14-207". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  65. **^** "Bar owner finds long-sought smoking ban loophole". _Colorado Springs Gazette_. Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Conn. Gen. Stat. § 19a-342". cga.ct.gov. Archived from the original on December 13, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012.
  67. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Del. Code Ann. tit. 16, §§ 2901 through 2908". Delcode.delaware.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  68. **^** Molly Murray (April 16, 2011). "Delaware cities: Smoking still legal on Rehoboth Beach". _The News Journal_. Gannett. DelawareOnline. Retrieved April 16, 2011.
  69. **^** Hughes, Gray; Ferrar, Doug; Neiburg, Jeff (May 25, 2017). "With tourists incoming, some throw shade at Rehoboth over beach tent rule". _The Daily Times_. Salisbury, MD. Retrieved February 6, 2018.
  70. **^** Weiss, Eric M. (January 5, 2006). "D.C. Smoking Ban Approved, ''The Washington Post'', January 5, 2006". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  71. **^** "Fla. Stat. §§ 386.201 through 386.2125". Leg.state.fl.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  72. **^** >2008–>Ch0386->Section%20209#0386.209 Fla. Stat. §386.209
  73. **^** Constitution of Florida, Article X, Section 20 (added in 2002) [1]
  74. **^** Ga. Code. Ann. § 31-12A-6
  75. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Ga. Code. Ann. § 31-12A-12
  76. **^** "Tobacco.org". Tobacco.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  77. **^** Cite error: The named reference `anrumunilist` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  78. **^** "Public Law 28-80". No-smoke.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  79. **^** "Guam". no-smoke.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  80. **^** "Haw. Rev. Stat. § 328J-3". Capitol.hawaii.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  81. **^** "Haw. Rev. Stat. § 328J-7". Capitol.hawaii.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  82. **^** "Haw. Rev. Stat. § 328J-6". Capitol.hawaii.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  83. **^** "Haw. Rev. Stat. § 328J-12". Capitol.hawaii.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  84. **^** Capitol.hawaii.gov
  85. **^** "Haw. Rev. Stat. § 328J-15". Capitol.hawaii.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  86. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dingeman, Robbie (October 31, 2002). "Smallest county to ban smoking". _Honolulu Advertiser_. Retrieved January 2, 2014.
  87. **^** "Idaho Code § 39-5503". Legislature.idaho.gov. July 29, 2004. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  88. **^** "Idaho Code § 39-5511". Legislature.idaho.gov. July 29, 2004. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  89. **^** Times. "KTVB.com". KTVB.com. Retrieved December 21, 2011.
  90. **^** Times. "MagicValley.com". MagicValley.com. Retrieved June 8, 2013.
  91. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Illinois Public Act 095-0017: "Smoke Free Illinois Act "". Ilga.gov. June 30, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  92. **^** 1988 Chicago Clean Indoor Air Ordinance (PDF)
  93. **^** "Clean Indoor Air Ordinance (No Smoking: Including E-Cigarettes)". City of Chicago. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014.
  94. **^** Lake County first in Illinois to raise tobacco purchase age to 21 _Chicago Sun-Times_ , September 13, 2017
  95. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "2012 Indiana House Bill 1149-1" (PDF). Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  96. **^** "Indiana Smoking Ban Dies in House Committee", _The Associated Press_ , January 28, 2008
  97. **^** John Byrne, "Statewide smoking ban now appears dead," _Post Tribune of Northwest Indiana_ , April 23, 2009 Archived April 30, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
  98. **^** "Mark Peterson, "Smoking ban debate over in Indiana," ''WNDU-16'', February 4, 2010". Wndu.com. February 4, 2010. Archived from the original on February 9, 2013. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  99. **^** Carden, Dan (April 11, 2011). "Dan Carden, "Smoking ban dies in Senate", ''Northwest Indiana Times'', April 11, 2011". Nwitimes.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  100. **^** "Action information for HB 1149, Indiana General Assembly (2012)". In.gov. March 9, 2012. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  101. **^** "CMS.bsu.edu". CMS.bsu.edu. March 17, 2008. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  102. **^** "Fortwayne.com". Fortwayne.com. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  103. **^** http://www.ipfw.edu/tobacco-free/
  104. **^** "A hazy ban". Idsnews.com. March 30, 2009. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  105. **^** "Purdue.edu". Purdue.edu. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  106. **^** http://wsbt.com/news/local/south-bend-smoking-ban-is-here. Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
  107. **^** "Evansville Courier and Press". Retrieved March 12, 2012.
  108. **^** _Paul Stieler Enters. v. City of Evansville_ , 2 N.E.3d 1269 (Ind. 2014)
  109. **^** "folio-destination-name:'sec_142D_3']$x=Advanced#0-0-0-27117 Iowa Code § 142D.3". Search.legis.state.ia.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  110. **^** TIM JAMISON, Waterloo man pushes for park smoking ban _The Courier_ , September 18, 2017
  111. **^** "folio-destination-name:'sec_142D_4']$x=Advanced#0-0-0-27119 Iowa Code § 142D.4". Search.legis.state.ia.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  112. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "folio-destination-name:'sec_142D_9']$x=Advanced#0-0-0-27129 Iowa Code § 142D.9". Search.legis.state.ia.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  113. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ H.B. 2221 (Kan. 2010) [ _dead link_ ]
  114. **^** K.S.A. 21–4013
  115. **^** "Steffes v. City of Lawrence, 284 Kan. 380, 160 P.3d 843 (2007)". Kscourts.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  116. **^** "KS Judge Blocks Parts Of Smoking Law, KMBC-9 TV, Kansas City, Mo., June 30, 2010". Kmbc.com. June 30, 2010. Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  117. **^** "K.R.S. 61.165" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  118. **^** "K.R.S. 61.167" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  119. **^** "Lexington Fayette County Food  & Bev. Ass'n v. Lexington-Fayette Urban County Gov't, 131 S.W.3d 745 (Ky. 2004)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  120. **^** "2011 Kentucky HB193". Lrc.ky.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  121. **^** "2012 Kentucky HB289". Lrc.ky.gov. Retrieved April 18, 2012.
  122. **^** "2011 Kentucky HB216". Lrc.ky.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  123. **^** "Health and Wellness – Smoke-Free Law Online Toolkit". LouisvilleKy.gov. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  124. **^** "Council passes smoking ban » Archive » Commonwealth Journal". Somerset-kentucky.com. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  125. **^** TEGNA. "Shepherdsville City Council bans 'smoking in cars with kids'". Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  126. **^** "Boone pulls out of smoking ban talks". Cincinnati.com. July 30, 2010. Retrieved February 18, 2014.
  127. **^** in: Campbell County (February 17, 2011). "Campbell repeals indoor smoking ban | Kentucky Politics". Cincinnati.com. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  128. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "La. Rev. Stat. § 1300.256". Legis.state.la.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  129. **^** The Times-Picayune (June 2, 2009). "Jan Moller, "House rejects smoking ban, 29–71", ''New Orleans Times-Picayune'', June 2, 2009". Nola.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  130. **^** Carolyn Kaster / The Associated Press. "Jan Moller, "Casino smoking ban rejected by House committee" (May 6, 2010)". Nola.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  131. **^** Marsha Shuler, "Committee rejects smoking ban bill," _Baton Rouge Advocate_ (May 26, 2010)
  132. **^** "AP, "Senate rejects smoking ban for Louisiana bars," ''New Orleans CityBusiness'' (June 2, 2011)". Neworleanscitybusiness.com. June 2, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  133. **^** "Louisiana Senate rejects smoking ban extension". Necn.com. May 23, 2012. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  134. **^** http://www.theadvocate.com/baton_rouge/news/article_ea2340e8-7c54-11e7-8177-77771ee76759.html
  135. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Me. Rev. Stat. tit. 22, § 1542". Mainelegislature.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  136. **^** "Me. Rev. Stat. tit. 22, § 1549". Mainelegislature.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  137. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "MD Clean Indoor Air Act of 2007 (House Bill 359)" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  138. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Mass. Gen. L. ch. 70, § 22". Mass.gov. January 1, 2006. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  139. **^** Gideon Gil (December 11, 2008). "Boston bans cigarette sales in drug stores but delays cigar bar closings". _The Boston Globe_. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  140. **^** Kotz, Deborah (February 5, 2014). "CVS decision to ban tobacco sales is hailed". _The Boston Globe_.
  141. **^** "Boston Public Health Commission Regulation Restricting the Sale of Tobacco Products in the City of Boston" (PDF).
  142. **^** Smith, Stephen (December 12, 2008). "Hub enacts strict ban on tobacco sales". _The Boston Globe_.
  143. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "2009 Michigan House Bill 4377" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  144. **^** "Michigan Government Smoking Ban FAQ" (PDF). Retrieved March 25, 2015.
  145. **^** "Minn. Rev. Stat. § 144.414". Revisor.leg.state.mn.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  146. **^** "Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act" (PDF). Emily Cleveland. July 2007. Retrieved October 29, 2007.
  147. **^** "Minn. Rev. Stat. § 144.417". Revisor.leg.state.mn.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  148. **^** Duluthtransit.com Archived November 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
  149. **^** "Postbulletin.com". Postbulletin.com. Archived from the original on January 3, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  150. **^** Miss. Code § 29-5-161
  151. **^** Miss. Code § 29-5-163
  152. **^** "2011 Mississippi SB2514". Billstatus.ls.state.ms.us. July 1, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  153. **^** "2011 Mississippi HB863". Billstatus.ls.state.ms.us. July 1, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  154. **^** "2011 Mississippi HB131". Billstatus.ls.state.ms.us. July 1, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  155. **^** "commercialappeal.com".
  156. **^** "Corinth aldermen adopt public smoking ban", Clarion Ledger, November 7, 2007
  157. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Mo. Rev. Stat. § 191.767". Moga.mo.gov. August 28, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  158. **^** "Mo. Rev. Stat. § 191.771". Moga.mo.gov. August 28, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  159. **^** "Mo. Rev. Stat. § 191.777". Moga.mo.gov. August 28, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  160. **^** "Mo. Rev. Stat. § 191.769". Moga.mo.gov. August 28, 2011. Archived from the original on December 10, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  161. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _City of Kansas City v. Carlson_ , 292 S.W.3d 368 (Mo. App. W.D. 2009)[ _dead link_ ]
  162. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ [Scott Lauck, "Legal challenge to KC smoking ban ends", _Kansas City Daily Record_ , October 7, 2009]
  163. **^** "2008 Missouri Senate Bill 1079". Senate.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  164. **^** "2009 Missouri Senate Bill 309". Senate.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  165. **^** "2010 Missouri Senate Bill 904". Senate.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  166. **^** "2010 Missouri House Bill 1766". House.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  167. **^** "2009 Missouri House Joint Resolution 5". House.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  168. **^** "2009 Missouri House Bill 910". House.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  169. **^** "2011 Missouri House Bill 438". House.mo.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  170. **^** "2012 Missouri House Bill 1352". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
  171. **^** "2012 Missouri Senate Bill 664". senate.mo.gov. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
  172. **^** "2012 Missouri House Bill 2103". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 18, 2012.
  173. **^** "2013 Missouri House Bill 523". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 13, 2013.
  174. **^** "2013 Missouri Senate Bill 201". senate.mo.gov. Retrieved May 13, 2013.
  175. **^** "2013 Missouri House Bill 509". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 13, 2013.
  176. **^** "2013 Missouri House Bill 1021". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 13, 2013.
  177. **^** "2014 Missouri House Bill 1716". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 24, 2014.
  178. **^** "2014 Missouri House Bill 1625". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 24, 2014.
  179. **^** "2014 Missouri Senate Bill 572". senate.mo.gov. Retrieved May 24, 2014.
  180. **^** "2014 Missouri House Bill 1067". house.mo.gov. Retrieved May 24, 2013.
  181. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mercatus Center (March 28, 2013). "Freedom in the 50 States-Missouri". _Freedom in the 50 States_. George Mason University. Retrieved March 29, 2013.
  182. **^** "Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, ''State Excise Tax Rates and Rankings'', December 3, 2013" (PDF). Retrieved April 9, 2014.
  183. **^** "A burning issue," _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , November 12, 2006
  184. **^** Tim O'Neil (November 6, 2012). "Tim O'Neil, "Missouri keeps tobacco tax as the lowest in the nation"". Stltoday.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  185. **^** "Smoking  & Tobacco Use State Highlights – Missouri, May 1, 2013". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved April 9, 2014.
  186. **^** The Associated Press (January 13, 2011). "Missouri House rejects smoking ban in Capitol offices, ''Southeast Missourian'', January 13, 2011". Semissourian.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  187. **^** The Associated Press (January 16, 2013). "Missouri House approves rules after debates over smoking, transparency, ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'', January 16, 2013". Stltoday.com. Retrieved January 17, 2013.
  188. **^** Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, _County Level Survey 2007: Secondhand Smoke for Missouri Adults_ , October 1, 2008 Archived December 16, 2008, at the Wayback Machine
  189. **^** "Smoking ban cuts into profits," _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , June 10, 2006
  190. **^** Ballwin (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Section 17-65
  191. **^** Donald Bradley, "In Missouri, many money issues find favor despite tough times", _The Kansas City Star_ , April 8, 2009[ _dead link_ ]
  192. **^** KY3. "Branson going smoke-free". _ky3.com_. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  193. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "City of Branson (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Section 58-126 et seq". Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  194. **^** KY3. "Branson going smoke-free". _ky3.com_. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  195. **^** "Margaret Gillerman, "Brentwood passes smoking ban", ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'', August 17, 2010". Stltoday.com. August 17, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  196. **^** Phil Sutin, "Clayton imposes smoking ban", _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , July 15, 2009 Archived July 16, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
  197. **^** Catherine Stortz Ripley, "City Council passes smoking ban", _Chillicothe Constitution-Tribune_ , May 15, 2007
  198. **^** Chillicothe (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Section 18-93
  199. **^** "Smoking ban passes," _Columbia Missourian_ , October 10, 2006
  200. **^** "Columbia (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Article IX" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  201. **^** "Creve Coeur passes smoking ban, KSDK-TV, November 9, 2010". Ksdk.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  202. **^** Tallan, Erika. "Smoking ban in Excelsior Springs takes effect on the Fourth, KCTV-5 News (July 2, 2013)". Kctv5.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  203. **^** "City of Excelsior Springs (Mo.) Ordinance No. 13-05-01" (PDF). Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  204. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ben Yarnell, "Smoking bans approved in Jefferson City, Fulton," ''Jefferson City News-Tribune'', November 3, 2010". Newstribune.com. November 3, 2010. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  205. **^** "Grandview (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Section 17-47". Library.municode.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  206. **^** Danny Henley, "Smoke-free proposal passes in Hannibal" _Hannibal Courier-Post_ , April 3, 2012
  207. **^** https://www.como.gov/Documents/article-ix-smoking.pdf
  208. **^** "Proponents postpone petition to ban smoking," _The Kansas City Star_ , November 8, 2006
  209. **^** Independence (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Article 2
  210. **^** Lynn Horsely, "KC will go smoke-free", _The Kansas City Star_ , April 8, 2008
  211. **^** Kansas City (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 34, Article XII
  212. **^** Lynn Horsely, "KC's smoking ban delayed", _The Kansas City Star_ , June 4, 2008
  213. **^** Lynn Horsely, "KC smoking ban effective today for bars, restaurants, tobacco stores," _The Kansas City Star_ , June 21, 2008
  214. **^** "Smoking ban begins Oct. 1".
  215. **^** "Steve Patton, "City Council votes yes on smoking ban," ''Daily Dunklin Democrat'' (April 16, 2014)". dddnews.com. Retrieved April 17, 2014.
  216. **^** "Smoking ban passes," _Truman State University Index_ , April 5, 2007
  217. **^** Kirksville (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article V
  218. **^** "City of Kirkwood Proposition 1 (2009)". Archived from the original on July 18, 2009. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  219. **^** Lake St. Louis (Mo.) Bill No. 3002 (2009) [ _dead link_ ]
  220. **^** Mark Schlinkmann, "Lake Saint Louis approves smoking ban", _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , March 15, 2010[ _dead link_ ]
  221. **^** Mark Schlinkmann, "Mayor Mike Potter signs Lake Saint Louis smoking ban; takes effect in six months," _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , March 31, 2010
  222. **^** "Lee's Summit Bans Smoking," _The Kansas City Star_ , August 11, 2006
  223. **^** Lee's Summit Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Article X
  224. **^** "Liberty (Mo.) Question 1 (2009)". Smokefreeliberty.web.officelive.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  225. **^** Brown, Tony (August 10, 2010). "Council passes workplace smoke ban, ''Maryville Daily Forum'', August 10, 2010". Maryvilledailyforum.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  226. **^** "North Kansas City approves smoking ban", _The Kansas City Star_ , June 11, 2008
  227. **^** North Kansas City (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Title 8, Article II
  228. **^** "Tobacco House exempted from NKC smoking ban," _The Kansas City Star_ , January 16, 2009
  229. **^** http://nevadamo.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/ord_2017-033_amend-chapter-42_smoking.pdf
  230. **^** Castile, Raymond (April 5, 2011). "O'Fallon to be smoke free, ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'', April 5, 2011". Stltoday.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  231. **^** "O'Fallon (Mo.) Smoke Free Air Act" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  232. **^** "Council OKs smoke ban," _The Rolla Daily News_ , July 6, 2011
  233. **^** "Emily Jarrett, "City council votes to snuff out smoking in bars, restaurants," ''Sedalia Democrat'' (June 17, 2013)". Sedaliademocrat.com. January 31, 2013. Archived from the original on January 2, 2014. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  234. **^** "Smoking ban passes in close vote". _News-Press & Gazette Company_. April 8, 2014. Retrieved April 8, 2014.
  235. **^** City of St. Joseph Special Ordinance No. 1453-10
  236. **^** "City of St. Louis (Mo.) Board Bill #46FS (2009)" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  237. **^** David Hunn (September 15, 2012). "St. Louis health director drops smoking charges against Missouri Athletic Club". Retrieved September 24, 2012.
  238. **^** "Smoking, alcohol bans pass," _Springfield News-Leader_ , April 5, 2011 Archived November 17, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
  239. **^** "Springfield (Mo.) Ordinance No. 5927" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 5, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  240. **^** "Amos Bridges, "City Council approves amendments to smoking ban," ''Springfield News-Leader'' (May 8, 2012)". News-leader.com. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  241. **^** Warrensburg (Mo.) Ordinance No. 4510 [ _dead link_ ]
  242. **^** Pruneau, Ed (January 26, 2013). "Ed Pruneau, "Council Adopts Smoke-Free Law; Takes Effect April 15," ''Washington (Mo.) Missourian'' (Jan. 26, 2013)". Emissourian.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  243. **^** "Smoking or non?", _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , July 14, 2004
  244. **^** Arnold (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Article XI
  245. **^** "It's approved!", _The Blue Springs Examiner_ , February 5, 2008
  246. **^** Blue Springs (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Section 245.280
  247. **^** "City of Gladstone (Mo.) Ordinance No. 3.208" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 6, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  248. **^** "Gladstone council passes smoking restrictions", _The Kansas City Star_ , February 24, 2009
  249. **^** "Hazelwood (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Section 215.555". Z2codes.sullivanpublications.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  250. **^** "Nixa passes toughest smoking ban in state," _Drury University Mirror_ , March 12, 2007
  251. **^** "Microsoft Word - Chapter CONTENTS.doc" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  252. **^** "Larry Seward, ''Parkville Passes Smoking Ban'', KSHB-TV April 8, 2009". Nbcactionnews.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  253. **^** Parkville (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 206 [ _dead link_ ]
  254. **^** Raymore (Mo.) Code of Ordinances, Chapter 270
  255. **^** "St. Louis County Code Chapter 605". Library3.municode.com. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  256. **^** Moyers, Scott (April 6, 2011). "Scott Moyers, "Cape voters reject public smoking ban," ''The Southeast Missourian'' (April 5, 2011)". Semissourian.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  257. **^** Susan Redden, "Carthage committee debates, tables proposed smoking ban", _Joplin (Mo.) Globe_ , February 3, 2009
  258. **^** "Joplin City Council rejects proposed smoking ban", KSPR-TV, October 19, 2010 [ _dead link_ ]
  259. **^** "AGENDA" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 25, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  260. **^** Brian Burnes, "Raytown board rejects proposed smoking law", _The Kansas City Star_ , September 8, 2009[ _dead link_ ]
  261. **^** "Jeff Salem, "Riverside postpones smoking ban discussion indefinitely," ''The Platte County (Mo.) Sun Gazette'', June 22, 2009". Plattesungazette.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  262. **^** Ashley Vasquez, "Smoking ban talk ends," _The Smithville Herald_ , December 26, 2007
  263. **^** Mark Schlinkmann, "St. Charles election on smoking appears unlikely", _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_ , June 1, 2008
  264. **^** Levin, Sam (July 11, 2013). "Sam Levin, "St. Charles City Backs Off Smoking Ban Proposal, Considers Mandatory Signage," ''Riverfront Times'' (July 11, 2013)". Blogs.riverfronttimes.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2014. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  265. **^** Schlinkmann, Mark (July 9, 2013). "Mark Schlinkmann, "City-imposed smoking ban appears dead in St. Charles," ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'' (July 9, 2013)". Stltoday.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  266. **^** Korando, Russell (June 14, 2011). "Russel Korando, "Smoking ban proposal blocked from St. Charles County ballot," ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'' (June 14, 2011)". Stltoday.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  267. **^** Korando, Russell (November 21, 2011). "Russell Korando, "St. Charles County Council rejects smoke-free bill," ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'' (November 30, 2011)". Stltoday.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  268. **^** Korando, Russell (September 17, 2012). "Russell Korando, "Smoking ban vote snuffed out in St. Charles County," ''St. Louis Post-Dispatch'' (September 17, 2012)". Stltoday.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  269. **^** Bryan, Andra (April 12, 2011). "Andra Bryan Stefanoni, "Webb City Council rejects smoking ban," ''The Joplin Globe'', April 12, 2011". Joplinglobe.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  270. **^** "FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT 6:00 P" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 28, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  271. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Mont. Code Ann. § 50-40-104". Archived from the original on September 29, 2009. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  272. **^** "§ 50-40-103". Archived from the original on November 18, 2003. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  273. **^** "Mont. Code Ann. § 50-40-120". Archived from the original on September 29, 2009. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
  274. **^** "N.R.S. § 71-5729". Uniweb.legislature.ne.gov. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  275. **^** "N.R.S. § 71-5730". Uniweb.legislature.ne.gov. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  276. **^** Associated Press, "Gov. signs cigar-bar exemption to Neb. smoking ban ", KCAU-TV Sioux City, Iowa, April 22, 2009]
  277. **^** "N.R.S. § 71-5717". Uniweb.legislature.ne.gov. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  278. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "NRS 202.2483". Leg.state.nv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  279. **^** "N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 155:66". Gencourt.state.nh.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  280. **^** "N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 155:67". Gencourt.state.nh.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  281. **^** "N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 155:68". Gencourt.state.nh.us. January 1, 1991. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  282. **^** "N.H. General Court, 829 A.2d 1089 (N.H. 2003)". Gencourt.state.nh.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  283. **^** "N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 155:67". Gencourt.state.nh.us. January 1, 1991. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  284. **^** "JTR Colebrook, Inc. v. Town of Colebrook, 829 A.2d 1089 (N.H. 2003)". Courts.state.nh.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  285. **^** "N.J. Stat. § 26:3D-58". Lis.njleg.state.nj.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.[ _permanent dead link_ ]
  286. **^** "N.J. Stat. § 26:3D-59 through 61". Lis.njleg.state.nj.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.[ _permanent dead link_ ]
  287. **^** "N.J. Stat. § 26:3D-63". Lis.njleg.state.nj.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.[ _permanent dead link_ ]
  288. **^** https://6abc.com/society/smoking-ban-at-nj-public-beaches-parks-in-effect/5088989/
  289. **^** "NJDOH - Smoke-free Air Act Initiative". State.nj.us. Archived from the original on January 26, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  290. **^** "Atlantic City Suspends Casino Smoking Ban". _The New York Times_. Associated Press. October 27, 2008. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  291. **^** "Pequannock council reintroduces revamped smoking ban : page all". NorthJersey.com. July 18, 2011. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  292. **^** N.M. Stat. Ann. § 24-16-4
  293. **^** N.M. Stat. Ann. § 24-16-13
  294. **^** N.M. Stat. Ann. § 24-16-12
  295. **^** N.M. Stat. Ann. § 24-16-18
  296. **^** N.M. Stat. Ann. § 24-16-20
  297. **^** "UNM.edu". UNM.edu. August 1, 2009. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  298. **^** "New York City Smoke-Free Air Act of 2002" (PDF). nyc.gov. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 7, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  299. **^** N.Y. Pub. Health Law § 1399-O
  300. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ N.Y. Pub. Health Law § 1399-Q
  301. **^** N.Y. Pub. Health Law § 1399-R
  302. **^** "City of Albany, NY Public Grounds Designated as Parks; Government and Care of Parks and Parkways". _ecode360.com_. Retrieved January 2, 2016.
  303. **^** "Smoking ban enforced on Great Neck sidewalks | 7online.com". Abclocal.go.com. January 6, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  304. **^** "Shops in New York told not to sell tobacco to under-21s". _New York City News.Net_. Retrieved May 19, 2014.
  305. **^** Ossad, Jordana (May 23, 2011). "New York City outdoor smoking ban begins. Archived". CNN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  306. **^** 2002 New York City Local Law No. 47
  307. **^** "Smoke-Free Air Act of 2002 : Tobacco Control : NYC DOHMH". Nyc.gov. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  308. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "North Carolina Session Law 2009-27" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  309. **^** "Gas Tax, Prison Smoking Ban Among New State Laws, WRAL-TV, January 1, 2006". Wral.com. January 1, 2006. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  310. **^** "Triangle Hospitals Ban Tobacco Use, WRAL-TV, July 3, 2007". Wral.com. July 3, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  311. **^** "Stay Healthy, UNC Department of Environment, Health  & Safety". Ehs.unc.edu. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  312. **^** "WAYNESVILLE, N.C. SMOKING BAN PASSES".
  313. **^** Van, Mara (November 8, 2012). "Mara Van Ells, "Smoking ban to change bar culture," ''Bismarck Tribune'' (November 8, 2012)". Bismarcktribune.com. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  314. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "North Dakota Initiative Measure 4 (2012)" (PDF). Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  315. **^** DakotaStudent.com: Smoking ban shows positive results [ _dead link_ ]
  316. **^** "NMI". No-smoke.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  317. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "Ohio Rev. Code Chapter 3794, "Smoking Ban "". Codes.ohio.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  318. **^** "Supreme Court of Ohio Case Summaries". Supremecourt.ohio.gov. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  319. **^** "Council Legislation 2008". Northroyalton.org. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  320. **^** "Cityofberlin.com" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  321. **^** Ok. Stat. Ann. Section 21-1247
  322. **^** Ok. Stat. Ann. Section 63-1-1523, _et seq._
  323. **^** Ok. Stat. Ann. Section 63-1-1527
  324. **^** "Mick Hinton, "Committee waters down smoking bill", ''Tulsa World'', February 19, 2009". Tulsaworld.com. February 19, 2009. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  325. **^** "Oklahoma House Bill 1040 (2009) – status". Webserver1.lsb.state.ok.us. Archived from the original on November 11, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  326. **^** Ore. Rev. Stat. § 433.845 Archived March 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  327. **^** Ore. Rev. Stat. § 433.835 Archived March 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  328. **^** Ore. Rev. Stat. § 433.850 Archived March 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  329. **^** Ore. Rev. Stat. § 433.870 Archived March 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  330. **^** "Oregon Restaurant Ass'n v. City of Corvallis, 166 Ore. App. 506, 999 P.2d 518 (2000)". Publications.ojd.state.or.us. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  331. **^** "2008 Pennsylvania Senate Bill 246". Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  332. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Act of Jun. 13, 2008, P.L. 182, No. 27 Cl. 35 – CLEAN INDOOR AIR ACT – ENACTMENT". Retrieved September 12, 2012.
  333. **^** "Philadelphia Smoking Ban". Smokefreephilly.org. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  334. **^** "Nutter to Ban Smoking in Philly Parks". _NBC 10 Philadelphia_. Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  335. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ward, Paula Reed; Anita Srikameswaran (May 22, 2007). "County's smoking ban in ashes". _Pittsburgh Post-Gazette_. Retrieved September 9, 2012.
  336. **^** NextPage – LivePublish (December 19, 2002). "P.R. Laws ch. 62 § 892". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  337. **^** NextPage – LivePublish (December 19, 2002). "P.R. Laws ch. 62 § 894". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  338. **^** "R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-20.10-3". Rilin.state.ri.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  339. **^** "R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-20.10-4". Rilin.state.ri.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  340. **^** "R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-20.10-6". Rilin.state.ri.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  341. **^** "R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-20.10–6.1". Rilin.state.ri.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  342. **^** "R.I. Gen. Laws § 23-20.10–13". Rilin.state.ri.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  343. **^** "S.C. Code § 44-95-20". Scstatehouse.gov. December 31, 1990. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  344. **^** "S.C. Code § 44-95-30". Scstatehouse.gov. December 31, 1990. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  345. **^** "Foothills Brewing Concern, Inc. v. City of Greenville, 660 S.E.2d 264 (S.C. 2008)". Judicial.state.sc.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  346. **^** "Beachfront Entertainment, Inc. v. Town of Sullivan's Island, 666 S.E.2d 912 (S.C. 2008)". Sccourts.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  347. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ "Ordinance Implementation, South Carolina Tobacco Collaborative". Sctobacco.org. Archived from the original on September 9, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  348. **^** "American Nonsmokers' Rights Foundation, "Bill Tracking Summary", May 29, 2009". Protectlocalcontrol.org. November 18, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  349. **^** "Beaufort passes smoking ban," _The Beaufort Gazette_ , May 27, 2008[ _dead link_ ]
  350. **^** "Florence bans smoking at most indoor businesses". Southcarolinaradionetwork.com. May 10, 2011. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  351. **^** "North Myrtle Beach smoking ban goes into effect : News". CarolinaLive.com. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  352. **^** http://www.cityofspartanburg.org/index.cfm?PageID=462 &ParentPageID=32
  353. **^** Jonathan Carlson (May 9, 2011). "Spartanburg Passes Smoking Ban-Begins Sept. 1". WSPA. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  354. **^** "No public smoking ban for North Charleston, ''The Charleston Post  & Courier'', May 15, 2008". Charleston.net. May 16, 2013. Archived from the original on May 22, 2008. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
  355. **^** "Folly Beach rejects smoking ban". Charleston.thedigitel.com. May 28, 2008. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  356. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _2009 South Dakota H.B. 1240_ (PDF), South Dakota Tobacco-Free Kids Network, 2010, archived from the original (PDF) on July 28, 2011, retrieved November 24, 2010
  357. **^** Associated Press: "Governor signs ban on smoking in bars, casinos", _Mitchell (S.D.) Daily Republic_ , March 19, 2009[ _dead link_ ]
  358. **^** "Chet Brokaw, "Petitions filed to put SD smoking ban to vote," ''Mitchell (S.D.) Daily Republic'', June 22, 2009". Mitchellrepublic.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  359. **^** Steve Young, "Petitions get OK in smoking fight", _Sioux Falls Argus Leader_ , June 25, 2009[ _dead link_ ]
  360. **^** Smoking Ban Clears Big Hurdle [ _dead link_ ]
  361. **^** "Voters Will Decide On Smoking Ban". Keloland TV. November 13, 2009. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2010.
  362. **^** "T.C.A. § 39-17-1803". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  363. **^** "T.C.A. § 39-17-1803". Michie.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  364. **^** "Protectlocalcontrol.org". Protectlocalcontrol.org. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  365. **^** "Tex. Educ. Code § 38.006". Statutes.legis.state.tx.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  366. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Tex. Penal Code § 48.01". Statutes.legis.state.tx.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  367. **^** "Google Scholar". Retrieved December 25, 2015.
  368. **^** Corrie MacLaggan (April 15, 2009). "Outlook hazy for statewide smoking ban proposal". Statesman.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  369. **^** Corrie MacLaggan (May 8, 2007). "Corrie MacLaggan, "Weak smoking ban passes in House", ''Austin American-Statesman'', May 8, 2007". Statesman.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  370. **^** Statewide smoking ban in Texas, has failed by Billy Loftin (May 19, 2009). "Billy Loftin, "Statewide smoking ban in Texas has failed", KVII-TV Amarillo, May 19, 2009". Connectamarillo.com. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  371. **^** _Roark & Hardee L.P. v. City of Austin_, Case No. A-05-CA-837-SS (W.D.Tex. 2006)
  372. **^** "Roark  & Hardee LP v. City of Austin, 522 F.3d 533 (5th Cir. 2008)" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  373. **^** "College Station City Ordinance, Section 9" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 21, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  374. **^** http://www.fox4news.com/news/fort-worth-city-council-approves-smoking-ban-for-bars-bingo-halls
  375. **^** "City of Frisco, Texas" (PDF). Ci.fisco.tx.us. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 17, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  376. **^** "Houston, Texas" (PDF). houstontx.gov. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
  377. **^** "Fort Worth smoking ban takes effect Tuesday; McKinney offers grace period", _The Dallas Morning News_ , December 31, 2007 Archived January 16, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
  378. **^** "Missouri City smoking ban goes into effect today | abc13.com". Abclocal.go.com. October 1, 2010. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  379. **^** Collier, Kiah. "2010 ELECTION: San Angelo bans smoking, drops sunset on sales tax, ''San Angelo Standard-Times'', November 3, 2010". Gosanangelo.com. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  380. **^** "Council adopts tough smoking rules", _San Antonio Express-News_ , August 19, 2010[ _dead link_ ]
  381. **^** "States and Municipalities with Laws Regulating Use of Electronic Cigarettes" (PDF).
  382. **^** White, Ian (September 24, 2010). "Ian White, "Council amends smoking rules," ''Galveston Daily News'', September 24, 2010". Galvestondailynews.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  383. **^** "Smoking ban debate generating lots of heat, ''The Monitor'', November 13, 2005". Smokersclubinc.com. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  384. **^** "Humble passes near-blanket smoking ban".
  385. **^** "Kilgore Passes Smoking Ban – KYTX CBS 19 Tyler Longview News Weather Sports". Cbs19.tv. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
  386. **^** "Editorial: Put out the fire, ''Amarillo Globe-News'', May 11, 2008". Amarillo.com. May 11, 2008. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  387. **^** JOY BLACKBURN (Daily News Staff) (February 10, 2011). "Smoking ban enforcement begins today, ''Virgin Islands Daily News'', February 10, 2011". Virginislandsdailynews.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  388. **^** "U.C.A. 1953 § 26-38-2.6". Utah State. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
  389. **^** "U.C.A. 1953 § 26-38-3". Utah State. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  390. **^** "U.C.A. 1953 § 26-38-3.5". Utah State. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  391. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "U.C.A. 1953 § 26-38-6". Utah State. Archived from the original on September 28, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
  392. **^** "Utah County Board of Health Regulation on Smoking in Outdoor Public Places" (PDF). Utah County Health Department. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
  393. **^** "Rider Rules". Utah Transit Authority. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
  394. **^** "Ver. Stat. tit. 28 § 1742". Leg.state.vt.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  395. **^** "Ver. Stat. tit. 28 § 1743". Leg.state.vt.us. September 1, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  396. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Daniel Barlow, "Workplace smoking ban starts July 1", ''The Barre Montpelier Times Argus'', May 30, 2009". Timesargus.com. May 30, 2009. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  397. **^** "Ver. Stat. tit. 28 § 1428". Leg.state.vt.us. July 1, 1988. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  398. **^** "Ver. Stat. tit. 28 § 1746". Leg.state.vt.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  399. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Va. Senate Bill 1105 (2009)". Leg1.state.va.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  400. **^** Davis, Chelyen. "Chelyen Davis, "House, Senate OK smoke ban," ''The Fredericksburg (Va.) Free Lance-Star'', February 20, 2009". Fredericksburg.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  401. **^** Banning Smoking in State Offices and Vehicles (Virginia Executive Order) Archived October 29, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
  402. **^** Virginia bans smoking in cars with children eight or younger
  403. **^** Minium, Harry (March 26, 2008). "Harry Minium, "Norfolk council reverses itself on smoking ban", ''The Virginian-Pilot'', March 26, 2008". Hamptonroads.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  404. **^** "Wash. Rev. Code § 70.160.030". Apps.leg.wa.gov. November 8, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  405. **^** "Wash. Rev. Code § 70.160.075". Apps.leg.wa.gov. November 8, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  406. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Wash. Rev. Code § 70.160.060". Apps.leg.wa.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  407. **^** "Wash. Rev. Code § 70.160.020". Apps.leg.wa.gov. November 8, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  408. **^** "Wash. Rev. Code § 70.160.080". Apps.leg.wa.gov. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  409. **^** "W. Va. Code § 8-27-10a (1985)". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  410. **^** "W. Va. Code § § 16-9A-4 (1987)". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  411. **^** "W. Va. Code § 21-3-8 (1919)". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  412. **^** "W. Va. Code § 22A-2- 30 (1985)". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  413. **^** "W. Va. Code § 22A-2-53 (1985)". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  414. **^** "W. Va. Code § 22A-2-53c (1994)". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  415. **^** "W. Va. Code § 47-20-28a". Legis.state.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  416. **^** 64 W.Va. C.S.R. §14, 8.12.3
  417. **^** "Found. for Indep. Living, Inc. v. Cabell-Huntington Bd. of Health, 591 S.E.2d 744 (W.V. 2003)". State.wv.us. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  418. **^** smoke-free", _The Times West Virginian_ , April 6, 2008
  419. **^** Alison Knezevich, "Putnam reverses smoking ban", _West Virginia Gazette_ , August 22, 2007
  420. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "2009 Wisconsin Senate Bill 181" (PDF). Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  421. **^** "Statewide smoking ban picks up steam, ''Green Bay Press Gazette'', April 9, 2006". Smokersclubinc.com. March 5, 2006. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  422. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 30-2-602". Michie.lexisnexis.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  423. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 30-2-604". Michie.lexisnexis.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  424. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 30-3-303". Michie.lexisnexis.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  425. **^** NextPage – LivePublish. "Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 30-3-304". Michie.lexisnexis.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  426. **^** BEN NEARY Associated Press writer (February 16, 2009). "Ben Neary, "Legislature shoveling through bills", ''Casper Tribune'', February 16, 2009". Trib.com. Retrieved December 2, 2011.
  427. **^** "Light up: Casper repeals smoking ban for bars," Associated Press (June 22, 2013)
  428. **^** "Voters approve full smoking ban in Casper". _Casper Star Tribune_. Heather Richards and Brendan Meyer. Retrieved August 10, 2016.
  429. **^** "Rock Springs adopts partial smoking ban, ''AP'', November 22, 2007". Tobacco.org. November 22, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2011.

## External links[edit]

**smoking law** at Wikipedia's sister projects

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/27px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png) Definitions from Wiktionary
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media from Wikimedia Commons
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-logo.svg/27px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png)News from Wikinews
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/23px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations from Wikiquote
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Texts from Wikisource
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikibooks-logo.svg/27px-Wikibooks-logo.svg.png)Textbooks from Wikibooks
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1b/Wikiversity-logo-en.svg/27px-Wikiversity-logo-en.svg.png)Resources from Wikiversity

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Smoking
ban**_.  
\---|---

  * "State Smoke-Free Indoor Air Fact Sheet", U.S. Centers for Disease Control, December 31, 2008
  * "Smokefree Lists, Maps, and Data", Americans for Nonsmokers' Rights
  * State-Specific No Smoking Sign Regulations
  * State Smoking Laws
  * "Short Chronological History of Cigarette"
  * "No Smoking Venues in Louisiana"

  * v

  * t
  * e

United States state-related lists

* * *

List of states and territories of the United States

Demographics|

  * Educational attainment
  * Irreligion
  * Largest cities by population
  * Most popular given names
  * Most populous counties
  * Populated places
  * Population
    * Density
    * Growth rate
    * Birth and death rates
    * Historical
    * African American
    * Amish
    * Asian
    * Pacific Islander
    * Hispanic and Latino
    * Spanish-speaking
  * Religiosity

Economy|

  * Billionaires
  * Budgets
  * Companies
  * Federal tax revenue
  * Federal taxation and spending
  * Gross domestic product
    * Growth rate
    * Per capita
  * Income
    * Inequality
  * Minimum wages
  * Poverty rates
  * Sales taxes
  * Sovereign wealth funds
  * State income taxes
  * Unemployment rates
  * Union affiliation
  * Vehicles per capita

Environment|

  * Carbon dioxide emissions
  * Botanical gardens
  * Parks
  * National Wildlife Refuges
  * Nature centers
  * Renewable energy
  * Superfund sites
  * Wilderness areas

Geography|

  * Area
  * Bays
  * Beaches
  * Coastline
  * Elevation
  * Extreme points
  * Forest
  * Geographic centers
  * Mountains
  * Regions
  * Volcanoes

Government|

  * Agriculture commissioners
  * Attorneys general
  * Capitals
  * Capitol buildings
  * Comparison
  * Counties
    * Alphabetical
    * List
  * State legislators
  * Governors
    * Lieutenant governors
  * Legislatures
  * Libraries and archives
  * Official languages
  * Poets laureate
  * Political divisions
  * State auditors
  * State secretaries of state
  * State speakers
  * State superintendents of education
  * State supreme courts
  * State treasurers
  * Statewide elected executive officials

Health|

  * Fertility rates
  * Hospitals
  * Human Development Index
    * American Human Development Index
  * Life expectancy
  * Obesity rates

History|

  * Date of statehood
  * Name etymologies
  * Historical societies
  * Museums
  * National Historic Landmarks
  * National Register of Historic Places
  * State partitions
  * Historic regions

Law|

  * Abortion
  * Age of consent
  * Alcohol
    * Dry communities
  * Alford plea
  * Cell phone use while driving
  * Constitutions
  * Firearms
    * Homicide
  * Law enforcement agencies
  * Legality of cannabis
  * Peace Index
  * Prisons
    * Incarceration rate
  * Same-sex unions
    * Former constitutional bans
    * Marriage law
  * Seat belt laws
  * Self-representation
  * Smoking bans
  * Speed limits (by jurisdiction)
  * Statutory codes

Miscellaneous|

  * Abbreviations
  * Casinos
  * Demonyms
  * Fictional states
  * Flags
  * Hotels
  * Insignia
  * License plates
  * Malls
  * Numbered highways
  * Quarters 
    * 50 states
    * District of Columbia and territories
    * America the Beautiful Quarters
  * Symbols
  * Coats of arms
  * Tallest buildings
  * Time zones

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) Commons
  * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portals

  * v

  * t
  * e

Smoking

* * *

Country and region|

| Africa|

  * Egypt
  * Nigeria

\---|---  
Asia-Pacific|

  * Afghanistan
  * East Timor
  * Hong Kong
  * India
  * Indonesia
  * Iran
  * Iraq
  * Japan
  * Korea 
    * North
    * South
  * Macau
  * Mainland China
  * Malaysia
  * New Zealand
    * Tokelau
  * Pakistan
  * Philippines
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Singapore
  * Syria
  * Taiwan
  * Vietnam

Eastern Europe|

  * Albania
  * Hungary
  * Latvia

Latin America|

  * Argentina
  * Brazil
  * Colombia
  * Ecuador
  * Uruguay

Western Europe  
and North America|

  * Canada
  * Finland
  * France
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Norway
  * Sweden
  * Turkey
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Religion|

  * Smoking in Jewish law
  * Tobacco fatwa
  * Ceremonial pipe
  * Chanunpa
  * Kinnikinnick
  * Pipe bag

Health|

|

  * Health effects of tobacco (Nicotine poisoning
  * Nicotine withdrawal)
  * Passive smoking
  * Third-hand smoke
  * Prevalence of tobacco use
  * Schizophrenia and smoking
  * Sidestream smoke
  * Smokeless tobacco keratosis
  * Smoker's face
  * Smoker's melanosis
  * Stomatitis nicotina
  * Smoking age
  * Smoking and male infertility
  * Smoking cessation
  * Tobacco-Free Pharmacies
  * Tobacco packaging warning messages
  * WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
  * Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products
  * World No Tobacco Day
  * Youth smoking

* * *

Women and smoking|

  * Breastfeeding difficulties
  * Breast cancer
  * Cervical cancer
  * Menopause
  * Ptosis of the breast
  * Smoking and female infertility
  * Smoking and pregnancy

Smoking ban|

|

  * Inflight smoking
  * List of smoking bans
  * Smoking bans in private vehicles
  * Tobacco-Free College Campuses

* * *

Country and region|

  * Australia
  * England
  * France
  * United States

Other|

  * Chain smoking
  * Cigarette consumption per capita
  * History of smoking
  * Smokeasy
  * Smoking fetishism
  * Smoking pipe
    * tobacco pipe
  * Tobacco advertising
  * Tobacco bowdlerization
  * Tobacco industry
  * Tobacco smoking

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_smoking_bans_in_the_United_States&oldid=900309491"

Categories:

  * Smoking in the United States
  * States of the United States law-related lists
  * Tobacco control
  * United States environment-related lists
  * United States health-related lists

Hidden categories:

  * Pages with reference errors
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Pages with broken reference names
  * Pages with citations lacking titles
  * Pages with citations having bare URLs
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from June 2016
  * Articles with dead external links from October 2017
  * Articles with dead external links from January 2018
  * Articles with permanently dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from December 2011
  * Use mdy dates from May 2018
  * Articles that may be too long from September 2015
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009
  * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010
  * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018
  * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009
  * Commons category link is on Wikidata
  * Commons category link is on Wikidata using P373

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

Add links

  * This page was last edited on 4 June 2019, at 19:59 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

