

Skip to Content

Menu Search

Cancer Helpline 800.227.2345

double-chat-bubble Live Chat

![American Cancer Society](/etc/designs/cancer.org/images/acs-logo.svg)

                
                                      * Latest News
                      * English
                        * Español
                        * More Languages
                

Donate

Donate

                
                                      * Cancer A-Z
                      * Stay Healthy
                      * Treatment & Support
                      * Our Research
                      * Get Involved
                      * Our Partners
                      * About Us
                
                      * News
                

English Español More Languages

Donate

double-chat-bubble Live Chat

Cancer Helpline

800.227.2345

Phone

Search

Search

CategoryCancer A-Z

                
                                      * What Causes Cancer?
                      * Medical Treatments that Might Affect Cancer Risk
                

# Abortion and Breast Cancer Risk

Abortion is an issue that can bring out strong feelings in people. These
feelings are often linked to personal, religious, and political views that may
have little to do with any connection to a disease like cancer.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women (aside from skin cancer), and
it’s the second leading cancer killer in women. Because it can be a deadly
disease, it’s one that many women fear.

Linking these topics creates a great deal of emotion and debate. But
scientific research studies have not found a cause-and-effect relationship
between abortion and breast cancer.

## How might hormone levels affect breast cancer risk?

A woman’s risk for some types of breast cancer is related to levels of certain
hormones in the body. Breast cells normally grow and divide in response to
hormones like estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin. Levels of these hormones
change throughout a woman’s life.

Breast cancer risk can be affected by a number of things that alter these
hormone levels. For example, women who have more menstrual periods over their
lifetime (because their periods start earlier, they go through menopause
later, or they never get pregnant) have a slightly higher risk of breast
cancer. The use of some types of hormones (for birth control or to control the
symptoms of menopause) can also increase breast cancer risk slightly (although
this risk goes down over time after hormone use is stopped). On the other
hand, breastfeeding might lower breast cancer risk slightly.

## Pregnancy and breast cancer risk

Women who have a full-term pregnancy before age 20 have a lower risk of breast
cancer than women who never have a full-term pregnancy or who have their first
full-term pregnancy after the age of 30 or 35. The risk of breast cancer also
goes down as the number of full-term pregnancies goes up. Still, a full-term
pregnancy after age 30 is linked to a higher risk of breast cancer than never
giving birth.

The reasons for these changes in risk are not entirely clear. We do know that
hormone levels typically change a lot during pregnancy. Some of these changes
cause cells in the breast to mature, to help prepare to produce milk for
breastfeeding. This might affect the tendency for these cells to become
cancerous. Pregnancy also decreases a woman’s total number of menstrual
cycles, which also seems to affect breast cancer risk. Still, the reason for
the differences in breast cancer risk based on the woman’s age during her
first full-term pregnancy is not known.

## Does abortion affect hormones during pregnancy?

Concern about a possible link between abortion and breast cancer has been
raised because abortion is thought to interrupt the normal cycle of hormones
during pregnancy. Some believe that this interruption might increase a woman’s
risk of developing breast cancer.

There are different types of abortion:

                
                                      * **Spontaneous abortion** , which most people refer to as a miscarriage, is the loss of a fetus before 5 months (20 weeks) into the pregnancy. It is often caused by problems with the fetus or with the maternal environment in which it is growing.
                      * **Stillborn birth (stillbirth)** is usually considered to be the death of a fetus after 5 months’ gestation while still in the uterus (womb).
                      * **Induced abortion** is a medical procedure done to end a pregnancy. It is what most people think of when they hear “abortion.”
                

All of these have been studied to see what effect they may have on a woman’s
risk of developing breast cancer later in life.

## Research on abortion and breast cancer

Researchers have looked at the possible link between abortion and breast
cancer for many years, but this has been a difficult area to study.

### How is this studied?

The most reliable way to know if something causes cancer would be to do a
randomized study. This means that you would take a large number of people,
expose half of them to the thing that could cause cancer (the possible
carcinogen), and don’t expose the other half to the possible carcinogen.
Whether someone is in the exposed or non-exposed group would be chosen at
random. As long as the 2 groups were similar to start with in terms of risk
factors for cancer, any difference in cancer risk between the 2 groups would
likely be because of being exposed to the possible carcinogen. Of course, it
isn’t practical or ethical to study the effects of many things on cancer risk
with this kind of study. This is especially true for effects of abortion.

Instead, to look at the effects of abortion on cancer risk, we have to use
_observational studies_. These kinds of studies gather information about the
people in them, often by asking questions or looking at medical records. Then
the researchers try to see if certain factors (or exposures) are linked to
certain outcomes. There are different types of observational studies:

In a **case-control study** , a group of people who already have a disease
like cancer (called the _cases_ ) are compared to a group of people who don’t
(called the _controls_ ) to see if there are differences in their past
exposures. Often, this is done by asking the people in the study many
questions about what they did or were exposed to many years ago. This is
called a _retrospective_ design. One problem with retrospective studies is
that it can be hard to remember what you did long ago. This might mean that
the study could miss a link. But a bigger problem with this kind of study is
that people with a disease like cancer often think very hard about what they
may have done in the past that could have contributed to their getting cancer.
They are more likely to remember things that the healthy people don’t. They
are also more likely to tell the researchers about things that they would
otherwise feel was too personal or embarrassing to mention – like abortion.
This is called _recall bias_ , and it can lead to a study finding links that
may not really exist.

A **cohort study** is another kind of observational study, but it is less
prone to recall bias. In this type of study, researchers gather baseline
information about a group of people who don’t have the disease being studied
(like breast cancer). These people are then watched over time, often being
asked every so often about possible risk factors and exposures. After a period
of time, the researchers look to see who got the disease and who didn’t. They
can see if the people who got the disease were more likely to have had a
certain exposure. Since none of the people had the disease (like cancer) at
the start of the study, there is no chance that having the disease would have
influenced their memory or their willingness to report things in their past
(like abortion). Because cohort studies follow people forward in time, they
are called _prospective_ studies. Researchers generally consider the
conclusions from cohort studies to be stronger than those from case-control
studies.

Some case control studies try to get past recall bias by using information
that was collected before the person had cancer. They may use medical records
or birth certificate registry information, for example. Because these studies
use information collected before the cancer, they are also considered
prospective studies.

### What do the studies show?

The results of studies looking at the possible link between breast cancer and
induced abortion often differ depending on how the study was done. Cohort
studies and studies that used records to determine the history of abortions
have not found an increased risk. Some case-control studies, however, have
found an increase in risk.

### Cohort and other prospective studies

The largest, and probably the most reliable, study on this topic was done
during the 1990s in Denmark, a country with very detailed medical records on
all its citizens. In this study, all Danish women born between 1935 and 1978
(a total of 1.5 million women) were linked with the National Registry of
Induced Abortions and with the Danish Cancer Registry. All of the information
about their abortions and their breast cancer came from registries – it was
very complete and was not influenced by recall bias.

After adjusting for known breast cancer risk factors, the researchers found
that induced abortion(s) had no overall effect on the risk of breast cancer.
The size of this study and the manner in which it was done provide good
evidence that induced abortion does not affect a woman’s risk of developing
breast cancer.

Another large cohort study was reported on by Harvard researchers in 2007.
This study included more than 100,000 women who were between the ages of 29
and 46 at the start of the study in 1993. These women were followed until
2003. Because they were asked about childbirths and abortions at the start of
the study, recall bias was unlikely to be a problem. After adjusting for known
breast cancer risk factors, the researchers found no link between either
spontaneous or induced abortions and breast cancer.

The California Teachers Study also reported on more than 100,000 women in
2008. Researchers had asked the women in 1995 about past induced and
spontaneous abortions. There was no difference in breast cancer risk between
the group who had either spontaneous or induced abortions and those who had
not had an abortion.

A European cohort study that published findings in 2006 followed over 260,000
women from 9 countries over an average of more than 6 years. This study found
no link between induced abortion and breast cancer risk.

A French cohort study of more than 100,000 women, published in 2003, also
found no link between induced abortion and breast cancer risk.

A 2013 Danish study of over 25,000 women who had at least one full-term
pregnancy found no link between induced abortion and breast cancer risk over
12 years of follow-up.

Other cohort studies have looked specifically at the possible link between
abortion and breast cancer in African-American women and in women who are at
increased risk of breast cancer because they have mutations in the _BRCA_
genes. These studies also did not find a link.

### Retrospective case-control studies

In 2004, the Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer, based
out of Oxford University in England, put together the results of many studies
that looked at abortion and breast cancer risk. It looked at both cohort and
case-control studies. When the studies that gathered information
retrospectively (case-control studies) were looked at together, there were
about 39,000 women with breast cancer (the cases) that were compared to about
48,000 women who hadn’t had breast cancer (the controls). They found about an
11% increased risk of breast cancer in women who reported having an induced
abortion.

Some other retrospective studies published since then have also found an
increased risk, including a case-control study of about 1,300 women from China
(published in 2012) and a case-control study of 300 women in Iran (published
in 2011).

But some recent case-control studies have not found a link, including a study
of about 350 women from Serbia (published in 2013). In fact, women in this
study had a lower risk of breast cancer.

## Why don’t all of the studies agree?

Induced abortion brings up many strong feelings in people, so it is often hard
to study its long-term effects.

Before 1973, induced abortions were illegal in much of the United States. So
when researchers asked a woman about past pregnancies, she may not have felt
comfortable saying that she had an abortion. Even though abortion is now
legal, it is still a very personal, private matter that many women do not like
to talk about. This means that many women might not report having an abortion
if asked for a study. In contrast, women with breast cancer are more likely to
accurately report their reproductive histories, including a history of having
an abortion. This recall bias (which was discussed earlier) could lead to
retrospective studies finding links that aren’t found in prospective studies.
Still, not everyone agrees that this is the reason that the different types of
studies conflict.

In general, though, when prospective and retrospective studies conflict,
experts generally accept the results of the prospective studies over the
retrospective studies.

## What do the experts say?

Several groups of experts have looked at the available studies on the possible
link between abortion and breast cancer.

In 2003, the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) held a workshop of more than
100 of the world’s leading experts who study pregnancy and breast cancer risk.
The experts reviewed human and animal studies that looked at the link between
pregnancy and breast cancer risk, including studies of induced and spontaneous
abortions. Some of their findings were:

                
                                      * Breast cancer risk is increased for a short time after a full-term pregnancy (that is, a pregnancy that results in the birth of a living child).
                      * Induced abortion is not linked to an increase in breast cancer risk.
                      * Spontaneous abortion is not linked to an increase in breast cancer risk.
                

The level of scientific evidence for these findings was considered to be “well
established” (the highest level).

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Committee on
Gynecologic Practice also reviewed the available evidence in 2003 and again in
2009. In 2009, the Committee said, “Early studies of the relationship between
prior induced abortion and breast cancer risk were methodologically flawed.
More rigorous recent studies demonstrate no causal relationship between
induced abortion and a subsequent increase in breast cancer risk.”

In 2004, the Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer, based
out of Oxford University in England, put together the results from 53 separate
studies done in 16 different countries. These studies included about 83,000
women with breast cancer (44,000 in prospective studies and 39,000 in
retrospective studies). Although the results of the retrospective studies
showed a small increase in risk, the prospective studies found a small
decrease in risk. After combining and reviewing the results from all of these
studies, the researchers concluded that “the totality of worldwide
epidemiological evidence indicates that pregnancies ending as either
spontaneous or induced abortions do not have adverse effects on women’s
subsequent risk of developing breast cancer.” These experts did not find that
abortions (either induced or spontaneous) cause a higher breast cancer risk.

## Conclusion

The topic of abortion and breast cancer highlights many of the most
challenging aspects of studies of people and how those studies do or do not
translate into public health guidelines. The issue of abortion generates
passionate viewpoints in many people. Breast cancer is the most common cancer
in women aside from skin cancer; and breast cancer is the second leading
cancer killer in women. Still, the public is not well-served by false alarms.
At this time, the scientific evidence does not support the notion that
abortion of any kind raises the risk of breast cancer or any other type of
cancer.

                
                                      * Written by
                      * References
                

![](/cancer-control-reference-components/footnote-

elements/_jcr_content/par/footnote_tabs/written_by/footnote_author_copy/image.img.png/1550074548031.png)

The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team

Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep
knowledge of cancer care as well as journalists, editors, and translators with
extensive experience in medical writing.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Committee on
Gynecologic Practice. ACOG Committee Opinion. No. 434: Induced Abortion and
Breast Cancer Risk. _Obstet Gynecol_. 2009;113:1417-1418.

Andrieu N, Goldgar DE, Easton DF, et al. Pregnancies, breast-feeding, and
breast cancer risk in the International BRCA1/2 Carrier Cohort Study (IBCCS).
_J Natl Cancer Inst_. 2006;98:535-544.

Beral V, Bull D, Doll R, et al. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in
Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and abortion: Collaborative reanalysis of data
from 53 epidemiological studies, including 83,000 women with breast cancer
from 16 countries. _Lancet_. 2004;363:1007-1016.

Braüner CM, Overvad K, Tjønneland A, Attermann J. Induced abortion and breast
cancer among parous women: A Danish cohort study. _Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand_.
2013;92:700-705.

Friedman E, Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, et al. Spontaneous and therapeutic
abortions and the risk of breast cancer among BRCA mutation carriers. _Breast
Cancer Res_. 2006;8(2):R15.

Henderson KD, Sullivan-Halley J, Reynolds P, et al. Incomplete pregnancy is
not associated with breast cancer risk: The California Teachers Study.
_Contraception_. 2008;77:391-396.

Ilic M, Vlajinac H, Marinkovic J, Sipetic-Grujicic S. Abortion and breast
cancer: Case-control study. _Tumori_. 2013;99:452-457.

Hajian-Tilaki KO, Kaveh-Ahangar T. Reproductive factors associated with breast
cancer risk in northern Iran. _Med Oncol_. 2011;28:441-446.

Jiang AR, Gao CM, Ding JH, et al. Abortions and breast cancer risk in
premenopausal and postmenopausal women in Jiangsu Province of China. _Asian
Pac J Cancer Prev_. 2012;13:33-35.

Kitchen AJ, Trivedi P, Ng D, Mokbel K. Is there a link between breast cancer
and abortion: a review of the literature. _Int J Fertil Womens Med_.
2005;50:267-271.

Melbye M, Wohlfahrt J, Olsen JH, et al. Induced abortion and the risk of
breast cancer. _N Engl J Med_. 1997;336:81-85.

Michels
![](/etc/clientlibs/granite/coralui2/optional/rte/resources/images/blank.png)KB,
Xue F, Colditz GA, Willett WC. Induced and spontaneous abortion and incidence
of breast cancer among young women. _Arch Intern Med_. 2007;167:814-820.

National Cancer Institute. Abortion, Miscarriage, and Breast Cancer Risk.
1/12/2010. Accessed at www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/Risk/abortion-
miscarriage on June 11, 2014.

National Cancer Institute. Breast Cancer Prevention. 6/2/2014. Accessed at
www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/prevention/breast/HealthProfessional/page2#Section_280
on June 11, 2014.

National Cancer Institute. Reproductive History and Breast Cancer Risk.
5/10/2011. Accessed at
www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/Risk/reproductive-history on June 11,
2014.

National Cancer Institute. Summary Report: Early Reproductive Events and
Breast Cancer Workshop. Accessed at
www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/causes/ere/workshop-report on June 11, 2014.

Paoletti X, Clavel-Chapelon F. Induced and spontaneous abortion and breast
cancer risk: Results from the E3N cohort study. _Int J Cancer_.
2003;106:270-276.

Palmer JR, Wise LA, Adams-Campbell LL, Rosenberg L. A prospective study of
induced abortion and breast cancer in African-American women. _Cancer Causes
Control_. 2004;15:105-111.

Reeves GK, Kan SW, Key T. Breast cancer risk in relation to abortion: Results
from the EPIC study. _Int J Cancer_. 2006;119:1741-1745.

Last Medical Review: June 19, 2014 Last Revised: June 19, 2014

American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For
reprint requests, please see our Content Usage Policy.

##

More In Cancer A-Z

                
                                      * Cancer Basics
                      * Cancer Causes
                      * Breast Cancer
                      * Colon and Rectal Cancer
                      * Skin Cancer
                      * Lung Cancer
                      * Prostate Cancer
                      * View All Cancer Types
                

BackTo Top

**Imagine a world free from cancer.** Help make it a reality.

DONATE

#### Cancer Information

                
                                      * Cancer Prevention & Detection
                      * Cancer Basics
                      * Signs & Symptoms of Cancer
                      * Treatments & Side Effects
                      * Cancer Facts & Statistics
                      * News and Stories
                      * Glossary
                      * For Health Care Professionals
                

#### Programs & Services

                
                                      * Breast Cancer Support
                      * TLC Hair Loss & Mastectomy Products
                      * Hope Lodge® Lodging
                      * Rides To Treatment
                      * Online Support Communities
                

#### ACS FUNDRAISERS

                
                                      * Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walks
                      * Relay For Life Events
                      * College Relay For Life
                      * Coaches vs. Cancer
                      * Galas, Balls & Parties
                      * Ways to Give
                      * Memorial Giving
                      * Planned Giving
                      * Leadership Giving
                      * Donate a Car
                

#### About ACS

                
                                      * Contact Us
                      * Local Offices
                      * Employment
                      * Information for Suppliers
                      * Report Fraud or Abuse
                      * Global Health
                      * ACS CAN
                      * Sign Up for Email
                      * Policies
                      * Our Volunteers
                

#### More ACS Sites

                
                                      * Bookstore
                      * Shop
                      * Cancer Atlas
                      * Press Room
                      * Cancer Statistics Center
                      * Volunteer Learning Center
                

#### Follow Us

Twitter Facebook Instagram

Cancer Information, Answers, and Hope. Available Every Minute of Every Day.

### 800.227.2345

Live Chat

#### Follow Us

Twitter Facebook Instagram

                
                                      * help 
                      * site map 
                      * privacy policy - 2018 
                      * accessibility 
                      * terms of use 
                      * state fundraising notices 
                      * Site Comments
                

(C) 2019 American Cancer Society, Inc. All rights reserved. The American
Cancer Society is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. Cancer.org is
provided courtesy of the Leo and Gloria Rosen family.

Close

##### *

Close

Image **_*of_** *

Previous Next

Close

Close

#### Select A Hope Lodge

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

