

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

                
                                      *           *           *           * JOIN MWU
                

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

                
                                      * GAMES
                      * BROWSE THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * MORE __
                

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

                
                                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

                
                                      * JOIN MWU
                      * GAMES
                      * THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# authoritarian

adjective

au·​thor·​i·​tar·​i·​an | \ ȯ-ˌthär-ə-ˈter-ē-ən ![How to pronounce

authoritarian \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , ə-, -ˌthȯr-\

## Definition of _authoritarian_

1 **:** of, relating to, or favoring blind submission to authority had
authoritarian parents

2 **:** of, relating to, or favoring a concentration of power in a leader or
an elite not constitutionally responsible to the people an authoritarian
regime

Other Words from _authoritarian_ Synonyms More Example Sentences Learn More
about _authoritarian_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _authoritarian_

authoritarian noun

authoritarianism \ -​ē-​ə-​ˌni-​zəm ![How to pronounce authoritarianism

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ noun

## Synonyms for _authoritarian_

Synonyms

authoritative, autocratic (also autocratical), bossy, despotic, dictatorial,
domineering, imperious, masterful, overbearing, peremptory, tyrannical (also
tyrannic), tyrannous

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Examples of _authoritarian_ in a Sentence

grew up with an _authoritarian_ older sister who thought she was queen of the
world an _authoritarian_ coach who runs football practice like it's boot camp

Recent Examples on the Web

Her appearance was protested – the Soviet Union, despite Glasnost, was a
preeminent _authoritarian_ regime, after all. -- Robert Sullivan, _Vogue_ ,
"Meeting Gorbachev, Werner Herzog's Documentary, Is a Historical Thriller for
Today," 27 May 2019 China’s resistance to Western pressure over the camps
highlights its growing confidence under President Xi Jinping, who has offered
Beijing’s _authoritarian_ system as a model for other countries. -- Yanan
Wang, _The Seattle Times_ , "China says interning Muslims brings them into
‘modern’ world," 16 Oct. 2018 Creating new laws and regulations is the easy
part in China’s _authoritarian_ political system. -- Michael Holtz, _The
Christian Science Monitor_ , "Beijing gets tough on trash," 5 July 2018 In the
Beijing classroom, the discussion turned away from Mao’s theories and to
questions about whether China’s _authoritarian_ system offered enough channels
for people to express their views. -- _New York Times_ , "Mao 101: Inside a
Chinese Classroom Training the Communists of Tomorrow," 28 June 2018 Critics
like Navalny accuse Putin of overseeing a corrupt _authoritarian_ system,
while the financial well-being of millions of Russians continues to
deteriorate. -- _NBC News_ , "Protesters detained as thousands rally against
Putin's government," 5 May 2018 Both also show an affection for strong-man
leadership, and while American democracy is far removed from China's one-party
_authoritarian_ system, Trump's verbal attacks on the mainstream media and
certain judges have drawn criticism. -- Christopher Bodeen, _USA TODAY_ , "Xi
vs Trump: Who has the better hand in any potential trade war?," 11 Apr. 2018
Critics accuse him of overseeing a corrupt, _authoritarian_ system and of
illegally annexing Ukraine's Crimea in 2014, a move that isolated Russia
internationally. -- _Anchorage Daily News_ , "Putin wins another six years at
Russia’s helm in landslide victory," 18 Mar. 2018 Hey @Delta -- Northeast Ohio
would make a great HQ if you're put off by Mr. Cagle's _authoritarian_
tendencies. -- Erin Edgemon, _AL.com_ , "Birmingham mayor tweets to Delta
'Let's chat' after Georgia blocks airline's tax deal," 27 Feb. 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'authoritarian.' Views expressed
in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its
editors. Send us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _authoritarian_

1861, in the meaning defined at sense 1

## History and Etymology for _authoritarian_

see authority

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _authoritarian_

Share _authoritarian_

Post the Definition of authoritarian to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of authoritarian on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _authoritarian_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

## Dictionary Entries near _authoritarian_

author entry

authoress

authorisation

authoritarian

authoritative

authority

authority figure

## Statistics for _authoritarian_

Last Updated

3 Jun 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _authoritarian_

## The first known use of _authoritarian_ was in 1861

See more words from the same year

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _authoritarian_

authoritarian

_adjective_

![How to pronounce authoritarian \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _authoritarian_

**:** expecting or requiring people to obey rules or laws **:** not allowing
personal freedom

See the full definition for _authoritarian_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _authoritarian_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _authoritarian_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _authoritarian_

Spanish Central: Translation of _authoritarian_

Nglish: Translation of _authoritarian_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _authoritarian_ for Arabic Speakers

Comments on _authoritarian_

What made you want to look up _authoritarian_? Please tell us where you read
or heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
                
                      * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
                
                      * tangerine clementine
                      * orange nectarine
                

![Spell

It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Syn

City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
                

Your poem could win $$

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
                

Going above and beyond

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
                

They sound alike but that's it

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
                

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

                
                                      * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
                

You all would not have guessed some of these

                
                                      * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
                

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

                
                                      * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
                

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

                
                                      * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
                

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
                

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
                

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Spell It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Spell It
                

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Syn City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Syn City
                

Build a city of skyscrapers—one synonym at a time.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

                
                                      * SPANISH CENTRAL
                      * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
                      * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
                      * VISUAL DICTIONARY
                      * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
                      * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
                      * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
                      * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
                

FOLLOW US

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * a
                      * b
                      * c
                      * d
                      * e
                      * f
                      * g
                      * h
                      * i
                      * j
                      * k
                      * l
                      * m
                      * n
                      * o
                      * p
                      * q
                      * r
                      * s
                      * t
                      * u
                      * v
                      * w
                      * x
                      * y
                      * z
                      * 0-9
                      * Home 
                      * Help 
                      * Apps 
                      * About Us 
                      * Shop 
                      * Advertising Info 
                      * Dictionary API 
                      * Contact Us 
                      * Video 
                      * Favorites 
                      * Word of the Year 
                      * Law Dictionary 
                      * Medical Dictionary 
                      * Privacy Policy 
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Browse the Thesaurus 
                      * Browse the Medical Dictionary
                      * Browse the Legal Dictionary
                      * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
                

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication *[C.]: Century

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century

