

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

                
                                      *           *           *           * JOIN MWU
                

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

                
                                      * GAMES
                      * BROWSE THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * MORE __
                

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

                
                                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

                
                                      * JOIN MWU
                      * GAMES
                      * THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# person

noun

per·​son | \ ˈpər-sᵊn ![How to pronounce person \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)
\

## Definition of _person_

1 **:** human, individual --sometimes used in combination especially by those
who prefer to avoid _man_ in compounds applicable to both sexes chair _person_
spokes _person_

2 **:** a character or part in or as if in a play **:** guise

3a **:** one of the three modes of being in the Trinitarian Godhead as
understood by Christians

b **:** the unitary personality of Christ that unites the divine and human
natures

4a archaic **:** bodily appearance

b **:** the body of a human being also **:** the body and clothing unlawful
search of the person

5 **:** the personality of a human being **:** self

6 **:** one (such as a human being, a partnership, or a corporation) that is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties

7 **:** reference of a segment of discourse to the speaker, to one spoken to,
or to one spoken of as indicated by means of certain pronouns or in many
languages by verb inflection

in person

**:** in one's bodily presence the movie star appeared _in person_

Other Words from _person_ Synonyms More Example Sentences Learn More about
_person_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _person_

personhood \ ˈpər-​sᵊn-​ˌhu̇d ![How to pronounce personhood

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ noun

## Synonyms for _person_

Synonyms

baby, being, bird, bod [British], body, character, cookie (or cooky),
creature, customer, devil, duck, egg, face, fish, guy, head, human, human
being, individual, life, man, mortal, party, personage, scout, slob, sort,
soul, specimen, stiff, thing, wight

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Examples of _person_ in a Sentence

She is a very nice _person_. I saw a _person_ standing on the dock. Any
_person_ who wants a refund must have a receipt. Most _people_ here are quite
friendly. The tickets are $25 per _person_. The _person_ at the front desk
will be able to help you. The tax break is only applicable to _persons_ in a
high income bracket. I like her _as a person_ , but she is not a very good
writer. The disease is easily transmitted from _person to person_. The dogs
discovered that the men were hiding drugs _about their persons_.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web

In _person_ , the 41-year-old Macron comes across as strikingly, sincerely
European. -- Angela Charlton, _The Seattle Times_ , "No more Mr Europe: Macron
forced to curb EU ambitions," 20 May 2019 Agender can also refer to someone
who does not care about gender, does not want to label their internal and
external identity or identifies as a _person_ , rather than a gender above all
things. -- Jasmine Gomez, _Seventeen_ , "What Does 'Agender' Mean?," 3 May
2019 If there’s a poverty rate of 20% or greater, and at least 500 _persons_
and/or 33% of the population lives more than a mile away from a supermarket or
large grocery store, it’s considered a food desert. -- Jessica Booth,
_Redbook_ , "Everything You Need To Know About Food Deserts," 29 Apr. 2019 On
a more serious note, however, Clarke gets watery-eyed reflecting on how GoT
changed her as a _person_. -- Erica Gonzales, _Harper's BAZAAR_ , "Emilia
Clarke Broke Down Crying the First Day She Filmed Game of Thrones," 8 Apr.
2019 If you get caught in your own thoughts or worries, try to bring your
focus back to the _person_ in front of you. -- Marisa Lascala, _Good
Housekeeping_ , "Everything You Need to Know About Dating and Single
Motherhood," 1 Mar. 2019 In _person_ , the G8 is essentially a G7 with a
vertical camera array. -- Michael Simon, _PCWorld_ , "LG G8 hands-on: Could
the future of smartphones be in the palm of my hand?," 24 Feb. 2019 No
_person_ , no place, and no thing has any power over us, for 'we' are the only
thinkers in our mind. -- Selena Barrientos, _Good Housekeeping_ , "20 Quotes
About Peace That Will Inspire Tranquility in Your Life," 12 Apr. 2019 The
five- _person_ team worked with the finance and human resources departments to
build the first bot. -- Sara Castellanos, _WSJ_ , "Intuit CIO: Be Strategic
About the Bots You Build," 11 Apr. 2019

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'person.' Views expressed in the
examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send
us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _person_

13th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1

## History and Etymology for _person_

Middle English, from Anglo-French _persone_ , from Latin _persona_ actor's
mask, character in a play, person, probably from Etruscan _phersu_ mask, from
Greek _prosōpa_ , plural of _prosōpon_ face, mask — more at prosopopoeia

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _person_

Share _person_

Post the Definition of person to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of person on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _person_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

From the Editors at Merriam-Webster

![some

people](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

'People' vs. 'Persons'

### 'People' vs. 'Persons'

How to choose between two words that seem to mean the same thing

![personage](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

The Difference Between 'Person' and...

### The Difference Between 'Person' and 'Personage'

Both words have personality

## Dictionary Entries near _person_

persistive

Persius

persnickety

person

persona

personability

personable

## Statistics for _person_

Last Updated

31 May 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _person_

## The first known use of _person_ was in the 13th century

See more words from the same century

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _person_

person

_noun_

![How to pronounce person \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _person_

**:** a human being

**:** a person who likes or enjoys something specified

law **:** the body or clothing of a person especially when considered as a
place to hide things

See the full definition for _person_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

person

noun

per·​son | \ ˈpər-sᵊn ![How to pronounce person \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)
\

## Kids Definition of _person_

1 **:** a human being considered as an individual I had never heard a _person_
speak Arabic.

_Hint:_ The word _person_ is sometimes used in compounds especially to avoid
_man_ in words that apply to both sexes. chair _person_

2 **:** the body of a human being Keep your _person_ neat.

person

noun

per·​son

## Legal Definition of _person_

1 **:** natural person

2 **:** the body of a human being also **:** the body and clothing of a human
being had drugs on his person

3 **:** one (as a human being or corporation) that is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties — see also juridical person, legal person,
personality

Other Words from _person_

personhood noun

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _person_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _person_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _person_

Spanish Central: Translation of _person_

Nglish: Translation of _person_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _person_ for Arabic Speakers

Comments on _person_

What made you want to look up _person_? Please tell us where you read or heard
it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
                
                      * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
                
                      * tangerine nectarine
                      * orange clementine
                

![Spell

It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Syn

City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

                
                                      1. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
                
                      2. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
                
                      3. codify  Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade
                

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
                

Your poem could win $$

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
                

Going above and beyond

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
                

They sound alike but that's it

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
                

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

                
                                      * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
                

You all would not have guessed some of these

                
                                      * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
                

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

                
                                      * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
                

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

                
                                      * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
                

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
                

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
                

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Spell It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Spell It
                

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Syn City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Syn City
                

Build a city of skyscrapers—one synonym at a time.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

                
                                      * SPANISH CENTRAL
                      * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
                      * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
                      * VISUAL DICTIONARY
                      * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
                      * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
                      * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
                      * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
                

FOLLOW US

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * a
                      * b
                      * c
                      * d
                      * e
                      * f
                      * g
                      * h
                      * i
                      * j
                      * k
                      * l
                      * m
                      * n
                      * o
                      * p
                      * q
                      * r
                      * s
                      * t
                      * u
                      * v
                      * w
                      * x
                      * y
                      * z
                      * 0-9
                      * Home 
                      * Help 
                      * Apps 
                      * About Us 
                      * Shop 
                      * Advertising Info 
                      * Dictionary API 
                      * Contact Us 
                      * Video 
                      * Favorites 
                      * Word of the Year 
                      * Law Dictionary 
                      * Medical Dictionary 
                      * Privacy Policy 
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Browse the Thesaurus 
                      * Browse the Medical Dictionary
                      * Browse the Legal Dictionary
                      * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
                

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

