

Go to Content Go to Navigation Go to Navigation Go to Site Search Homepage

Planned Parenthood has a partner website about sexual health topics
specifically for Nigeria. Would you like to go to the Nigeria website?

Visit the Nigeria Site (DASUBJECTMATTER.ORG) STAY ON THE PLANNED PARENTHOOD
SITE

            
                              * Español
            

![Planned Parenthood](/static/assets/img/planned-parenthood-horizontal.svg)

            
                              * Learn
            

#### Sexual and Reproductive Health

            
                                * Abortion
                    * Birth Control
                    * Cancer
                    * Emergency Contraception
                    * Health and Wellness
                    * Pregnancy
                    * Sex and Relationships
                    * Sexual Orientation and Gender
                    * Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
                    * Glossary A - Z
                    * For Teens
                    * For Parents
                    * For Educators
            

#### Related Health Topics

            
                                * Depression
                    * Vaccinations
                    * Hypertension
                    * Diabetes
                    * Substance Use Disorder
                    * Anxiety
            
                  * Get Care
            

#### Get Care

            
                                * Schedule an Appointment
                    * Our Services
                    * Health Insurance
                    * Get Care Online
                    * Spot On
                    * Blog
            
                  * Get Involved
            

#### Get Involved

            
                                * Donate
                    * Ways to Give
                    * Jobs and Volunteering
                    * Take Action
                    * Shop
            
                  * Donate 
                  * Open Search Search
            

Search

Find

Español Open Search Search

Search

Find

            
                              * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Learn
            

#### Sexual and Reproductive Health

            
                                * Overview
                    * Abortion
                    * Birth Control
                    * Cancer
                    * Emergency Contraception
                    * Health and Wellness
                    * Pregnancy
                    * Sex and Relationships
                    * Sexual Orientation and Gender
                    * Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
                    * Glossary A - Z
                    * For Teens
                    * For Parents
                    * For Educators
            

#### Related Health Topics

            
                                * Depression
                    * Vaccinations
                    * Hypertension
                    * Diabetes
                    * Substance Use Disorder
                    * Anxiety
            
                  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Get Care
            

#### Get Care

            
                                * Overview
                    * Schedule an Appointment
                    * Our Services
                    * Health Insurance
                    * Get Care Online
                    * Spot On
                    * Blog
            
                  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Get Involved
            

#### Get Involved

            
                                * Overview
                    * Donate
                    * Ways to Give
                    * Jobs and Volunteering
                    * Take Action
                    * Shop
            
                  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Donate 
                  * Home
                  * About Us
                  * Who We Are
                  * Current:  Our History
            

# Our History

In 1916, Planned Parenthood was founded on the idea that women should have the
information and care they need to live strong, healthy lives and fulfill their
dreams. Today, Planned Parenthood affiliates operate more than 600 health
centers across the United States, and Planned Parenthood is the nation’s
leading provider and advocate of high-quality, affordable health care for
women, men, and young people. Planned Parenthood is also the nation’s largest
provider of sex education. How did we get where we are today? Learn more about
our 100-year history.

Explore Our 100 Years

##

The Beginning

Planned Parenthood traces its roots back to nurse, educator and founder
Margaret Sanger — whose activism changed the world.Sanger had the
revolutionary idea that women should control their own bodies — and thus their
own destinies. Imagine that!

Sanger grew up in an Irish family of 11 children in Corning, New York. Her
mother, in fragile health from many pregnancies, including 7 miscarriages,
died at age 50 of tuberculosis. Her mother’s story — along with her work as a
nurse on the Lower East Side of New York — inspired Sanger to travel to Europe
and study birth control methods at a time when educating people about birth
control was illegal in the United States.

On October 16, 1916, Sanger — together with her sister Ethel Byrne and
activist Fania Mindell — opened the country’s first birth control clinic in
Brownsville, Brooklyn. Women lined up down the block to get birth control
information and advice from Sanger, Byrne, and Mindell.

Nine days later, police raided the clinic and shut it down. All 3 women were
charged with crimes related to sharing birth control information. Sanger
refused to pay the fine and spent 30 days in jail, where she educated other
inmates about birth control.

Although the Brownsville clinic was shut down, Sanger went on to travel the
country to share her vision — and the Planned Parenthood movement began.

## **A Movement Begins**

In 1923, Sanger opened the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau in Manhattan
to provide birth control devices to women and to collect statistics about the
safety and long-term effectiveness of birth control. That same year, Sanger
incorporated the American Birth Control League, an ambitious new organization
that examined the global impact of population growth, disarmament, and famine.
The two organizations eventually merged to become Planned Parenthood®
Federation of America, Inc. (PPFA®).

The continued work of Sanger and efforts from other birth control proponents
led to a 1936 court ruling that birth control devices and information would no
longer be classified as obscene, and could be legally distributed in New York,
Connecticut, and Vermont. While it took another 30 years for these rights to
be extended to married couples (but just married couples) throughout the rest
of the country, it was an historic step toward making birth control available
to everyone.

##

The Development of the Pill

In 1948, Planned Parenthood awarded a small grant to biologists Gregory
Pincus, John Rock, and M.C. Chang to conduct research into a birth control
pill.

Katharine Dexter McCormick, a leader in the suffrage movement and the League
of Women Voters, was head of the research process and its primary funder.

In 1956, the first large-scale human trial of the birth control pill was
carried out in Puerto Rico. The step was critical to the pill’s development at
the time, but the testing conducted on Puerto Rican women was done without
informed consent — now considered unethical, and in some cases, illegal.
Puerto Rican women, unaware they were participating in an experimental
clinical trial with hormone levels 20 times higher than birth control pills on
the market today resulted in harmful side effects, such as dizziness, cramps,
and vomiting.

As time went on, the pill was refined to become the safe and effective birth
control method used by millions of women today. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved the sale of pills for contraception on May 9,
1960. Within 5 years, 1 out of every 4 married women in the U.S. under the age
of 45 had used the pill.

While stateside acceptance of Sanger’s vision was slow, global progress was
swift. In Bombay, the International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) was
founded at the 3rd International Conference on Planned Parenthood. Margaret
Sanger served as its president from 1952-1959. Today, Planned Parenthood
Federation of America is the U.S. Member Association to IPPF.

##

A New Era for Women

The pill soon changed the lives of women and families across the U.S. and
around the world. Finally there was an easy, effective, and reversible way to
prevent pregnancy. But the pill still wasn’t available nationwide. Some states
banned all forms of contraception.

In 1965, in the landmark case Griswold v. Connecticut, the Supreme Court ruled
that states couldn’t deny the sale of contraception to married couples. That
led 10 states to legalize birth control.

Seven years later, in 1972, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down a Massachusetts
statute that banned the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried people in
Eisenstadt v. Baird. So by the early 70s anyone — single or married — was
allowed to get birth control from their doctor.

In 1970, Title X of the Public Health Services Act became law. It established
public funding for family planning and sex education programs in the U.S. That
meant Planned Parenthood and other reproductive health organizations were able
to provide birth control and sex education services for more people,
especially in low-income communities. To this day, Title X funding is critical
to accessing sexual and reproductive health care.

By the early 1970s, the role of women in public life was starting to change,
and a movement for safe and legal abortion emerged. State after state changed
their laws to allow abortion in certain cases. After New York legalized
abortion in 1970, a Planned Parenthood health center in Syracuse, NY was the
first Planned Parenthood health center to offer abortion services.

In 1973, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of abortion rights in the landmark
case Roe vs. Wade, citing the right to privacy. Roe vs. Wade guaranteed the
right to safe and legal abortion within the first 3 months of pregnancy in all
50 states. Roe vs. Wade remains the law today.

A short-lived but crucial era of abortion rights expansion followed. Laws
requiring spousal consent for abortion and strict parental consent rules for
minors seeking abortion were soon struck down in the courts, removing harmful
obstacles to abortion.

However, in 1976, the Hyde Amendment made it illegal for federal public
funding to pay for abortion services except in a few circumstances, such as
cases of rape, incest, or a life-endangering pregnancy. So even while abortion
remained legal, it was becoming out of reach for low-income people in need of
financial assistance, or for those who receive health care through Medicaid or
Medicare.

Through legal victories and setbacks, Planned Parenthood continued to grow
into its role as a trusted sexual and reproductive health care provider and
educator, establishing affiliates in communities across the country, and
becoming a leading advocate in the fight for reproductive rights.

## **Victories and Violence**

The expansion of abortion rights in the 1970s resulted in fierce backlash from
opponents of safe and legal abortion in the 1980s and 90s, with tragic
consequences.

Extremists staged campaigns of patient intimidation, and committed acts of
violence — including murder — against abortion providers, as well as bombings
and arsons at health centers.

Also, opponents of safe and legal abortion began gaining strong political
influence. The Reagan and George H.W. Bush presidencies resulted in
significant setbacks to the reproductive rights movement. In 1992, the Supreme
Court upheld the constitutional right to an abortion, but allowed states to
put their own regulations about abortion into place. Planned Parenthood v.
Casey allowed states to put limits on abortion — such as mandatory waiting
periods of more than 24 hours — that made it harder for patients to access
abortion care.

During this time, laws were passed that restricted federal funds from health
care providers and organizations who discussed abortion with their patients —
including the Title X “gag” rule and the Mexico City Policy, or “global gag
rule.” In 1993, the Clinton administration reversed these rules — but it was
not the last time the world would suffer from the global gag rule.

But throughout these difficult times, Planned Parenthood remained steadfast in
its commitment to patients and its vision of a world without barriers to
sexual and reproductive health care.

In 1987, Planned Parenthood began offering free or low-cost HIV testing in
communities around the country. In 1989, millions marched in Washington in
support of reproductive rights. That same year, Planned Parenthood Federation
of America president Faye Wattleton founded the Planned Parenthood Action
Fund, a 501c4 organization, to engage in public education campaigns,
grassroots organizing, and legislative and electoral activity.

Throughout the 1990s, Planned Parenthood and other reproductive health experts
successfully advocated for FDA approval of new, effective methods of birth
control — including the birth control shot, the ring, the patch, and the
implant. In 1999, the FDA approved Plan B emergency contraception, and Planned
Parenthood began work to make emergency contraception widely available at its
health centers and educate the public about emergency contraception, also
known as the “morning-after pill.”

In 1996, Planned Parenthood launched www.plannedparenthood.org, which made
expert medical and sexual health information easily accessible for everyone.
Today, 76 million people reach Planned Parenthood online every year.

## **A New Millennium, a Second Century**

Scientific advances in sexual and reproductive health soared as the 90s
closed, and the 21st century began with the promise of expanded birth control
and abortion options.

In 2000, the FDA approved mifepristone, known as medication abortion or the
abortion pill, after several years of delays due to political opposition.
Planned Parenthood health centers were then able to offer another safe and
effective option to patients seeking abortion.

In 2005, the first Planned Parenthood affiliate began providing hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) for transgender patients. In 2006, the HPV vaccine
was approved, and Planned Parenthood health centers began providing this
lifesaving cancer prevention method at health centers across the country. The
same year, Plan B emergency contraception became available for purchase
without a prescription for women ages 18+. (In 2013, Plan B and similar brands
became available over-the-counter for people of all ages.)

But these advancements were tempered by a political climate increasingly
hostile to reproductive health care. The George W. Bush administration
reinstated the global gag rule, galvanized opponents of safe and legal
abortion by passing a ban on a rarely used later-stage abortion procedure, and
worked to establish a new legal status for frozen embryos. Funding for
“abstinence-only” sexuality education increased, leaving students across the
country without medically accurate sexual health information.

In 2009, The Obama administration overturned the global gag rule and
reaffirmed America’s commitment to sexual and reproductive health at home and
abroad. In 2010, the Affordable Care Act was passed. It expanded access to
health insurance, allowing more people to get the health care they needed. The
law includes a provision that requires insurance plans to cover birth control
and preventive care services, like cancer screenings and STD testing. Planned
Parenthood has worked to educate 300,000 people about the new health insurance
law, helping them get coverage.

After years of state by state restrictions on abortion, in 2016 the Supreme
Court ruled that states could not create rules that placed an “undue burden”
on people seeking abortion, in the Whole Woman’s Health vs. Hellerstedt case —
a victory for those in favor of safe and legal abortion. In response, Planned
Parenthood vowed to redouble its efforts to fight abortion restrictions across
the country.

2016 also marked 100 years since Margaret Sanger, Ethel Byrne, and Fania
Mindell opened the first clinic in Brooklyn. Learn more about Planned
Parenthood’s history, hear interviews with the people who were there, and see
images from our 100 years of care.

Planned Parenthood continues to reach millions of people today. Learn more
about Our Impact.

### Book an Appointment

Zip, City, or State

We couldn't access your location, please search for a location.

Search

Please fill out this field. Sorry, we could not find any Health Center for
your search.

Or call 1-800-230-7526

### 100 Years Strong

Learn about the history of Planned Parenthood in this brief overview of our
history and mission.

WATCH VIDEO

#### About Us

            
                              * Who We Are 
                  * Our Mission 
                  * Our History 
                  * Our Impact 
                  * Leadership 
                  * Contact Us 
                  * Planned Parenthood Global 
                  * Newsroom 
                  * Facts & Figures 
                  * About This Site
            

## Help Keep Our Mission Strong

DONATE NOW

## Book an Appointment

Zip, City, or State

We couldn't access your location, please search for a location.

Search

Please fill out this field. Sorry, we could not find any Health Center for
your search.

Or call 1-800-230-7526

![Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc.](/static/assets/img/planned-

parenthood-stacked-tag.6916ef62aa8e.svg)

Planned Parenthood delivers vital reproductive health care, sex education, and
information to millions of people worldwide. Planned Parenthood Federation of
America, Inc. is a registered 501(c)(3) nonprofit under EIN 13-1644147.
Donations are tax-deductible to the fullest extent allowable under the law.

Call Planned Parenthood Donate

Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on

            
                            * About Us Toggle Navigation
                  * Who We Are
                  * Leadership
                  * Annual Reports
                  * Local Offices
                  * Planned Parenthood Global
                * Get Involved Toggle Navigation
                  * Take Action
                  * Share Your Story
                  * Volunteer
                  * Shop
                * Resources Toggle Navigation
                  * Jobs
                  * Facts & Figures
                  * Newsroom
                  * Press Releases
                  * Online Quizzes
                * About This Site Toggle Navigation
                  * Terms of Use
                  * Privacy Policy
                  * Sitemap
                  * Contact Us
            
                * Privacy Policy
                * Terms of Use
                * Contact Us
            

(C) 2019 Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

