

![Finger Lakes Donor Recovery Network](http://www.donorrecovery.org/wp-

content/themes/flrn/images/head-logo.png)

![Changing Lives Through Organ Donation](http://www.donorrecovery.org/wp-

content/themes/flrn/images/head-tagline.png)

                
                                    * Register as a Donor
                    * News
                    * Events
                

![“twitter](http://www.donorrecovery.org/wp-content/themes/flrn/images/social-

tw.png) ![facebook link” />

                
                                            <a href=](http://www.donorrecovery.org/wp-content/themes/flrn/images/social-yt.png)![enews signup](http://www.donorrecovery.org/wp-content/themes/flrn/images/enews.png)
                
                    * Home
                    * Understanding Organ Donation
                      * Enroll in the New York Donor Registry
                      * Donor Registry Q&A
                      * 10 Facts About Organ Donation
                      * Frequently Asked Questions
                      * VIDEO: How Donation and Transplant Works
                      * Religion and Organ Donation
                      * Understanding Brain Death
                      * Organs & Tissues for Transplant
                      * Quick Quizzes and Health Tips
                      * Appropriate Donation Terminology
                      * Statistics - Organ Donation & Transplant
                    * Gift of Life Stories
                    * Raising Awareness
                      * National Donate Life Month
                      * National Donor Sabbath
                      * Rose Parade
                      * Transplant Games
                      * National Minority Donor Awareness Week
                      * Hispanic Heritage Month
                      * Volunteer
                      * Speakers Bureau
                      * bLifeNY Campaign
                    * FLDRN Update Newsletter
                    * For Families of Donors
                      * News and Events
                      * Information for the Families of Donors
                      * Bereavement Resources
                      * Helping Grieving Children
                      * Writing to Recipients
                    * For Transplant Patients
                      * Regional Transplant Hospitals
                      * The Organ Donor Program
                      * Writing to Your Donor Family
                    * For Healthcare Professionals
                      * News Updates
                      * Partners Newsletter
                      * Donation Process Overview
                      * Working With Families of Potential Donors
                      * VIDEO: Considering the Gift of Life
                      * Interview: "My Sister’s Transplant Was a Miracle!"
                

Search:

Finger Lakes Donor Recovery Network > Understanding Organ Donation >
Understanding Brain Death

# Understanding Brain Death

Brain death is the total and irreversible loss of all brain function and the
circumstance under which the donation of vital organs most commonly takes
place.

![Brain death photo illustration 2](http://66.39.0.253/wp-

content/uploads/2011/09/Brain-Death-Image-300x157.jpg)

This photo illustration shows an angiogram of a brain at left with blood flow
and brain at right without blood flow as it would be seen in a brain dead
patient. © Fusionspark Media Inc.

The concept of brain death is often difficult for families to come to terms
with when dealing with a tragic loss. Their loved one who has suffered from an
injury to the brain is in a hospital intensive care unit. Doctors are doing
everything possible to help the patient including supporting blood pressure
and heart rate with medications, breathing for the patient with a ventilator,
and constantly monitoring the patient's condition. Often, for the patient with
a non-traumatic brain injury like a stroke, there is no outward sign that
their loved one has suffered a devastating and non-survivable injury to the
brain. The patient looks to be asleep, is warm to touch and appears to breath,
albeit with the help of a machine.

It is under these circumstances that families are asked to understand that
their loved one has died. It is also under the same scenario that organ
donation is presented as an option in order to give life to others.

#### What is brain death?

Brain death occurs when a person has an irreversible, catastrophic brain
injury, which causes total cessation of all brain function (the upper brain
structure and brain stem). Brain death is not a coma or persistent vegetative
state. Brain death is determined in the hospital by one or more physicians not
associated with a transplantation team.

Some causes of brain death include (but are not limited to):

                
                                    * Trauma to the brain (i.e. severe head injury caused by a motor vehicle crash, gunshot wound, fall or blow to the head)
                    * Cerebrovascular injury (i.e. stroke or aneurysm)
                    * Anoxia (i.e. drowning or heart attack when the patient is revived, but not before a lack or blood flow/oxygen to the brain has caused brain death)
                    * Brain tumor
                

#### If my loved one is brain dead, what does that mean?

When someone is brain dead, it means that the brain is no longer working in
any capacity and never will again. Other organs, such as the heart, kidneys or
liver, can still work for a short time if the breathing machine is left in
place, but when brain death is declared, it means the person has died.

#### What can cause brain death?

Death of the brain can occur from accidental injuries or illness. High blood
pressure can also cause bleeding in the brain and result in death. A brain
infection, a brain tumor or a traumatic injury may cause the brain to swell
and lead to death as well.

#### How does the doctor determine brain death?

Doctors examining the patient will conduct a battery of tests to determine
whether any brain activity is present. If all brain activity is absent, the
patient is dead.

#### I have understood that when an individual dies, that his/her heart stops

beating. If my loved one is dead, why does the heart continue to beat?

The heart is part of the autonomic nervous system and thus has the ability to
beat independently of the brain as long as it has oxygen. The heart will
eventually stop beating as all bodily systems begin to stop working shortly
after brain death. Once this process has begun, it cannot be reversed. At the
time a physician declares brain death, the patient is dead. Mechanical support
(a breathing machine) keeps oxygen going to the organs until they can be
recovered for transplant. The machine is not keeping the patient alive (brain
death is irreversible and is legally and medically recognized as death), it is
merely keeping the organs viable until they can be recovered.

#### Would removing the breathing machine be the same as causing the death of

my loved ?

![Cerebral blood flow scan of a child showing absence of blood

flow.](http://66.39.0.253/wp-

content/uploads/2011/09/CBF_Brain_Death-150x150.gif)

Cerebral blood flow scan of a child showing absence of blood flow. © John J.
Mickell, M.D

No. The brain will never recover when it dies. Since the patient has already
been declared dead, removing the machine (which is artificially pumping air
into the lungs) cannot cause further harm or death.

#### What is the legal time of death for a brain dead patient?

The legal time of death is the date and time that doctors determine that all
brain activity has ceased. This is the time that is noted on the patient's
death certificate.

#### Is brain death the same as being in a coma or persistent vegetative

state?

No. Brain death is death. A patient who is in a coma or persistent vegetative
state typically has some brain stem function (which controls breathing) and
possibly other brain function. When a person is brain dead, no part of the
brain is functioning any longer.

#### Are there any proven cases where patients were declared brain dead and

later were restored to a normal life?

No. Often the general public views brain death and coma as the same. They are
NOT! Brain death is irreversible. Brain death is death.

_Text Source: Tennessee Donor Services_

                
                                    * ### Pass Life On!
                

**Join the New York State organ donor registry.

REGISTER NOW

                
                                    * ### Facts About Organ Donation
                
                      * If you are sick or injured and admitted to a hospital, the FIRST PRIORITY for emergency physicians and nurses is to SAVE YOUR LIFE, regardless of whether or not you have registered to be an organ donor.
                      * Everyone waiting for a transplant is treated fairly and with respect. Objective medical criteria determine how donated organs are allocated to patients on the transplant waiting list.
                      * All major religions approve of organ donation.
                

Check out "10 Facts About Organ Donation"

                
                                      * ### Upcoming Events
                

There are no upcoming events.

View Calendar __

__ Add

                
                                        * __Add to Timely Calendar
                        * __Add to Google
                        * __Add to Outlook
                        * __Add to Apple Calendar
                        * __Add to other calendar
                        * __Export to XML
                
                
                
                        * About Us
                        * Contact Us
                        * Financial Contributions
                        * Statistics
                        * Privacy
                        * Accessibility
                        * Employment
                
                      *           * (C) Finger Lakes Donor Recovery Network, Corporate Woods of Brighton, Building 30, Suite 220, Rochester, NY 14623 (800) 810-5494
                

![Donate Life](http://www.donorrecovery.org/wp-

content/themes/flrn/images/foot-logo.png)

A Donate Life  
Organization

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

