

![Children](/-/media/images/chw/logos/chw-svg-

logo.svg?la=en&hash=000453E2F4938DB41BAA7B4E1523CE0EEB12A93C)
![Children](/-/media/images/chw/logos/chw-svg-

logo.svg?la=en&hash=000453E2F4938DB41BAA7B4E1523CE0EEB12A93C)

                
                                      * Home
                      * About us
                      * Careers
                      * Contact
                      * Medical Professionals
                      * NewsHub
                      * MyChart
                

Donate

Search

Search

                
                                      * Medical care
                      * Patient/family experience
                      * Locations
                      * Find a doctor
                      * Children's in the community
                      * Ways to help
                      * About us
                      * Careers
                      * Contact
                      * Medical Professionals
                      * NewsHub
                
                      * Medical care
                        * ## Search A-Z
                

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

View all specialties and services »

## Featured services

Cancer and blood disorders

Orthopedics

Gastroenterology

Pediatricians (primary care)

Genetics and genomics

Heart care

Find a doctor

Sign up for MyChart

Neurosciences

Health information

Newborn and fetal care

Urgent care: reserve your slot

                
                                      * Patient/family experience
                        * ## INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS, FAMILIES AND VISITORS
                

Request an appointment

Medical records

Urgent care: reserve your slot

Message your provider (MyChart)

Coming to Childrens Hospital Milwaukee

Mobile apps

Coming to Children's Hospital Fox Valley

From out of town?

Billing and payments

Symptom Checker

Insurance information

Compliments and concerns

                
                                      * Locations
                        * ## CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL LOCATIONS
                

Milwaukee hospital

Community services

Fox Valley hospital

Behavioral health

Primary care

Urgent care

Specialty clinics

Other locations

Surgicenter

                
                                      * Find a doctor
                        * ## FIND A DOCTOR
                

Search by name or specialty

Request an appointment

Find a pediatrician

Find information for medical professionals

Find a research investigator

Find services and specialties

Print a physician verification letter

Learn about our research

                
                                      * Children's in the community
                        * ## WORKING TOGETHER FOR HEALTHY KIDS
                

Community partners & professionals

Families & clients

Foster care & adoption

                
                                      * Ways to help
                        * ## WAYS YOU CAN HELP
                

Donate online

Giving to Children's

Advocacy

Become a volunteer

Events supporting Children's

Sign up for our e-newsletter

About our foundation

## (414) 266-2000

Urgent Care & ER

## In this section

## Fetal Concerns Center

* * *
                
                                      * Programs and services
                      * Conditions
                      * Our specialists
                      * Our location
                      * Resources
                      * Patient stories
                      * Get a second opinion
                      * For medical professionals
                
                      * Home>
                      * Medical care>
                      * Fetal Concerns Center>
                      * Conditions>
                      * Pregnancy complications>
                      * Blood type incompatibility
                

# Blood type incompatibility

## What is blood type incompatibility?

Every person's blood has certain characteristics. If a baby’s and mother’s
blood are incompatible, it can lead to fetal anemia, immune hydrops
(erythroblastosis fetalis) and other complications.

The most common type of blood type incompatibility is Rh disease (also known
as Rh incompatibility). The Rh factor is a protein on the covering of red
blood cells. If the Rh factor protein is present, the person is Rh positive.
If the Rh factor protein isn’t present, the person is Rh negative. When the
mother’s Rh factor is negative and the baby’s is positive, it can cause the
mother’s immune system to make Rh antibodies that attack the baby’s red blood
cells as foreign. Other maternal antibodies that may develop and cause
complications include anti-Kell, anti-E, anti-jka and anti-fya.

## What causes blood type incompatibility?

Blood type and factors are determined by genetics. A baby may have the blood
type and Rh factor of either parent, or a combination of both parents. The Rh
positive gene is dominant (stronger) and even when paired with an Rh negative
gene, the positive gene takes over.

Blood type incompatibility only becomes a problem after a mother develops
antibodies against her baby’s blood cells. These antibodies don’t develop
until a mother is “sensitized,” which occurs when the mother’s and baby’s
blood mix during pregnancy. This can happen if the baby’s blood crosses the
placenta or during certain invasive prenatal tests, trauma, birth or other
situations. Although sensitization is not a common issue in first pregnancies,
it can cause complications with future pregnancies.

## Prenatal diagnosis of blood type incompatibility

Early identification of antibodies is important, and all pregnant women
receive a blood test early in their pregnancy. If antibodies are present, then
prenatal diagnostic procedures may include:

                
                                      * ultrasound to evaluate blood flow in the baby’s brain, which can be used to detect early anemia before evidence of hydrops
                      * ultrasound to detect organ enlargement or fluid buildup in the baby
                      * blood tests to monitor the levels of the mother’s antibodies to determine the baby’s risk of anemia
                      * sampling of blood from the fetal umbilical cord to check for anemia
                

## Specialists you will work with

In addition to your regular OB, a maternal fetal medicine specialist will help
monitor and manage any issues related to blood type incompatibility during
your pregnancy. If your baby requires special care after birth, your care team
may include a neonatologist in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).

## How does blood type incompatibility affect my baby?

As the mother’s antibodies destroy the baby’s red blood cells, the baby can
become anemic. The anemia can cause other complications, including:

                
                                      * jaundice — yellowing of the skin, eyes and mucous membranes
                      * enlargement of the liver and spleen
                      * hydrops fetalis — this occurs when the baby’s organs are unable to handle the anemia. The baby’s heart begins to fail and large amounts of fluid build up in the fetal tissues and organs. A fetus with hydrops fetalis is at great risk of being stillborn.
                

After birth, the red blood cell destruction may continue, leading to a
condition called hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN). Problems may include:

                
                                      * severe jaundice — when the baby’s liver is unable to handle the large amount of bilirubin that results from red blood cell breakdown, the baby's liver becomes enlarged, and the anemia continues.
                      * kernicterus — the most severe form of excess bilirubin can lead to build up of bilirubin in the brain, possibly causing seizures, brain damage, deafness and death.
                

## Does my baby need a special hospital?

That depends on the severity of your baby’s condition. If you deliver at
Froedtert, your baby will receive top-notch care in Children’s Hospital’s
Level IV Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, which is ranked as one of the best in
the nation. Your baby will stay in the hospital until he or she is well enough
to go home.

## How does blood type incompatibility affect my pregnancy?

You may need frequent blood tests to follow the amount of antibodies you’re
making and regular ultrasounds to monitor your baby more closely. Most
Milwaukee-area patients continue to receive care at the Fetal Concerns Center
and then deliver at the Froedtert & the Medical College of Wisconsin Birth
Center, though in some cases it’s possible for mothers to receive follow-up
care and deliver at another hospital closer to home. If your baby’s condition
worsens, you may need to deliver early.

If an Rh negative mother has not yet been sensitized, she is usually given Rh
immunoglobulin (RhIg), also known as RhoGAM. This blood product can prevent
the mother’s antibodies from reacting to Rh-positive cells. Many women are
also given RhIg around the 28th week of pregnancy. After the baby is born, a
woman should receive a second dose of the drug within 72 hours.

## How do you treat blood type incompatibility?

Fortunately, hemolytic disease of the newborn is a very preventable disease.
Treatment will be informed by the medical team’s assessment of your baby’s
condition and your input as the parent, and it could include:

                
                                      * fetal intrauterine transfusion of red blood cells — this procedure places a needle through the mother’s uterus and directly into the umbilical cord vein or baby’s abdominal cavity to replenish depleted red blood cells. This can help prevent a baby’s anemia from progressing into hydrops. Intrauterine transfusions may need to be repeated, and your baby may require another transfusion immediately after birth.
                      * early delivery — if the baby develops complications and has mature lungs, your doctor may recommend inducing labor and delivery to prevent worsening of the disease.
                

## Will I be able to help care for my baby?

Yes. Our recently expanded and redesigned NICU was created to promote family
bonding, with private rooms where parents can stay with their baby 24/7, and
other special features for families’ comfort. Our on-call lactation
specialists can help you successfully breastfeed and pump and store breast
milk when direct breastfeeding isn’t an option.

## When can my baby go home?

Your baby will be discharged from the hospital once he or she is breathing
independently, eating well and gaining weight. That may take several weeks.
Premature babies will likely require a longer NICU stay.

## What’s my baby’s long-term prognosis?

Although outcomes depend on the severity of your baby’s condition, babies
affected by blood type incompatibility generally do very well. Babies who have
not yet developed hydrops have survival rates greater than 90 percent, and
even the majority of babies with hydrops survive after fetal intrauterine
transfusion.

## What about future pregnancies?

The mother’s immune system keeps the antibodies in case the foreign cells
appear again, even in a future pregnancy. Complications are usually more
severe in subsequent pregnancies than they are in the first. If an Rh negative
mother receives Rhlg before becoming Rh sensitized, it helps protect a future
Rh positive baby.

                
                                      * A A A
                

Text Size

                
                                      * ![](/Content/img/printico.png)
                

Print Page

## Get a second opinion

It's important to know what your options are. The Fetal Concerns Center can
provide expert opinions to verify or give more information about an initial
diagnosis. Contact us today.

## Research and outcomes

![Our outcomes reports help families and partner providers make the most

informed health care

decisions.](/-/media/images/medicalcare/fetalconcerncenter/fccwcallout.jpg?h=145&w=200&hash=04CADBBD5FD4F680F061A5FF51AA12BB01799096&hash=04CADBBD5FD4F680F061A5FF51AA12BB01799096&la=en)  
Our outcomes reports help families and partner providers make the most
informed health care decisions. Learn more about our surgical outcomes and
what current research studies are underway.

## Information for...

                
                                      * Community partners
                      * Donors and volunteers
                      * Job applicants
                      * Medical professionals
                      * News media
                      * Parents and families
                      * Researchers
                      * Students
                      * Vendors
                

## About us

                
                                      * About Children's Hospital
                      * Contact us
                      * Find a location
                      * Find a doctor
                      * Jobs/careers
                      * Medical programs
                      * Safety and quality
                

## Online services

                
                                      * Email newsletters
                      * Get help finding something on the site
                      * Make a donation
                      * MyChart
                      * Patient websites
                      * Pay your bill
                      * Prepare for your visit to the hospital
                      * Request an appointment
                      * ##  ![Children](/-/media/images/chw/footer/footerlogo.jpg?h=100&w=225&la=en&hash=0DFBDCFCA0BAE56156F4EA85FB0E05B005FCC26C)
                

8915 W. Connell Ct.  
P.O. Box 1997  
Milwaukee, WI 53226  
(414) 266-2000  
(877) 266-8989 toll free  
TTY: (414) 266-2465

                
                                      * Get help finding something on the website
                      * Connect with us
                      *             * ![Children](/-/media/images/chw/footer/footerblog.jpg?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=5EB4E016B501D3D2CEF2F37E0B45CBBF97FE9D75)
                        * ![Facebook](/-/media/images/global/social-media-icons/footerfb.jpg?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=9498F51AA93E796357E848126D9DA17475B684DB)
                        * ![Twitter](/-/media/images/global/social-media-icons/footertwitter.jpg?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=6DC431EFA38D916E994EE1155CC0ACBACEFBCC2E)
                        * ![LinkedIn](/-/media/images/chw/footer/footerin.jpg?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=B780A7B48C9D49AE237BFC438282E8A3A84A72E0)
                        * ![YouTube](/-/media/images/chw/footer/footeryt.jpg?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=4326FC7FD4FF3D503EA1EC7A9A8BD36D4A1171F5)
                        * ![Instagram](/-/media/images/chw/footer/instagram_33x33-\(1\).jpg?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=02DCCEE3820DD4B8AA224DE82BCF4D9A058157D2)
                        * ![Snapchat](/-/media/images/chw/footer/snapchat_33x33.png?h=33&w=33&la=en&hash=F209B44C3F4A9174C2AFA95DAA090BFEC7E8F11B)
                
                      * © 2019 Children's Hospital of Wisconsin
                      * |
                      * Terms of use and privacy policy
                      * |
                      * Online privacy policy
                      * |
                      * Nondiscrimination practices
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

