

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

                
                                      *           *           *           * JOIN MWU
                

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

                
                                      * GAMES
                      * BROWSE THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * MORE __
                

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

                
                                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

                
                                      * JOIN MWU
                      * GAMES
                      * THESAURUS
                      * WORD OF THE DAY
                      * WORDS AT PLAY
                      * TIME TRAVELER
                

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# conception

noun

con·​cep·​tion | \ kən-ˈsep-shən ![How to pronounce conception

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Definition of _conception_

1a(1) **:** the process of becoming pregnant involving fertilization or
implantation or both

(2) **:** embryo, fetus

b **:** beginning "Joy had the like conception in our eyes … "-- William
Shakespeare

2a **:** the capacity, function, or process of forming or understanding ideas
or abstractions or their symbols He directed the project from conception to
completion.

b **:** a general idea **:** concept We get the conception of an animal … by
comparing different animals …-- John Stuart Mill

c **:** a complex product of abstract or reflective thinking the philosopher's
conception of reality

d **:** the sum of a person's ideas and beliefs concerning something his
conception of the American dream

3 **:** the originating of something in the mind an artist's conception of how
the city would look a hundred years from now

Other Words from _conception_ Synonyms Choose the Right Synonym More Example
Sentences Learn More about _conception_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _conception_

conceptional \ kən-​ˈsep-​shnəl ![How to pronounce conceptional

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , -​shə-​nᵊl \ adjective

conceptive \ kən-​ˈsep-​tiv ![How to pronounce conceptive

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ adjective

## Synonyms for _conception_

Synonyms

concept, generality, generalization, notion, stereotype

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Choose the Right Synonym for _conception_

idea, concept, conception, thought, notion, impression mean what exists in the
mind as a representation (as of something comprehended) or as a formulation
(as of a plan). idea may apply to a mental image or formulation of something
seen or known or imagined, to a pure abstraction, or to something assumed or
vaguely sensed. innovative _ideas_ my _idea_ of paradise concept may apply to
the idea formed by consideration of instances of a species or genus or, more
broadly, to any idea of what a thing ought to be. a society with no _concept_
of private property conception is often interchangeable with concept; it may
stress the process of imagining or formulating rather than the result. our
changing _conception_ of what constitutes art thought is likely to suggest the
result of reflecting, reasoning, or meditating rather than of imagining.
commit your _thoughts_ to paper notion suggests an idea not much resolved by
analysis or reflection and may suggest the capricious or accidental. you have
the oddest _notions_ impression applies to an idea or notion resulting
immediately from some stimulation of the senses. the first _impression_ is of
soaring height

## Examples of _conception_ in a Sentence

He directed the project from _conception_ to production. the _conception_ of a
new device They have a clear _conception_ of how the process works. a child's
_conception_ of responsibility They have very different _conceptions_ of the
proper role of government.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web

And personally, my ideal _conception_ of Americanness is one characterized by
that tradition of skepticism toward authority, and aversion to imperialism
(and all the pomp and circumstance that goes with it). -- Eric Levitz, _Daily
Intelligencer_ , "Trump’s Military Parade Would Not Be ‘Un-American’," 8 Feb.
2018 Of course, there are some good actors in the Republican Party (likely
Catholics) who truly believe that life begins at _conception_. -- _Glamour_ ,
"With the Alabama Abortion Ban, Republicans Rule Embryos Are People (but Women
Aren’t)," 15 May 2019 Most people have some kind of hazy _conception_ of how
the stock market works. -- _Bloomberg.com_ , "How The Bond Market Changed in
Decades on Wall Street," 27 July 2017 What about some other common
_conceptions_ for beating colds and fevers, such as eating chicken soup? --
Mark Fischetti, _Scientific American_ , "Fact or Fiction?: Feed a Cold, Starve
a Fever," 3 Jan. 2014 Ghost imaging isn’t all that ghostly In ghost imaging’s
original _conception_ , the quantum properties of light were an essential part
of the imaging process. -- Chris Lee, _Ars Technica_ , "Humans can perform
ghost imaging, no computer required," 4 Sep. 2018 Artificial ingredients,
synthetic hormones, and potential contaminants could make _conception_ less
likely and may even be harmful to a potential fetus. -- Suzannah Weiss,
_Glamour_ , "9 Foods to Avoid If You're Trying to Get Pregnant," 17 Apr. 2019
Eudaimonia involves a more objective _conception_ of living as a human ought
to live, according to our species’ true nature. -- Julian Baggini, _WSJ_ ,
"‘Aristotle’s Way’ Review: Philosophize and Flourish," 15 Feb. 2019 Studies
have shown that just 25 weeks after _conception_ , fetuses can be seen
grasping at the umbilical cord inside the womb. -- Carolyn Twersky,
_Seventeen_ , "Why Do Couples Hold Hands?," 4 Jan. 2019

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'conception.' Views expressed in
the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors.
Send us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _conception_

14th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1a(1)

## History and Etymology for _conception_

Middle English _concepcioun_ , from Anglo-French _concepcion_ , from Latin
_conception-, conceptio_ , from _concipere_ — see concept entry 1

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _conception_

Share _conception_

Post the Definition of conception to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of conception on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _conception_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

## Dictionary Entries near _conception_

concept album

concept car

conceptible

conception

conception control

conceptionist

conceptism

## Phrases Related to _conception_

no conception of

## Statistics for _conception_

Last Updated

4 Jun 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _conception_

## The first known use of _conception_ was in the 14th century

See more words from the same century

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _conception_

conception

_noun_

![How to pronounce conception \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _conception_

**:** the process of forming an idea

**:** the process that occurs within a woman's body when she becomes pregnant

**:** an idea of what something is or should be

See the full definition for _conception_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

conception

noun

con·​cep·​tion | \ kən-ˈsep-shən ![How to pronounce conception

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Medical Definition of _conception_

1a **:** the process of becoming pregnant involving fertilization or
implantation or both

b **:** embryo, fetus

2a **:** the capacity, function, or process of forming or understanding ideas
or abstractions or their symbols

b **:** a general idea

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _conception_

Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with _conception_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _conception_

Spanish Central: Translation of _conception_

Nglish: Translation of _conception_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _conception_ for Arabic Speakers

Comments on _conception_

What made you want to look up _conception_? Please tell us where you read or
heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### kinetic

![Listen to the pronounciation of kinetic](/images/audio.svg)

relating to the motion of material bodies

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
                
                      * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?
                
                      * orange tangerine
                      * clementine nectarine
                

![Spell

It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Syn

City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

                
                                      1. folderol  Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes
                
                      2. reticent  Mueller's team hesitant to testify
                
                      3. codify  Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade
                

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest
                

Your poem could win $$

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6ce6898d68](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Who Put the ‘B’ at the End of ‘Superb'?
                

Going above and beyond

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf6aca749b20](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Difference Between 'Elicit' and 'Illicit'
                

They sound alike but that's it

                
                                      * ![alt-5cf57bdf6cfe1](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Word on the Classical 'Collateral Adjective'
                

Or, how 'feline' is an adjective for 'cat'

Ask the Editors

                
                                      * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words
                

You all would not have guessed some of these

                
                                      * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia
                

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

                
                                      * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally
                

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

                
                                      * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
                

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

                
                                      * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz
                

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz
                

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Spell It](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Spell It
                

Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

Take the quiz

                
                                      * ![Syn City](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Syn City
                

Build a city of skyscrapers—one synonym at a time.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

                
                                      * SPANISH CENTRAL
                      * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
                      * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
                      * VISUAL DICTIONARY
                      * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
                      * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
                      * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
                      * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
                

FOLLOW US

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Browse the Dictionary:
                      * a
                      * b
                      * c
                      * d
                      * e
                      * f
                      * g
                      * h
                      * i
                      * j
                      * k
                      * l
                      * m
                      * n
                      * o
                      * p
                      * q
                      * r
                      * s
                      * t
                      * u
                      * v
                      * w
                      * x
                      * y
                      * z
                      * 0-9
                      * Home 
                      * Help 
                      * Apps 
                      * About Us 
                      * Shop 
                      * Advertising Info 
                      * Dictionary API 
                      * Contact Us 
                      * Video 
                      * Favorites 
                      * Word of the Year 
                      * Law Dictionary 
                      * Medical Dictionary 
                      * Privacy Policy 
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Browse the Thesaurus 
                      * Browse the Medical Dictionary
                      * Browse the Legal Dictionary
                      * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary
                

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

