

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

                
                                      * Check Your Symptoms
                      * Find A Doctor
                      * Find A Dentist
                      * Find Lowest Drug Prices
                      * Health
                

A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

                
                                        * ADD/ADHD
                        * Allergies
                        * Arthritis
                        * Cancer
                        * Cold, Flu & Cough
                        * Depression
                        * Diabetes
                        * Eye Health
                        * Heart Disease
                        * Lung Disease
                        * Orthopedics
                        * Pain Management
                        * Sexual Conditions
                        * Skin Problems
                        * Sleep Disorders
                        * View All
                

### Resources

                
                                        * Symptom Checker
                        * Expert Blogs and Interviews
                        * Podcasts
                        * Message Boards
                        * Questions & Answers
                        * Insurance Guide
                        * Find a Doctor
                        * Children's Conditions A-Z
                        * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
                

#### Featured Topics

                
                                        * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
                        * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
                      * Drugs &
                

Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

                
                                        * Drugs
                        * Supplements
                

### Tools

                
                                        * Manage Your Medications
                        * Pill Identifier
                        * Check for Interactions
                

### Drug Basics & Safety

                
                                        * Commonly Abused Drugs
                        * Taking Meds When Pregnant
                

#### Featured Topics

                
                                        * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
                        * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
                      * Living
                

Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

                
                                        * Diet & Weight Management
                        * Weight Loss & Obesity
                        * Food & Recipes
                        * Fitness & Exercise
                

### Beauty & Balance

                
                                        * Healthy Beauty
                        * Health & Balance
                        * Sex & Relationships
                        * Oral Care
                

### Living Well

                
                                        * Women's Health
                        * Men's Health
                        * Aging Well
                        * Healthy Sleep
                        * Healthy Teens
                        * Fit Kids
                

#### Featured Topics

                
                                        * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
                        * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
                      * Family &
                

Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

                
                                        * Getting Pregnant
                        * First Trimester
                        * Second Trimester
                        * Third Trimester
                        * View All
                

### Parenting Guide

                
                                        * Newborn & Baby
                        * Children's Health
                        * Children's Vaccines
                        * Raising Fit Kids
                        * View All
                

### Pet Care Essentials

                
                                        * Healthy Cats
                        * Healthy Dogs
                        * View All
                

#### Featured Topics

                
                                        * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
                        * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
                      * News &
                

Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

                
                                        * Flying With CBD Oil? What You Should Know
                        * Being Transgender Is Not a Mental Disorder
                        * Room Temperature Affects Women Differently Than Men
                        * Don't Risk Your Life Trying to Take the Perfect Selfie
                        * Neck Cracking and Stroke: How Risky Is It?
                

### Experts & Community

                
                                        * Message Boards
                        * Expert Blogs
                        * News Center
                

#### Featured Topics

                
                                        * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
                        * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
                      * Mobile Apps
                      * Subscriptions
                
                      * Sign In
                      * Subscribe
                      * My Profile
                        * My Tools
                        * My WebMD Pages
                        * My Account
                        * Sign Out
                

### Pregnancy Tests Home

                
                                      * Medical Reference
                      * Features
                      * Video
                      * Slideshows & Images
                      * Quizzes
                      * Health Tools
                      * News Archive
                

### Pregnancy Home

                
                                      * News
                      * Reference
                      * Slideshows
                      * Quizzes
                      * Videos
                      * Message Board
                      * Find an Ob-Gyn
                

### Health and Pregnancy Guide

                
                                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * First Trimester
                      * Second Trimester
                      * Third Trimester
                      * Labor and Delivery
                      * Pregnancy Complications
                

### Related to Pregnancy

                
                                      * Gestational Diabetes
                      * Labor and Delivery
                      * Multiples and Twins
                      * Newborns
                      * Ovulation Calculator
                      * Pregnancy Calendar
                      * Pre-Pregnancy
                      * Pregnancy Visual Timeline
                      * Pregnancy Milestones
                      * More Related Topics
                
                      * Pregnancy
                      * Guide
                

![](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/mobile/icons/target_icon.png)

#### What Not to Do if You Want to Get Pregnant

# Pregnancy Tests

### In this Article

#### In this Article

#### In this Article

                
                                      * What is a pregnancy test, and how does it work?
                      * What types of pregnancy tests are available?
                      * HCG Tests
                      * How accurate are pregnancy tests?
                      * Is it expensive or hard to do a home pregnancy test (HPT)?
                      * What do the pregnancy test results mean?
                

A pregnancy test may let you know if you are pregnant.

Here are answers to some of the most common questions about pregnancy tests.

## What is a pregnancy test, and how does it work?

Pregnancy tests are designed to tell if your urine or blood contains a hormone
called human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). This hormone is made right after a
fertilized egg attaches to the wall of a woman's uterus.

This usually happens -- but not always -- about 6 days after fertilization. If
you're pregnant, levels of hCG continue to rise rapidly, doubling every 2 to 3
days.

## What types of pregnancy tests are available?

Two main types of pregnancy tests can let you know if you're pregnant: urine
tests and blood tests.

**Urine tests** can be done at home or in a doctor's office. Some home
pregnancy tests can detect hCG the day of your missed period. Home pregnancy
tests are private and convenient.

These products come with instructions. Follow them closely for the most
accurate results. After testing, you can confirm results by seeing your
doctor, who can perform even more sensitive pregnancy tests.

**Blood tests** are done at your doctor's office, but are used less often than
urine tests. These tests can detect pregnancy earlier than a home pregnancy
test, or about 6 to 8 days after ovulation. But with these tests, it takes
longer to get the results than with a home pregnancy test.

## HCG Tests

Two types of blood pregnancy tests are available:

**A qualitative hCG test** simply checks to see if hCG is present. It gives a
"yes" or "no" answer to the question, "Are you pregnant?" Doctors often order
these tests to confirm pregnancy as early as 10 days after a missed period.
Some of these tests can detect hCG much earlier.

**A quantitative hCG test** (beta hCG) measures the exact amount of hCG in
your blood. It can find even very low levels of hCG. Because these pregnancy
tests can measure the concentration of hCG, they may be helpful in tracking
any problems during pregnancy. They may also (in combination with other tests)
be used to rule out a tubal (ectopic) pregnancy or to monitor a woman after a
miscarriage when hCG levels fall rapidly.

#### Continued

## How accurate are pregnancy tests?

Results may also be more accurate if you do the test first thing in the
morning, when your urine is more concentrated.

Urine home pregnancy tests are about 99% accurate. Blood tests are even more
accurate than this.

How accurate a home pregnancy test is depends upon:

                
                                      * How closely you follow instructions.
                      * When you ovulate in your cycle and how soon implantation occurs.
                      * How soon after pregnancy you take the test.
                      * The sensitivity of the pregnancy test.
                

## Is it expensive or hard to do a home pregnancy test (HPT)?

You can buy a home pregnancy test in a drugstore without a prescription. The
cost depends on the brand. But most tests are relatively inexpensive -- from
$8 to $20.

Home pregnancy tests are quick and easy to use. They are also very accurate if
you carefully follow directions. These pregnancy tests all work in a similar
way. You test the urine in one of these ways:

                
                                      * Hold the test's stick in your urine stream.
                      * Collect urine in a cup and then dip the test's stick into it.
                      * Collect urine in a cup and use a dropper to put urine into another container.
                

With all of these techniques, you need to wait a few minutes before seeing the
results. Results may show up as a line, a color, or a symbol such as a "+" or
"-" sign. Digital tests produce the words "pregnant" or "not pregnant."

If you have any questions about the pregnancy test or the results, call your
doctor or the telephone number listed with the home pregnancy test.

## What do the pregnancy test results mean?

It's important to know what a positive or negative result means.

**If you get a positive result,** you are pregnant. This is true no matter how
faint the line, color, or sign is. If you get a positive result, you may want
to call your doctor to talk about what comes next.

In very rare cases, you can have a false-positive result. This means you're
not pregnant but the test says you are. You could have a false-positive result
if blood or protein is in your urine. And certain drugs, such as
tranquilizers, anticonvulsants, or hypnotics, and some fertility drugs, may
also cause false-positive results.

#### Continued

**If you get a negative result,** you are likely not pregnant. But you may
still be pregnant if:

                
                                      * The test is past its expiration date.
                      * You took the test the wrong way.
                      * You tested too soon.
                      * Your urine is too diluted because you drank large amounts of fluids right before the test.
                      * You are taking certain medications, such as diuretics or antihistamines.
                

If you get a negative pregnancy test result, try retesting within about a week
to double-check. Some home pregnancy tests suggest doing this regardless of
your results.

What if you get two different results? Call your doctor. A blood test is a
good idea to confirm results.

WebMD Medical Reference Reviewed by Traci C. Johnson, MD on February 11, 2019

#### Sources

SOURCES:

American Pregnancy Association: "Understanding Pregnancy Tests: Urine &
Blood."

American Pregnancy Association: "Taking a Pregnancy Test."

American Pregnancy Association: "Pregnancy FAQ: Early Pregnancy."

Department of Health and Human Services: "Pregnancy Tests: FAQs."

Lab Tests Online: "hCG."

© 2019 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.

Pagination

### Next Article

Early Pregnancy Symptoms

### Health & Pregnancy Guide

                
                                      1. Getting Pregnant
                      2. First Trimester
                      3. Second Trimester
                      4. Third Trimester
                      5. Labor and Delivery
                      6. Pregnancy Complications
                

### Top Picks

                
                                      * Am I in Labor?
                      * Implantation Bleeding
                      * Guide to Prenatal Tests
                      * When Pregnancy Is a Surprise
                      * Abdominal Separation
                      * Pregnant With Allergies? Top Treatment Tips
                

### further reading

                
                                      * A User's Guide to Prenatal Tests
                      * Prenatal Tests You Need for Your Baby's Health
                      * AFP Blood Test During Pregnancy
                      * Pregnancy and the Quad Marker Screen
                      * Fetal Blood Sampling (FBS)
                      * CVS (Chorionic Villus Sampling)
                      * Your Guide to Prenatal Testing
                      * Pregnancy Tests Topics
                

### Today on WebMD

![baby

bootie](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/prepregnancy_checklist_slideshow/110x70_prepregnancy_checklist_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Your Pre-Pregnancy Checklist

Are you ready for baby?

![hand circling date on

calendar](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/ovulation_calculator_most_fertile_days_other/110x70_ovulation_calculator_most_fertile_days_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Ovulation Calculator

Track your most fertile days.

![Pretty pregnant woman timing contaction

pains](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/warning_signs_premature_labor_ref_guide/110x70_warning_signs_premature_labor_ref_guide.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Am I in Labor?

The signs to watch out for.

![pregnant woman in

hospital](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/pregnancy_pain_relief_ref_guide/110x70_pregnancy_pain_relief_ref_guide.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Inducing Labor

Are there ways to do it naturally?

### Recommended for You

![slideshow fetal

development](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/pregnancy/69x75_slideshow_fetal_development.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### See How Your Baby Grows Each Month

![pregnancy first trimester warning

signs](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/thumbnails/unified_right_rail/pregnancy/69x75_pregnancy_first_trimester_warning_signs.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### Why Your Favorite Foods Gross You Out

![beautiful

twins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/all_about_twins_triplets_and_more_slideshow/69x75_all_about_twins_triplets_and_more_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### What You Should Know About Multiple Births

![Woman trying on dress in

store](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/looking_and_feeling_your_best_during_pregnancy_slideshow/69x75_looking_and_feeling_your_best_during_pregnancy_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### Your Guide to a Beautiful Pregnancy

![pregnant

woman](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/_2012/03_2012/7_embarrassing_pregnancy_symptoms_features/69x75_7_embarrassing_pregnancy_symptoms_features.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### 7 Embarrassing Pregnancy Symptoms

![Woman looking at pregnancy

test](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/early_stages_of_pregnancy_rmq/69x75_early_stages_of_pregnancy_rmq.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) QUIZ

#### Early Signs of Pregnancy

![calendar and baby

buggy](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/due_date_calculator_other/69x75_due_date_calculator_other.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) TOOL

#### Due Date Calculator

![dark chocolate

squares](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/pregnancy_snacks_uk_slideshow/69x75_pregnancy_snacks_uk_slideshow.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) SLIDESHOW

#### 12 Easy, Yummy Snacks for Pregnant Women

### Tools & Resources

                
                                      * Can You Eat Peanuts?
                      * What to Expect During Labor
                      * Should I Eat My Placenta?
                      * What Is Implantation Bleeding?
                      * Flu Shots and Pregnancy
                      * Ovulation Tool: Find Your Most Fertile Days
                

### Subscribe to the Pregnancy & Child Development Newsletter.

Get essential updates about your growing baby and what to expect each week.

Sign Up

### Health Solutions

                
                                      * World Class Heart Care
                      * Cancer Center 101
                      * Treat Enlarged Prostate
                      * Treating Baby Eczema
                      * Clinical Trial Q&A
                      * 3 Migraine Essentials
                      * Opioid Addiction
                      * Probiotics 101
                      * The HPV Vaccine
                      * Aging & Addiction
                      * Support for PTSD
                      * Penis Curved When Erect
                      * Reduce Cancer Risk
                      * Immunotherapy for Cancer
                      * Bent Fingers?
                      * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin
                

### More from WebMD

                
                                      * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
                      * Live Better With MS Assessment
                      * What Is Endometriosis?
                      * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
                      * How Does Chemo Work?
                      * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
                      * Beat Crohn's Flares
                      * Ways to Prevent Migraines
                      * Managing Diabetes at Work
                      * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
                      * Avoid Allergy Triggers
                      * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
                      * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
                      * Finding the Best MS Care Team
                      * What's New in Psoriasis Research
                      * Where Breast Cancer Spreads
                
                      * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)
                        * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
                        * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
                        * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
                      * ### Policies
                
                        * Privacy Policy
                        * Cookie Policy
                        * Editorial Policy
                        * Advertising Policy
                        * Correction Policy
                        * Terms of Use
                

### About

                
                                        * Contact Us
                        * About WebMD
                        * Careers
                        * Newsletter
                        * Corporate
                        * WebMD Health Services
                        * Site Map
                        * Accessibility
                      * ### WebMD Network
                
                        * Medscape
                        * Medscape Reference
                        * MedicineNet
                        * eMedicineHealth
                        * RxList
                        * OnHealth
                        * WebMDRx
                        * First Aid
                        * WebMD Magazine
                        * WebMD Health Record
                        * Dictionary
                        * Physician Directory
                      * ### Our Apps
                
                        * WebMD Mobile
                        * WebMD App
                        * Pregnancy
                        * Baby
                        * Allergy
                        * Medscape
                

### For Advertisers

                
                                        * Advertise with Us
                        * Advertising Policy
                
                      * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
                      * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
                      * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
                      * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
                      * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)
                

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

