

Homepage

## Accessibility links

                
                                      * Skip to content
                      * Accessibility Help
                

BBC Account

Notifications

                
                                      * Home
                      * News
                      * Sport
                      * Weather
                      * iPlayer
                      * Sounds
                      * CBBC
                      * CBeebies
                      * Food
                      * Bitesize
                      * Arts
                      * Taster
                      * Local
                      * TV
                      * Radio
                      * Three
                      * Menu
                

Search

Search the BBCSearch the BBC

Future Menu

                
                                      * What is BBC Future?
                
                      * Latest
                
                      * Best of..
                
                      * New series
                

Machine Minds

                
                                      * Tomorrow's trends
                

Future Now

                
                                      * ![\(Copyright: Thinkstock\) \(Credit: Copyright: Thinkstock\)](http://ichef.bbci.co.uk/wwfeatures/wm/live/130_73/images/live/p0/0q/1t/p00q1t85.jpg)
                
                      * The Real Risk
                      * Sex
                      * Human body
                

# Sex: What are the chances?

When things get intimate, what are the chances of getting pregnant... or even
dying of a heart attack?

                
                                      * Share on Facebook
                
                      * Share on Twitter
                
                      * Share on Reddit
                
                      * Share on WhatsApp
                
                      * Share on Google+
                
                      * Share by Email
                
                      * Share on Facebook
                
                      * Share on Twitter
                
                      * Share on Reddit
                
                      * Share on LinkedIn
                
                      * Share on Google+
                
                      * Share by Email
                
                      * By David Spiegelhalter
                

15 March 2012

Sex: everyone - well almost everyone - does it. But like so many other fun
activities, it carries its fair share of risks. Unwanted pregnancies and
getting a nasty disease are the obvious ones, but there is also the risk of
having a heart attack, getting injured when the bed collapses, even the chance
of arrest _in flagrante_ in a public place.

So, what appears to be a simple act (for some, at least) is actually rather
more complex. And that means we can begin to look for juicy numbers to find
out just how risky things are in the bedroom.

Let us start, as most of us did, with simple, unprotected sex between a man
and a woman, and ask: what is the chance of it ending in a pregnancy? This,
for understandable reasons, is rather difficult to study under laboratory
conditions - a New Zealand study in which participants were only allowed to
have sex once a month suffered, unsurprisingly, with a high dropout rate.

Perhaps the closest we have to a robust figure is from a European study that
recruited 782 young couples who did not use artificial contraception and who
carefully recorded the day of every act (and there were a lot of them) until
there had been 487 pregnancies. The simplest way to estimate the chance of
pregnancy was to consider only cycles in which there had been only one act of
intercourse. Peak times for pregnancies seemed to occur two days before
ovulation - the chances of getting pregnant during this time was around 25%,
confirming previous estimates. But the chances drop fairly steeply either side
of the peak, to a 5% average over the rest of the cycle.

The bottom line is that a single act of intercourse between a young couple has
on average a one in 20 chance of pregnancy - this assumes the opportunity
presented itself on a random day, as these things tend do when you are young.

**Calculating success**

So, given this, what are the chances of success for an average couple trying
to have a child? People who study how populations change are called
demographers, and they use the rather academic term to describe the chances of
becoming pregnant during one menstrual cycle: "fecundability".

This, of course, varies between couples, but the estimated average is between
15% and 30% in high-income countries. Taking this lower figure we can estimate
that for an average couple trying to have a child, there is an 85% chance of
finishing each month without conceiving. If we assume each month is the same
and independent, then there is a 0.85 x 0.85 (multiplied 12 times) chance of
not getting pregnant in a year of trying, which is 14%.

So, in other words, fecundability of 15% means a 100 - 14 = 86% chance of
getting pregnant in a year. A figure of 90% is often quoted as the proportion
of young couples who will be expecting a child after a year without
contraception, which corresponds to a fecundability of 18%.

**Reducing risk**

But suppose you do not actually want to get pregnant - how effective are
different types of contraception?

This is generally expressed as pregnancy rate following one year of use, and
strongly depends, of course, on the care with which precautions are taken.
Devices such as the contraceptive pill, intrauterine devices, implants and
injections are quoted as being 99% effective, so that less than 1 in 100 users
should be pregnant after a year. Male condoms are around 98% effective if used
correctly. And diaphragms and caps with spermicide are said to be 92-96%
effective, which means that between 4 and 8 women using them will end up
pregnant each year.

Such figures are particularly important when trying to minimise the incidence
of unwanted teenage pregnancies. In 1998 in England 41,000 girls aged 15-17
conceived. That is 47 in every 1,000 girls, or 1 in every 21 - or to put it in
more stark terms, one girl in every average-sized school class. The UK
government's efforts to halve this rate by 2010 only partially worked; by 2009
the headline figure had dropped to 38 per 1,000 girls, a 19% drop instead of
their 50% target.

Forty-nine percent of these teenage pregnancies end in abortions, but that
still leaves many actual teenage births. In a 2001 UNICEF report, the UK had
the highest rates in Europe with 30 births per women aged 15 to 19, with only
the USA exceeding it among high-income OECD countries, with 52 births per
1,000. This is in staggering contrast to countries such as Korea, Japan,
Switzerland, the Netherlands and Sweden, which all have birth rates of fewer
than seven per 1,000 teenagers. The Netherlands is just over the channel from
the UK and yet their youth clearly have a very different approach to sex.

**Unfortunate end**

Finally, we should never forget the risks of such an energetic pursuit. Last
year, researchers estimated that 1 in 45 heart attacks are triggered by sexual
activity. Luminaries such as Nelson Rockefeller, Errol Flynn, President Felix
Faure of France, and at least two popes, are said to have succumbed in this
way.

Solo sexual activity used to be associated with blindness and stunted growth,
for which there is a limited evidence-base to say the least. But if it
involves asphyxiation it is not recommended for the cautious, with numerous
fatalities recorded, including the actor David Carradine, singer Michael
Hutchence and a UK Member of Parliament. One study recorded as many as 117
deaths from just two provinces in Canada.

The moral of all this is, possibly, that sex can be just as much about risk as
morality.

_If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on
Future, head over to ourFacebook page or message us on Twitter._

## Follow BBC Future

                
                                      * Facebook
                
                      * Twitter
                

![*](http://ssc.api.bbc.com/?c1=2&c2=19774467&ns_site=bbc&name=bbc_-_future_-

_sex_what_are_the_chances&b_vs_un=bc&c7=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bbc.com%2Ffuture%2Fstory%2F20120313-sex-

in-the-city-or-

elsewhere&b_c7=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bbc.com%2Ffuture%2Fstory%2F20120313-sex-in-

the-city-or-elsewhere&c8=bbc_-_future_-

_sex_what_are_the_chances&b_app_type=web&b_app_name=future%7Crc65.1&b_imp_ver=rc65.1&b_imp_src=wwf&b_site_section=column.the-

real-risk&b_site_channel=future&b_site_subsec1=the-real-

risk&b_edition=international&b_column=the-real-

risk&b_page_type=sty%7Cimg&b_article_title=sex%3A%20what%20are%20the%20chances%3F&b_article_id=wwfuture%2Fstory%2F20120313-sex-

in-the-city-or-

elsewhere&b_article_author=david%20spiegelhalter&b_article_theme=sex%7Chumanbody%7Crisk%7Cstatistics&b_article_date=1416302129000&b_article_update=1416302129000&b_article_length=4541)

## Explore the BBC

                
                                      * Home
                      * News
                      * Sport
                      * Weather
                      * iPlayer
                      * Sounds
                      * CBBC
                      * CBeebies
                      * Food
                      * Bitesize
                      * Arts
                      * Taster
                      * Local
                      * TV
                      * Radio
                      * Three
                
                      * Terms of Use
                      * About the BBC
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Cookies
                      * Accessibility Help
                      * Parental Guidance
                      * Contact the BBC
                      * Get Personalised Newsletters
                

_Copyright (C) 2019 BBC._ The BBC is not responsible for the content of
external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

