

For full functionality, it is necessary to enable JavaScript. Here are
instructions how to enable JavaScript in your web browser.

##### Welcome to Medical News Today

Healthline Media, Inc. would like to process and share personal data (e.g.,
mobile ad id) and data about your use of our site (e.g., content interests)
with our third party partners (see a current list) using cookies and similar
automatic collection tools in order to a) personalize content and/or offers on
our site or other sites, b) communicate with you upon request, and/or c) for
additional reasons upon notice and, when applicable, with your consent.

Healthline Media, Inc. is based in and operates this site from the United
States. Any data you provide will be primarily stored and processed in the
United States, pursuant to the laws of the United States, which may provide
lesser privacy protections than European Economic Area countries.

By clicking “accept” below, you acknowledge and grant your consent for these
activities unless and until you withdraw your consent using our rights request
form. Learn more in our Privacy Policy.

                
                                      *             * Top categories
                          * Blood / Hematology
                          * Bones / Orthopedics
                          * Breast Cancer
                          * Colorectal Cancer
                          * Depression
                          * GastroIntestinal
                          * Hypertension
                          * Lymphoma
                          * Men's Health
                          * Neurology / Neuroscience
                          * Nutrition / Diet
                          * Pain / Anesthetics
                          * Prostate / Prostate Cancer
                          * Psoriasis
                          * Respiratory
                          * Sexual Health / STDs
                          * Stroke
                          * Tuberculosis
                          * Urology / Nephrology
                          * Women's Health
                        * All categories
                          * A - B
                          * C - D
                          * E - G
                          * H - L
                          * M - O
                          * P - R
                          * S - Z
                          * All Topics
                

More

                
                                        * Sign up for our newsletter
                        * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)Discover in-depth, condition specific articles written by our in-house team.
                
                      * Newsletter
                

![MNT

home](https://cdn1.medicalnewstoday.com/structure/images/logo/logo-2017-640-60.png)

MNT - Hourly Medical News Since 2003

Search Go

                
                                      *           *             * Top categories
                          * Blood / Hematology
                          * Bones / Orthopedics
                          * Breast Cancer
                          * Colorectal Cancer
                          * Depression
                          * GastroIntestinal
                          * Hypertension
                          * Lymphoma
                          * Men's Health
                          * Neurology / Neuroscience
                          * Nutrition / Diet
                          * Pain / Anesthetics
                          * Prostate / Prostate Cancer
                          * Psoriasis
                          * Respiratory
                          * Sexual Health / STDs
                          * Stroke
                          * Tuberculosis
                          * Urology / Nephrology
                          * Women's Health
                        * All categories
                          * A - B
                          * C - D
                          * E - G
                          * H - L
                          * M - O
                          * P - R
                          * S - Z
                          * All Topics
                

More

                
                                        * Sign up for our newsletter
                        * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)Discover in-depth, condition specific articles written by our in-house team.
                
                      * Newsletter
                

![MNT

home](https://cdn1.medicalnewstoday.com/structure/images/logo/logo-2017-640-60.png)

MNT - Hourly Medical News Since 2003

Search Go

                
                                      * __ Loading...
                

![]()

##### Please accept our privacy terms

We use cookies and similar technologies to improve your browsing experience,
personalize content and offers, show targeted ads, analyze traffic, and better
understand you. We may share your information with third-party partners for
marketing purposes. To learn more and make choices about data use, visit our
Advertising Policy and Privacy Policy. By clicking “Accept and Continue”
below, (1) you consent to these activities unless and until you withdraw your
consent using our rights request form, and (2) you consent to allow your data
to be transferred, processed, and stored in the United States.

ACCEPT AND CONTINUE TO SITE Deny permission

Scroll to Accept

#### Get the MNT newsletter

Enter your email address to subscribe to our most top categories

Your privacy is important to us.

FINISH

### Email an article

You have chosen to share the following article:

**How elderberries can help you fight the flu**

To proceed, simply complete the form below, and a link to the article will be
sent by email on your behalf.  
**Note:** Please don't include any URLs in your comments, as they will be
removed upon submission.

We do not store details you enter into this form. Please see our privacy
policy for more information.

_*_ Your Name (max. 30 chars) The field 'Your Name' is required.

_*_ Email Address This is not a valid email address.

_*_ Friend's Name (max. 30 chars) The field 'Friend's Name' is required.

_*_ Friend's Email Address The field 'Friend's Email Address' is required.

Optional Comments (max. 100 chars)

Send securely

## Message sent successfully

**The details of this article have been emailed on your behalf.**

Click here to return to the Medical News Today home page.

* * *

![Thank you for supporting Medical News

Today](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

# Can a person get pregnant while taking the pill?

Last reviewed Fri 17 August 2018 Last reviewed Fri 17 Aug 2018

By Rachel Nall RN BSN CCRN

Reviewed by Deborah Weatherspoon, PhD, RN, CRNA

__Table of contents

                
                                      1. How effective is the pill?
                      2. Five reasons for pill failure
                      3. Tips for preventing pill failure
                      4. Early signs of pregnancy
                      5. Outlook
                

Birth control pills are a popular and effective method of contraception.
However, some factors, such as missing pill days, vomiting, and taking certain
medications, can reduce the effectiveness of the pill and may result in
unintended pregnancies.

In this article, we look at how effective the birth control pill is, and five
reasons why the pill might fail. We also give tips on how to prevent pill
failure and describe some early signs of pregnancy.

## How effective is the pill?

![young woman holding pack of

pills](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)  
_Certain circumstances can reduce the effectiveness of birth control pills._

The combined pill contains hormones that prevent ovulation, which is when the
ovaries release an egg for fertilization. Another type of pill, known as the
minipill, causes a person's cervical mucus to thicken and the uterine lining
to thin, which reduces the likelihood of sperm reaching an egg.

The birth control pill is very effective if a person takes it correctly and
does not miss any pill days. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), the pill is 99.7 percent effective with perfect use. This
means that less than 1 out of 100 women who take the pill would become
pregnant in 1 year.

However, with typical use, the effectiveness of the pill is 91 percent. This
means that around 9 out of 100 women would become pregnant in a year of taking
the pill.

![Thank you for supporting Medical News

Today](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

## Five reasons for pill failure

Although the birth control pill is generally very effective, some situations
can reduce its effectiveness and may sometimes result in unintended
pregnancies. These include:

### Missing a day

Manufacturers intend for people to take the pill daily for it to be most
effective. If a person misses a day, their hormone levels may not remain at
consistent enough levels to prevent pregnancy.

If a person finds it difficult to take the pill on a daily basis, other birth
control methods may better suit their needs. A doctor or gynecologist can
advise on the range of alternative contraceptives.

### Vomiting

Sometimes a person may be ill when they take the pill. When a person vomits,
the pill can come back up, or they may not fully absorb it into their body.

Anyone who experiences vomiting shortly after taking the pill should take
another pill as soon as possible and then take their next pill as usual.

### Not taking the pills at the same time each day.

In addition to taking birth control pills daily, a person should also take the
pills at around the same time each day. This can maintain their hormone levels
more consistently.

A person should always take the minipill within the same 3-hour time window
every day. Someone who misses their window should use a backup birth control
method for the next 2 days or avoid having sex.

Many people set a daily alarm reminding them to take their pill at the correct
time each day.

### Not starting a new pack right away

![st johns wort flower and

tablets](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)  
_Some medications and supplements can interact with the pill and decrease its
effectiveness._

It is essential to start a new pack of pills the day after finishing the
previous one. However, sometimes a person may not have their new package yet.
Missing a few days between packs can make the pill less effective at
preventing pregnancy.

According to the CDC, anyone who misses two or more pills in a row should use
a backup contraceptive method or avoid sexual intercourse until they have
taken the birth control pill for 7 consecutive days.

### Medications that interfere with the pill

Some medications can make the pill less effective. Medications include certain
antibiotics, such as rifampicin, and anti-fungal drugs, such as griseofulvin.

A person should use backup contraception while taking these medications and
for 48 hours after finishing the course.

Other more long-term medications and supplements may also affect how well
birth control pills work. These can include:

                
                                      * epilepsy drugs, such as phenobarbital, phenytoin, and carbamazepine
                      * anti-viral medications used to treat HIV
                      * St. John's Wort, which is a herbal remedy
                

![Can I take Plan B on the

pill?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

Can I take Plan B on the pill?

Plan B One-Step is an emergency contraception pill. Learn about whether a
person can take it while on the birth control pill here.

Read now

## Tips for preventing pill failure

Birth control pills are very effective if a person takes them correctly and
does not miss any pill days. The following tips can help prevent unintended
pregnancies while taking the pill:

                
                                      * reading the packaging and following the instructions carefully
                      * taking the pill at the same time every day
                      * using an app that tracks periods and provides pills reminders, such as one of the apps from our review article
                      * always getting a new pill pack at least 1 week before the last pill pack is due to run out
                      * always taking missed pills as soon as possible
                      * using a backup method of contraception, such as a condom, if a person misses taking two or more pills in a row
                

If a person is concerned about not being able to take their pills
consistently, they should speak to their doctor or gynecologist about other
birth control methods. There are several options available that do not require
taking a pill daily, such as an intrauterine device, or IUD.

## Early signs of pregnancy

![sleepy young woman sitting on

armchair](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)  
_Unexplained tiredness can be an early sign of pregnancy._

If a person is concerned about contraceptive failure and the possibility of
being pregnant, they should speak to their doctor. However, there are also
some early signs that can indicate pregnancy:

                
                                      * **Bloating**. While bloating is often a symptom of premenstrual syndrome, it can sometimes also be a sign of early pregnancy.
                      * **Breast tenderness**. Raised levels of the hormones estrogen and progesterone can cause breast tenderness early in pregnancy. Some women may also experience symptoms, such as tingling, heaviness, or feelings of breast fullness.
                      * **Light spotting**. A small amount of bleeding or spotting can occur when an egg attaches to the uterine lining. If spotting occurs outside of an expected menstrual cycle, it may be an early symptom of pregnancy.
                      * **Unexplained fatigue**. Hormonal changes that occur in the body during pregnancy can make a person feel tired, even during the early stages.
                      * **Urinating more often**. Hormonal changes can increase a woman's need to urinate during early pregnancy.
                

Anyone who thinks they could be pregnant may wish to take an at-home pregnancy
test. These tests have become more sensitive to a person's hormone levels and
better at detecting pregnancy in its earliest stages.

However, at-home pregnancy tests still may not reliable if an individual takes
it too early or does not follow the instructions correctly. According to the
United States Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), for most reliable results,
a person should take the test 1–2 weeks after their first missed period.

## Outlook

While birth control pills are generally very effective, they can sometimes
fail to prevent pregnancies if a person does not use them correctly and
consistently.

Anyone who is concerned about the effectiveness or convenience of their method
of contraception should speak to a doctor.

If a person misses taking more than one pill, they should use a backup
contraceptive method for at least 7 consecutive days of retaking the pill.

## Related coverage

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Can you get pregnant right after stopping the pill? The pill prevents
pregnancy, but what happens when you stop using it? This article looks at how
soon you can become pregnant after stopping the pill. Find out more about how
the pill works, what research says about stopping, and who is most likely to
conceive as soon as they stop taking the pill. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

How to switch birth control pills properly People can switch birth control
pills with minimal issues by following a few simple guidelines. In this
article, learn how to switch birth control pills and reduce the risk of
unintended pregnancy. We also explain how birth control pills work and the
possible side effects, such as spotting and tender breasts. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

What to do if you've lost a birth control pill People often lose birth control
pills in their handbags or down the drain. Losing a pill is not usually a
problem. A person should call their doctor for advice and a replacement pack
while continuing to use their regular pack. However, the best advice varies,
depending on the type of birth control. Learn more here. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Why can you have a missed period on birth control? A person can miss a period
while taking birth control pills for many reasons. The pills contain several
hormones that affect the menstrual cycle, and stress levels and other issues
can play a role. In this article, learn about how the pills work, and seven
factors that can cause a person on the pill to miss a period. Read now

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)

Birth control: What is the best option? There are so many types of birth
control available that a person may be confused and mystified about the way
birth control alternatives work and affect the body. In this article, we
explain how the most common ones work and how effective they are. You can also
find out about how they may affect the way you feel. Read now

email email

print

share share

Birth Control / Contraception

Pregnancy / Obstetrics Women's Health / Gynecology

#### Additional information

Article last reviewed by Fri 17 August 2018.

Visit our Birth Control / Contraception category page for the latest news on
this subject, or sign up to our newsletter to receive the latest updates on
Birth Control / Contraception.

All references are available in the **References** tab.

#### References

This content requires JavaScript to be enabled.

Appendix D: Contraceptive effectiveness. (2014, April 25). _Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report ( _MMWR_ ) _, _63_ (RR04), 47. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6304a5.htm

Birth control methods: How well do they work? (2016, November). Retrieved from
https://kidshealth.org/en/teens/bc-chart.html

Birth control pill quick facts. (2017, June 8). Retrieved from
https://www.hhs.gov/opa/pregnancy-prevention/birth-control-methods/birth-
control-pills/index.html

Feintuch, S. (n.d.). Early pregnancy symptoms before you miss your period.
Retrieved from https://www.healthywomen.org/content/article/early-pregnancy-
symptoms-you-miss-your-period

Medical devices. Pregnancy. (2017, December 28). Retrieved from
https://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/productsandmedicalprocedures/invitrodiagnostics/homeusetests/ucm126067.htm

Recommended actions after late or missed combined oral contraceptives. (2013).
Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/unintendedpregnancy/pdf/248124_fig_2_3_4_final_tag508.pdf

Using birth control pills regularly for successful contraception. (2007,
January). Retrieved from http://www.arhp.org/publications-and-
resources/patient-resources/fact-sheets/successful-contraception

#### Citations

Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay,
paper or report:

**MLA**  
Rachel Nall BSN CCRN. "Can a person get pregnant while taking the pill?."
_Medical News Today_. MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Aug. 2018. Web.  
6 Jun. 2019. https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322799.php

* * *

**APA**  
Rachel Nall BSN CCRN. (2018, August 17). "Can a person get pregnant while
taking the pill?." _Medical News Today_. Retrieved from  
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322799.php.

* * *

Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited
instead.

## Recommended related news

* * *

![MNT Knowledge

Center](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

## Latest news

                
                                      * ![Brain changes may explain why exercise relieves autism in mice](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                

Brain changes may explain why exercise relieves autism in mice

Voluntary exercise prompted the brain to prune surplus connections between
nerve cells and reduced behavioral symptoms of ASD in a mouse model.

                
                                      * ![Tomato juice: Could 1 cup per day keep heart disease at bay?](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                

Tomato juice: Could 1 cup per day keep heart disease at bay?

A new study concludes that drinking tomato juice each day can reduce the
levels of certain markers of cardiovascular disease. However, more work is
needed.

                
                                      * ![Gut bacteria may help explain why drugs don't work for everyone](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                

Gut bacteria may help explain why drugs don't work for everyone

A study with common human gut bacteria and a mouse model investigates whether
our microbiome helps explain why drugs work well for some but not others.

                
                                      * ![Lack of motivation: Does inflammation alter brain systems?](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                

Lack of motivation: Does inflammation alter brain systems?

A new review suggests that low-grade inflammation may sometimes directly
affect motivation. Its authors want to explore possible links with depression.

                
                                      * ![Is white meat really more healthful than red meat?](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAADklEQVR42mNkgAJGDAYAAFEABCaLYqoAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                

Is white meat really more healthful than red meat?

A new randomized controlled trial compares the effects of both red and white
meat on blood cholesterol levels. The study also looks at saturated fats.

![MNT Knowledge

Center](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

## Popular in: Birth Control / Contraception

                
                                      * How to find the right condom size 
                      * Can a person get pregnant while taking the pill? 
                      * Is it possible to get pregnant while on birth control? 
                      * Is it safe to skip your period using birth control? 
                      * How to stop spotting on the pill
                

![](https://d.turn.com/r/dd/id/L21rdC84MTYvY2lkLzE3NDc2NjAwNjEvdC8y/kv/CampaignID=MedicalNewsToday,Content=birthcontrol)

Scroll to top

![MNT

home](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

* * *
                
                                      * Popular news
                      * Editorial articles
                      * All news topics
                      * Knowledge center
                      * Newsletters
                      * Share our content
                      * About us
                      * Our editorial team
                      * Contact us
                      * Advertise with MNT
                

### get our newsletter

Health tips, wellness advice and more.

Subscribe

Your privacy is important to us.

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK.

(C) 2004-2019 All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of
Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is not
intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take
any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.

Privacy | Terms | Ad policy | Careers

![TRUSTe](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAP///wAAACH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAICRAEAOw==)

This page was printed from:
**https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322799.php**

Visit **www.medicalnewstoday.com** for medical news and health news headlines
posted throughout the day, every day.

* * *

2019 Healthline Media UK Ltd. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade
mark of Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is
not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not
take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.

![Quantcast](https://pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-test123.gif)

![](https://analytics.twitter.com/i/adsct?txn_id=l4bfr&p_id=Twitter)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

