
                
                                      * 800.223.2273 
                      * MyChart
                      * Need help?
                      * From out of town?
                      * Giving
                      * Careers
                      * Search
                

![Cleveland Clinic logo](/-/scassets/images/org/logo/logo-

ccf.ashx?la=en&hash=1AC03A77F0EFD3CE883B2F5FEBFDED5E33EBF191)

Menu __ Search

## Cleveland Clinic Menu

                
                                      * ClevelandClinic.org
                      * Find a Doctor
                      * Locations & Directions
                      * Patients & Visitors
                      * Health Library
                      * Institutes & Departments
                

MyChartNeed help?

Call for Additional Assistance 800.223.2273

                
                                      * ClevelandClinic.org
                      * Find a Doctor
                      * Locations & Directions
                      * Patients & Visitors
                      * Health Library
                      * Institutes & Departments
                

Home / Health Library / Articles

# Fetal Development: Stages of Growth

Pregnancy begins with the first day of your last menstrual period. Find out
what happens to your fetus month by month.

                
                                      * Appointments & Access
                      * Contact Us
                

The start of pregnancy is actually the first day of your last menstrual
period. This is called the 'menstrual age' and is about two weeks ahead of
when conception actually occurs.

### Here's a primer on conception

Each month a group of eggs (called oocytes) is recruited from the ovary for
ovulation (release of the egg). The eggs develop in small fluid-filled cysts
called follicles. Normally, one follicle in the group is selected to complete
maturation. This dominant follicle suppresses all the other follicles in the
group, which stop growing and degenerate.

The mature follicle opens and releases the egg from the ovary (ovulation).
Ovulation generally occurs about two weeks before a woman's next menstrual
period begins.

After ovulation, the ruptured follicle develops into a structure called the
corpus luteum, which secretes progesterone and estrogen. The progesterone
helps prepare the endometrium (lining of the uterus) for the embryo to
implant.

On average, fertilization occurs about two weeks after your last menstrual
period. When the sperm penetrates the egg, changes occur in the protein
coating around it to prevent other sperm from entering. At the moment of
fertilization, your baby's genetic make-up is complete, including its sex.

If a Y sperm fertilizes the egg, your baby will be a boy; if an X sperm
fertilizes the egg, your baby will be a girl.

Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) is a hormone present in your blood from
the time of conception. It is produced by cells that form the placenta and is
the hormone detected in a pregnancy test. However, it usually takes three to
four weeks from the first day of your last period for the hCG to increase
enough to be detected by pregnancy tests.

Within 24 hours after fertilization, the egg begins dividing rapidly into many
cells. It remains in the fallopian tube for about three days. The fertilized
egg (called a blastocyte) continues to divide as it passes slowly through the
fallopian tube to the uterus where its next job is to attach to the
endometrium (a process called implantation). Before this happens, the
blastocyte breaks out of its protective covering. When the blastocyte
establishes contact with the endometrium, an exchange of hormones helps the
blastocyte attach. Some women notice spotting (or slight bleeding) for one or
two days around the time of implantation. The endometrium becomes thicker and
the cervix is sealed by a plug of mucus.

Within three weeks, the blastocyte cells ultimately form a little ball, or an
embryo, and the baby's first nerve cells have already formed. Your developing
baby is called an embryo from the moment of conception to the eighth week of
pregnancy. After the eighth week and until the moment of birth, your
developing baby is called a fetus.

The development stages of pregnancy are called trimesters, or three-month
periods, because of the distinct changes that occur in each stage.

### Stages of Growth: Month by Month

**Month 1**

As the fertilized egg grows, a water-tight sac forms around it, gradually
filling with fluid. This is called the amniotic sac, and it helps cushion the
growing embryo.

The placenta also develops. The placenta is a round, flat organ that transfers
nutrients from the mother to the baby, and transfers wastes from the baby.

A primitive face will take form with large dark circles for eyes. The mouth,
lower jaw, and throat are developing. Blood cells are taking shape, and
circulation will begin. The tiny "heart" tube will beat 65 times a minute by
the end of the fourth week. By the end of the first month, your baby is about
1/4 inch long â€“ smaller than a grain of rice!

**Month 2**

Your baby's facial features continue to develop. Each ear begins as a little
fold of skin at the side of the head. Tiny buds that eventually grow into arms
and legs are forming. Fingers, toes and eyes are also forming.

The neural tube (brain, spinal cord and other neural tissue of the central
nervous system) is well formed. The digestive tract and sensory organs begin
to develop. Bone starts to replace cartilage.

The head is large in proportion to the rest of the baby's body.

By the end of the second month, your baby is about 1 inch long and weighs
about 1/30 of an ounce.

At about 6 weeks, your baby's heart beat can usually be detected.

After the 8th week, your baby is called a fetus instead of an embryo.

**Month 3**

Your baby's arms, hands, fingers, feet, and toes are fully formed. Your baby
can open and close its fists and mouth. Fingernails and toenails are beginning
to develop and the external ears are formed. The beginnings of teeth are
forming. Your baby's reproductive organs also develop, but the baby's gender
is difficult to distinguish on ultrasound.

By the end of the third month, your baby is fully formed. All the organs and
extremities are present and will continue to mature in order to become
functional. The circulatory and urinary systems are working and the liver
produces bile.

At the end of the third month, your baby is about 4 inches long and weighs
about 1 ounce.

Since your baby's most critical development has taken place, your chance of
miscarriage drops considerably after three months.

**Month 4**

Your baby's heartbeat may now be audible through an instrument called a
doppler. The fingers and toes are well-defined. Eyelids, eyebrows, eyelashes,
nails, and hair are formed. Teeth and bones become denser. Your baby can even
suck his or her thumb, yawn, stretch, and make faces.

The nervous system is starting to function. The reproductive organs and
genitalia are now fully developed, and your doctor can see on ultrasound if
you are having a boy or a girl.

By the end of the fourth month, your baby is about 6 inches long and weighs
about 4 ounces.

**Month 5**

You may begin to feel your baby move, since he or she is developing muscles
and exercising them. This first movement is called quickening.

Hair begins to grow on baby's head. Your baby's shoulders, back, and temples
are covered by a soft fine hair called lanugo. This hair protects your baby
and is usually shed at the end of the baby's first week of life.

The baby's skin is covered with a whitish coating called vernix caseosa. This
"cheesy" substance is thought to protect baby's skin from the long exposure to
the amniotic fluid. This coating is shed just before birth.

By the end of the fifth month, your baby is about 10 inches long and weighs
from 1/2 to 1 pound.

**Month 6**

Your baby's skin is reddish in color, wrinkled, and veins are visible through
the baby's translucent skin. Baby's finger and toe prints are visible. The
eyelids begin to part and the eyes open.

Baby responds to sounds by moving or increasing the pulse. You may notice
jerking motions if baby hiccups.

If born prematurely, your baby may survive after the 23rd week with intensive
care.

By the end of the sixth month, your baby is about 12 inches long and weighs
about 2 pounds.

**Month 7**

Your baby will continue to mature and develop reserves of body fat. Your
baby's hearing is fully developed. He or she changes position frequently and
responds to stimuli, including sound, pain, and light. The amniotic fluid
begins to diminish.

At the end of the seventh month, your baby is about 14 inches long and weighs
from 2 to 4 pounds.

If born prematurely, your baby would be likely to survive after the seventh
month.

**Month 8**

Your baby will continue to mature and develop reserves of body fat. You may
notice that your baby is kicking more. Baby's brain is developing rapidly at
this time, and your baby can see and hear. Most internal systems are well
developed, but the lungs may still be immature.

Your baby is about 18 inches long and weighs as much as 5 pounds.

**Month 9**

Your baby continues to grow and mature: the lungs are nearly fully developed.

Your baby's reflexes are coordinated so he or she can blink, close the eyes,
turn the head, grasp firmly, and respond to sounds, light, and touch. Baby is
definitely ready to enter the world!

You may notice that your baby moves less due to tight space. Your baby's
position changes to prepare itself for labor and delivery. The baby drops down
in your pelvis. Usually, the baby's head is down toward the birth canal.

Your baby is about 18 to 20 inches long and weighs about 7 pounds.

Share **Facebook** Twitter **LinkedIn** Email __ Print

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our
site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic
products or services. Policy

### Related Institutes & Services

##### Ob/Gyn & Women's Health Institute

Find the latest information on Womenâ€™s Health, including the use of minimally
invasive surgical techniques, treatments for infertility, menstrual disorders,
urogynecology and pelvic floor disorders, menopause and more.

##### Cleveland Clinic Children's

Cleveland Clinic Children's is dedicated to the medical, surgical and
rehabilitative care of infants, children and adolescents.

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our
site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic
products or services. Policy

### References:

                
                                      * Babycenter. Fetal development week by week Accessed 9/11/2014.
                      * WomensHealth.gov. Stages of pregnancy Accessed 9/11/2014.
                

_This information is provided by the Cleveland Clinic and is not intended to
replace the medical advice of your doctor or healthcare provider. Please
consult your healthcare provider for advice about a specific medical
condition. This document was last reviewed on: 09/09/2014_

Cleveland Clinic News & More

## Cleveland Clinic News & More

![Loading...](/assets/imgs/cc_bug_ani.gif)

Show More

                
                                      * Appointments & Access
                      * Contact Us
                

**Facebook** Twitter **YouTube** Instagram **LinkedIn** Pinterest __ Snapchat

##### Actions

Appointments & AccessPay Your BillFinancial AssistanceAccepted InsuranceMake a
DonationRefer a PatientPhone DirectoryEvents Calendar

##### Blog, News & Mobile Apps

Consult QDHealth EssentialsNewsroomMobile Apps

##### About Cleveland Clinic

About UsLocationsQuality & Patient SafetyOffice of Diversity &
InclusionPatient ExperienceResearch & InnovationsCommunity
CommitmentCareersFor EmployeesResources for Medical Professionals

##### Site Information & Policies

Send Us FeedbackSite MapAbout this WebsiteCopyright, Reprint &
LicensingWebsite Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyNotice of Privacy PracticesNon-
Discrimination Notice

9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | (C) 2019 Cleveland
Clinic. All Rights Reserved.

![Back to Top](/assets/imgs/back-to-top-button.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

