

# Fetal rights

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Moral or legal rights of the human fetus

## Rights

Theoretical distinctions

  * Claim rights and liberty rights
  * Individual and group rights
  * Natural and legal rights
  * Negative and positive rights

Human rights

  * Civil and political
  * Economic, social and cultural
  * Three generations

Rights by beneficiary

  * Accused
  * Animals
  * Children
  * Consumers
  * Creditors
  * Deaf
  * Elders
  * Fetuses
  * Gun owners
  * Humans
  * Natives
  * Intersex
  * Kings
  * LGBT
  * Men
  * Minorities
  * Parents (Mothers, Fathers)
  * Patients
  * Plants
  * Prisoners
  * States
  * Students
  * Victims
  * Women
  * Workers
  * Youth
  * Disabled persons

Other groups of rights

  * Civil liberties
  * Digital
  * Linguistic
  * Property
  * Reproductive
  * Self defense
  * Self-determination of people
  * Water and sanitation

  * v

  * t
  * e

**Fetal rights** are the moral rights or legal rights of the human fetus under
natural and civil law. The term _fetal rights_ came into wide usage after the
landmark case _Roe v. Wade_ that legalized abortion in the United States in
1973.[1] The concept of fetal rights has evolved to include the issues of
maternal drug and alcohol abuse.[2] The only international treaty specifically
tackling fetal rights is the American Convention on Human Rights which
envisages the right to life of the fetus. While international human rights
instruments lack a universal inclusion of the fetus as a person for the
purposes of human rights, the fetus is granted various rights in the
constitutions and civil codes of several countries. Many legal experts believe
there is an increasing need to settle the legal status of the fetus.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Modern regulations
  * 3 Fetal rights by country
  * 4 Behavioral intervention
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References

## History[edit]

See also: History of abortion law debate

In antiquity, the fetus was sometimes protected by restrictions on abortion.
Some versions of the Hippocratic Oath indirectly protected fetus by
prohibiting abortifacients.[3] Until approximately the mid-19th century,
philosophical views on the fetus were influenced in part by Aristotelian
concept of delayed hominization.[4] According to it, human fetuses only
gradually acquire their souls, and in the early stages of pregnancy the fetus
is not fully human.[4] Relying on examinations of miscarried fetuses,
Aristotle believed that male fetuses acquire their basic form at around day
40, and female ones at day 90.[4] For Pythagoreans, however, fetal life was
co-equal in moral worth with adult human life from the moment of conception;
similar views were held by Stoics.[5] Ancient Athenian law did not recognise
fetal right to life before the ritual acknowledgement of the child.[6] The
law, however, allowed to postpone the execution of sentenced pregnant women
until a baby was delivered.[7]

Several Hindu texts on ethics and righteousness, such as _Dharmaśāstra_ , give
fetus a right to life from conception, although in practice such texts are not
always followed.[8]

The property law of Roman Empire granted fetus inheritance rights.[9] As long
as the fetus was conceived before the testator's death (usually, the father)
and then born alive, his or her inheritance rights were equal to those born
before the testator's death.[9] Even though under the Roman law the fetus was
not a legal subject, it was a potential person whose property rights were
protected after birth.[9] Roman jurist Ulpian noted, that "in the Law of the
Twelve Tables he who was in the womb is admitted to the legitimate succession,
if he has been born".[10] Another jurist Julius Paulus Prudentissimus
similarly noted, that "the ancients provided for the free unborn child in such
a way that they preserved for it all legal rights intact until the time of
birth".[10] The inheritance rights of the fetus were means of fulfilling the
testator's will.[9] The interests of the fetus could be protected by a
custodian, usually a male relative, but in some cases a woman herself could be
appointed the custodian.[11] The Digest granted the fetus consanguinity
rights,[12] vesting the protection of fetal interests in the praetor. The
Digest also prohibited the execution of pregnant women until delivery.[13] The
Roman law also envisaged that if a slave mother had been free for any period
between the time of the conception and childbirth, the child would be regarded
as born free.[14] Although the mother might have become slave again before the
childbirth, it was considered that the unborn should not be prejudiced by the
mother's misfortune.[14] At the same time, Greek and Roman sources do not
mention issues of alcohol consumption by pregnant women.[15] On that basis it
is believed that Greeks and Romans were not aware of the fetal alcohol
syndrome.[15]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/The_Petition_of_the_Unborn_Babes.jpg/220px-

The_Petition_of_the_Unborn_Babes.jpg)

A baby holding the "Petition of the Unborn Babes", 18th century illustration.

After the spread of Christianity an issue emerged on whether it was
permissible for a pregnant woman to be baptised before childbirth, due to
uncertainty as to whether the fetus would be cobaptised with its mother. The
Synod of Neo-Caesarea decided that the baptism of a pregnant woman in any
stage of gestation did not include the fetus.[16] In the Middle Ages, fetal
rights were closely associated with the concept of ensoulment. In some cases
the fetus could also inherit or be in the order of succession. In the
Byzantine Empire, fetus was regarded as a natural person and could inherit
alongside blood descendents and slaves.[17] Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII
Palaiologos allowed soldiers to transfer their pronoiai to their unborn
children.[18] The unborn royals were increasingly granted the right to
succession. In 1284, King of Scotland Alexander III designated his future
unborn children as heirs presumptive by the act of parliament to avoid
potential squabbles among loyal descendants of his lineage.[19] The 1315
entail of Scottish king Robert the Bruce allowed the unborn collateral
individuals to be in line for the throne beyond his brother Edward and
daughter Marjorie Bruce.[19] After the death of Albert II of Germany in 1439,
his then-unborn son Ladislaus the Posthumous inherited his father's sovereign
rights.[20] In 1536, the British Parliament gave the unborn children of Henry
VIII and Jane Seymour precedence in the line of royal succession.[21] The
medieval distinction between the ensouled and the unensouled fetus was removed
after Pope Pius IX decreed in 1854 that the ensoulment of Virgin Mary occurred
at conception.[22]

In 1751, a pamphlet "The Petition of the Unborn Babes to the Censors of the
Royal College of Physicians of London" by physician Frank Nicholls was
published, advocating fetal right to life and protection. The pamphlet
anticipated many of the arguments of the 21st century's pro-life movement.[23]
In 1762, English jurist and judge William Blackstone wrote that an "infant in
its mother's womb" could benefit from a legacy and receive an estate as if it
were actually bom.[24] The fetus was thus considered a person for purposes of
inheritance.[24] Similarly to the Roman law, the Napoleonic Code envisaged
that if a woman becomes a widow, a male guardian should be appointed for her
unborn child.[25]

In the 20th century and particularly after World War II fetal rights issues
continued to develop. In 1948, the Declaration of Geneva was adopted which
prior to amendments in 1983 and 2005, advised physicians to "maintain the
utmost respect for human life from the time of its conception".[26] In 1967,
_American Bar Association Journal_ noted "the modern trend of legal decisions
that grant every property and personal right to the unborn child, including
the right to life itself, from conception on".[27] In 1975, while interpreting
the right to life under the Basic Law of Germany, the Federal Constitutional
Court opined that "life in the sense of historical existence of a human
individual" exists "at least from the 14th day after conception (nidation,
individuation)" and thus everyone's right to life under the Basic Law of
Germany includes the unborn as human beings.[28] The 1980s witnessed the
reappearance of fetal protection in the workplace, aimed at guarding fetal
health in potentially hazardous working conditions.[29] In 1983, Ireland was
one of the first countries in the world to constitutionalize a fetal right to
life by passing the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution, later repealed in
September 2018.[30]

## Modern regulations[edit]

The only modern international treaty specifically tackling the fetal rights is
the American Convention on Human Rights which envisages the fetal right to
life from the moment of conception.[31] The convention was ratified by twenty
five countries of the Americas (two countries later denounced the convention
leading the current number of ratifiers to be twenty three [32])[a] in
1973–1993. Mexico ratified the convention with the reservation that the
expression "in general" concerning the fetal right to life does not constitute
an obligation and that this matter falls within the domain of the states.[34]
While the convention may be interpreted to permit domestic abortion laws in
exceptional circumstances, it effectively declares the fetus a person.[34]
However, only a minority of state ratifiers completely prohibit abortion
without allowing for an exception when the pregnant woman's life is in danger
(Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Nicaragua).[35]

Based on the 1959 Declaration of the Rights of the Child, preambular paragraph
9 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) states that "the child...
needs... appropriate legal protection before as well as after birth", but due
to ambiguity the legal protection of the fetus conflicts with the rights of a
pregnant girl under the same Convention.[36] Such conflict is sometimes called
maternal–fetal conflict.[37] Under CRC, the rights of a pregnant girl are
interpreted as superseding those of her fetus.[36] The states retain the power
to decide for themselves what prenatal legal protection they would adopt under
CRC.[38] A proposal to grant fetus the right to life from conception was put
forward by Belgium, Brazil, El Salvador, Mexico and Morocco during drafting of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), but it was
rejected in favor of less stringent wording.[39] At the same time, ICCPR
prohibits the execution of pregnant women.[40]

The World Medical Association Declaration on Therapeutic Abortion notes that
"circumstances bringing the interests of a mother into conflict with the
interests of her unborn child create a dilemma and raise the question as to
whether or not the pregnancy should be deliberately terminated".[41] The
Dublin Declaration on Maternal Health, signed in 2012, prioritizes fetal right
to life by noting that "there is a fundamental difference between abortion,
and necessary medical treatments that are carried out to save the life of the
mother, even if such treatment results in the loss of life of her unborn
child".[42] Several organizations, such as World Health Organization (WHO) and
Human Rights Watch prioritize women's reproductive rights over fetal
rights.[43]

Under European law, fetus is generally regarded as an in utero part of the
mother and thus its rights are held by the mother.[44] The European Court of
Human Rights opined that the right to life does not extend to fetuses under
Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).[44] In _H. v.
Norway_ , the European Commission did not exclude that "in certain
circumstances" the fetus may enjoy "a certain protection under Article 2,
first sentence".[45] Three European Union member states (Ireland, Hungary and
Slovakia) grant the fetus the constitutional right to life. The Constitution
of Norway grants the unborn royal children the right of succession to the
throne.[46] In English common law, fetus is granted inheritance rights under
the born alive rule.[44]

Islamic law grants the fetus the right to life particularly after ensoulment,
which according to various Islamic jurists happens after 40–42 days or four
months after conception[47] (some Shiite jurists believe the ensoulment occurs
after 11 to 14 days, during the implantation of the fertilized egg in the
uterine wall).[48] Both the Sunni and Shiite jurists accord the fetus
inheritance rights under two conditions: if a man dies and a pregnant wife
survives him, the fetal right to inherit is secure and the inheritance cannot
be disposed of before the fetus' share is set aside.[48] Under the second
condition, if a woman aborts the fetus at any stage and ignores any vital
signs, the fetus is entitled to the inheritance of any legitimate legator who
dies after its conception.[48]

The legal debate on fetal rights sometimes invokes the notion of fetal
viability.[49] Its primary determinant is fetal lung capacity which typically
develops at twenty-three to twenty-four weeks.[49] The twenty-three weeks is
usually regarded as the lower bound of fetal viability because technology has
been unable to surpass the limit set by lung development.[49] It was
nonetheless stated that technology has made it possible to regard the fetus as
a patient independent of the mother.[1] In _Winnipeg Child and Family Services
v. G._ , the judges argued that "technologies like real-time ultrasound,
foetal heart monitors and foetoscopy can clearly show us that the foetus is
alive" and thus the born alive rule is "outdated and indefensible".[50]

The creation of human embryos for all research purposes is prohibited by the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being
with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine. However, similarly to
the abortion debate, in the normative debate on embryo research two views can
be distinguished: a "fetalist" view focusing on the moral value of the embryo,
and a "feminist" view advocating the interests of women, particularly
candidate oocyte donors.[51]

## Fetal rights by country[edit]

**Country** | **Constitutional protection of fetal rights** | **Recognition of
personhood**  
---|---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d9/Flag_of_Canada_%28Pantone%29.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Canada_%28Pantone%29.svg.png) Canada | No | | No | **223. When child
becomes human being** [52] A child becomes a human being within the meaning of
this Act when it has completely proceeded, in a living state, from the body of
its mother , whether or not:

    
    
    (a) it has breathed;
    (b) it has an independent circulation; or
    (c) the navel string is severed.
    

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/78/Flag_of_Chile.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Chile.svg.png) Chile | Yes | **Article 19** [53] The Constitution
guarantees all persons:

1.The right to life and to the physical and mental integrity of the person.

    
    
    The law protects the life of the unborn .
    

| Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9f/Flag_of_the_Dominican_Republic.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_Dominican_Republic.svg.png) Dominican Republic | Yes | **Article
37** [54] The right to life is inviolable from conception until death. The
death penalty may not be established, pronounced, nor applied in any case. |
Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e8/Flag_of_Ecuador.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ecuador.svg.png) Ecuador | Yes | **Article 45** [55] Children and
adolescents shall enjoy the rights that are common to all human beings, in
addition to those that are specific to their age. The State shall recognize
and guarantee life, including care and protection from the time of conception.
| Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Flag_of_El_Salvador.svg/23px-

Flag_of_El_Salvador.svg.png) El Salvador | Yes | **Article 1[56]** El Salvador
recognizes the human person as the origin and the end of the activity of the
State, which is organized to attain justice, judicial security, and the common
good.  
In that same manner, it recognizes as a human person every human being since
the moment of conception. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/31/Flag_of_Equatorial_Guinea.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Equatorial_Guinea.svg.png) Equatorial Guinea | Yes | **Article 23**
The State protects the person from its conception and fosters the minor in
order for him to develop normally and with security for his moral, mental, and
physical integrity, as well as his life within the home. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/b/ba/Flag_of_Germany.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Germany.svg.png) Germany | No | | Yes | **219. Counselling of the
pregnant woman in a situation of emergency or conflict** The counselling
serves to protect unborn life. It should be guided by efforts to encourage the
woman to continue the pregnancy and to open her to the prospects of a life
with the child; it should help her to make a responsible and conscientious
decision. The woman must thereby be aware that the unborn child has its own
right to life.  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ec/Flag_of_Guatemala.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Guatemala.svg.png) Guatemala | Yes | **Article 3** [57] The State
guarantees and protects the human life from its conception, as well as the
integrity and security of the person. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c1/Flag_of_Hungary.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Hungary.svg.png) Hungary | Yes | **Article 2** [58] Human dignity
shall be inviolable. Every human being shall have the right to life and human
dignity; the life of the foetus shall be protected from the moment of
conception. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/Flag_of_Honduras.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Honduras.svg.png) Honduras | Yes | **Article 67** [59] The unborn
shall be considered as born for all rights accorded within the limits
established by law. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/45/Flag_of_Ireland.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Ireland.svg.png) Ireland | No (8th Amendment repealed in 2018) | | No
|  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Flag_of_Kenya.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Kenya.svg.png) Kenya | Yes | **26. Right to life**

  1. Every person has the right to life.
  2. The life of a person begins at conception .

| Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Flag_of_Madagascar.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Madagascar.svg.png) Madagascar | Yes | **Article 19** [60] The State
recognizes and organizes for all individuals the right to the protection of
health from their conception through the organization of free public health
care, which gratuitousness results from the capacity of the national
solidarity. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fc/Flag_of_Mexico.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Mexico.svg.png) Mexico | Not federally  
Varies by state[b] | | Varies by state |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/27/Flag_of_Paraguay.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Paraguay.svg.png) Paraguay | Yes | **Article 4** The right to life is
inherent to the human person. Its protection is guaranteed, in general, from
conception. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Flag_of_Peru.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Peru.svg.png) Peru | Yes | **Article 2.** [61] To life, his identity,
his moral, psychical, and physical integrity, and his free development and
well-being. The unborn child is a rights-bearing subject in all cases that
benefit him. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Flag_of_the_Philippines.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_Philippines.svg.png) Philippines | Yes | **Section 12** [62] The
State recognizes the sanctity of family life and shall protect and strengthen
the family as a basic autonomous social institution. It shall equally protect
the life of the mother and the life of the unborn from conception. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e6/Flag_of_Slovakia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Slovakia.svg.png) Slovakia | Yes | **Article 15** [63] 1. Everyone has
the right to life. Human life is worthy of protection already before birth. |
Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/74/Flag_of_the_Solomon_Islands.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_Solomon_Islands.svg.png) Solomon Islands | No | | Yes[64] |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4e/Flag_of_Uganda.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Uganda.svg.png) Uganda | Yes | **23. Protection of right to life** 2.
No person has the right to terminate the life of an unborn child except as may
be authorised by law. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States | Not federally (see Human
Life Amendment)  
1 state (Alabama) | | Not federally  
38 states  
23 states from conception |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Flag_of_Zambia.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Zambia.svg.png) Zambia | Yes | **12. Protection of right to life** 2.
No person shall deprive an unborn child of life by termination of pregnancy
except in accordance with the conditions laid down by an Act of Parliament for
that purpose. | Yes |  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/Flag_of_Zimbabwe.svg/23px-

Flag_of_Zimbabwe.svg.png) Zimbabwe | Yes | **48. Right to life** 3. An Act of
Parliament must protect the lives of unborn children, and that Act must
provide that pregnancy may be terminated only in accordance with that law. |
Yes |

  1. **^** Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Dominican Republic, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago ( _denounced_ ), Uruguay and Venezuela ( _denounced_ ).[1][33]
  2. **^** Baja California, Sonora, Campeche, Chihuahua, Chiapas, Colima, Durango, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Nayarit, Oaxaca, Puebla, Querétaro, Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosi, Tamaulipas and Yucatan

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d5/H.R._1997_signing.jpg/250px-H.R._1997_signing.jpg)

United States President George W. Bush signs the Unborn Victims of Violence
Act of 2004

The Eighth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland gave "the unborn" a right
to life equal to that of "the mother".[65] In 2018, the Supreme Court ruled
that the fetus' only inherent constitutionally protected right is the right to
be born, overturning a High Court ruling that a fetus additionally possessed
the children's rights guaranteed by Article 42A of the Constitution.[66] On 25
May 2018, a referendum was passed[67] which amended the Constitution by the
substitution of the former provision recognising the right to life of the
unborn, with one permitting the Oireachtas, the Irish Parliament, to legislate
for the termination of pregnancies.[68] This amendment took effect when it was
signed into law by the President of Ireland on 18 September 2018, and abortion
was governed by the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013 until it was
replaced and repealed by the Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy)
Act 2018, which took effect on 1 January 2019.

In the United States, as of 2014[update], thirty-eight states provide certain
level of criminal protection for the unborn, and twenty-three of these states
have laws that protect the fetus from conception until birth.[69] All US
states–by statute, court rule or case law–permit a guardian ad litem to
represent the interests of the unborn.[70] In 1999, the Unborn Victims of
Violence Act was introduced into United States Congress which defines violent
assault committed against pregnant women as being a crime against two victims:
the woman and the fetus she carries.[71] This law was passed in 2004 after the
murder of Laci Peterson and the fetus she was carrying. In 2002, U.S.
President George W. Bush announced a plan to ensure health care coverage for
fetuses under the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP).[72]

The civil codes of several countries, such as China (including Hong Kong and
Macau)[73] and Russia, as well as some US states,[70] grant fetus inheritance
rights, usually under the born alive rule. In the civil code of Iran, fetus
can inherit in case of abortion that took place due to a crime, as long as the
fetus was alive even for a second after birth.[74] Under the civil code of
Japan, for the purposes of inheritance the fetus is deemed to have already
been born.[75] The civil codes of the Philippines and Spain envisage that
donations to the unborn children can be made and accepted by "persons who
would legally represent them if they were already born".[76][77] The same is
allowed by the Malikis.[78]

Alongside Norway, the Constitution of Bhutan grants the unborn royal children
the right to succession, but only if there is no male heir.[79]

## Behavioral intervention[edit]

Various initiatives, prompted by concern for the ill effects which might be
posed to the health or development of a fetus, seek to restrict or discourage
women from engaging in certain behaviors while pregnant. Also, in some
countries, laws have been passed to restrict the practice of abortion based
upon the gender of the fetus.

  * Many jurisdictions actively warn against the consumption of alcoholic beverages by pregnant women, recommending a maximum intake or total abstinence, due to its association with Fetal alcohol syndrome. Countries that encourage those who are pregnant to avoid alcohol either entirely or partially include Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, Israel, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
  * Many national and international agencies recommend dietary guidelines for pregnant women due to the health risks posed by the consumption of fish contaminated with methylmercury through industrial pollution. Studies have linked exposure to various levels of methylmercury in utero to neurological disorders in children.
  * The use of tobacco products or exposure to secondhand smoke during pregnancy has been linked to low birth weight.[80] Governor Mike Huckabee of Arkansas, citing studies which attribute 10% of infant deaths to tobacco-smoking mothers, considered adopting a smoking ban for pregnant women in 2006 with the aim of reducing infant mortality.[81]
  * No U.S. state has enacted a law which criminalizes specific behavior during pregnancy,[ _needs update_ ] but, nonetheless, it has been estimated that at least 200 American women have been criminally prosecuted or arrested under existing child abuse statutes for allegedly bringing about harm in-utero through their conduct during pregnancy.[82] Reasons for pressing charges included use of illicit drugs, consumption of alcohol, and failure to comply with a doctor's order of bedrest or caesarean section.[82] Drug addicts have been accused of "supplying drugs to a minor" through unintentional chemical subjection via the umbilical cord.[82] Others have been charged with assault with a deadly weapon with the "deadly weapon" in question being an illegal drug.[82] Minnesota, Wisconsin and South Dakota allow women who continue to use substances while pregnant to be civilly committed.[82] Some states require that medical providers report any infant who is born with a physical dependency, or who tests positive for residual traces of alcohol or drugs, to child welfare authorities.
  * Cultural preferences for male children in some parts of Asia, such as Mainland China, India, South Korea, and Taiwan, have sometimes led to sex-selective abortion of female fetuses, leading to the disparity between male-to-female birth rates which is observed in some places. India banned the practice of abortion for reasons of fetal sex in 1994.[83]

## See also[edit]

  * Beginning of human personhood
  * Born alive rule
  * Children's rights
  * Embryo adoption
  * Nutrition and pregnancy
  * Prenatal care
  * Reproductive justice
  * Stem cell controversy
  * Women's reproductive rights

## Notes[edit]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Fetal Rights". _West's Encyclopedia of American Law, edition 2_. The Gale Group, Inc. 2008. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
  2. **^** Erin N. Linder (2005). "Punishing prenatal alcohol abuse: the problems inherent in utilizing civil commitment to address addiction" (PDF). University of Illinois Law Review. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
  3. **^** Riddle, John (1994). _Contraception and Abortion from the Ancient World to the Renaissance_. Harvard University Press. p. 8. ISBN 0674168763.
  4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ James Fieser (2010). "Abortion". _Applied Ethics: A Sourcebook_. University of Tennessee. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
  5. **^** Riddle 1994, p. 64.
  6. **^** K. A. Kapparis (2002). _Abortion in the Ancient World_. Duckworth Academic. p. 188. ISBN 0715630806.
  7. **^** Mitchel Roth (2010). _Crime and Punishment: A History of the Criminal Justice System_. Cengage Learning. p. 12. ISBN 0495809888.
  8. **^** Harold G. Coward, Philip Hilton Cook (1996). _Religious Dimensions of Child and Family Life: Reflections on the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child_. Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press. p. 60. ISBN 155058104X.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jean Reith Schroedel (2000). _Is the Fetus a Person?: A Comparison of Policies Across the Fifty States_. Cornell University Press. p. 31. ISBN 0801437075.
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Judith Evans Grubbs (2002). _Women and the Law in the Roman Empire: A Sourcebook on Marriage, Divorce and Widowhood_. Psychology Press. p. 264. ISBN 0415152402.
  11. **^** Е. В. Афонасин. (2014). "Казусы римского права" (PDF) (in Russian). Новосибирский гос. ун-т. p. 78. Retrieved 3 November 2015.
  12. **^** "The Digest or Pandects Book XXXVIII". The Roman Law Library. Retrieved 3 November 2015.
  13. **^** "The Digest or Pandects Book XLVIII". The Roman Law Library. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Robert Dundonald Melville. _A manual of the principles of Roman law relating to persons, property, and obligations_. Ripol Classic. p. 103. ISBN 1176341588.
  15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ernest L. Abel (1999). "Was the fetal alcohol syndrome recognized by the Greeks and Romans?" (PDF). _Alcohol & Alcoholism_. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  16. **^** S. Troianos. "The embryo in Byzantine canon law" (PDF). Biopolitics International Organisation. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
  17. **^** Nigel Wilson, ed. (2013). _Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece_. Routledge. p. 381. ISBN 1136787992.
  18. **^** Mark C. Bartusis (2013). _Land and Privilege in Byzantium: The Institution of Pronoia_. Cambridge University Press. p. 276. ISBN 1139851462.
  19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michael Penman. "Diffinicione successionis ad regnum Scottorum: Royal succession in Scotland in the Later Middle Ages" (PDF). STORRE: Stirling Online Research Repository. Retrieved 8 November 2015.
  20. **^** John A. Gade. _Luxemburg in the Middle Ages_. Brill Archive. p. 211.
  21. **^** James Panton (2011). _Historical Dictionary of the British Monarchy_. Scarecrow Press. p. xxx. ISBN 0810874970.
  22. **^** Erich H. Loewy (2013). _Textbook of Medical Ethics_. Springer Science  & Business Media. pp. 159–160. ISBN 9401744793.
  23. **^** "Man-Midwife, Male Feminist: The Life and Times of George Macaulay, M.D., Ph.D. (1716-1766)". University of Michigan Library. Retrieved 17 November 2015.
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The Legal Status Of the Unborn Child". _The Journal of Legal Medicine_. Magazines for Industry, Incorporated: iv. 1977.
  25. **^** France, George Spence, Robert Samuel Richards (1824). _The Code Napoleon: Or, The French Civil Code_. C. Hunter. p. 108.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  26. **^** Tatsuo Kuroyanagi (2013). "Historical Transition in Medical Ethics — Challenges of the World Medical Association" (PDF). _Japan Medical Association Journal_. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
  27. **^** Richard P. Byrne (April 1967). "Abortion Classified and Reclassified". _ABA Journal_. **53** : 304, 306. ISSN 0747-0088.
  28. **^** Jayawickrama, Nihal (2002). _The Judicial Application of Human Rights Law: National, Regional and International Jurisprudence_. Cambridge University Press. pp. 246–247. ISBN 052178042X.
  29. **^** Blank, Robert; Bonnicksen, Andrea (2013). _Medicine Unbound: The Human Body and the Limits of Medical Intervention: Emerging Issues in Biomedical Policy Volume 3_. Columbia University Press. p. 77. ISBN 0231514263.
  30. **^** Fiona De Londras (22 May 2015). "Constitutionalizing Fetal Rights: A Salutary Tale from Ireland". _Michigan Journal of Gender & Law_. SSRN 2600907.
  31. **^** "Q &A: Human Rights Law and Access to Abortion". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
  32. **^** http://www.oas.org/dil/treaties_B-32_American_Convention_on_Human_Rights_sign.htm
  33. **^** "Signatories and Ratifications". Organization of American States. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
  34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Alvaro Paul (2012). "Controversial conceptions: The unborn and the American Convention on Human Rights". Loyola University Chicago International Law Review. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
  35. **^** https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-37336279
  36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Abby F. Janoff (2004). "Rights of the pregnant child vs. rights of the unborn under the Convention on the Rights of the Child" (PDF). _Boston University International Law Journal_. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
  37. **^** Linda Farber Post (1996). "Bioethical Consideration of Maternal-Fetal Issues". _Fordham Urban Law Journal_. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  38. **^** Jozef H.H.M. Dorscheidt (2010). "Developments in Legal and Medical Practice Regarding the Unborn Child and the Need to Expand Prenatal Legal Protection". _European Journal of Health Law_. ResearchGate. Retrieved 8 November 2015.
  39. **^** Niels Petersen. "The Legal Status of the Human Embryo in vitro: General Human Rights Instruments" (PDF). _Zeitschrift für ausländisches öffentliches Recht und Völkerrecht_. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
  40. **^** "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights". UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Retrieved 1 November 2015.
  41. **^** "WMA Declaration on Therapeutic Abortion". WMA. Archived from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2015.
  42. **^** "Translations". Dublin Declaration. Retrieved 28 October 2015.
  43. **^** World Health Organization (2012). _Safe abortion: technical and policy guidance for health systems_ (PDF) (2nd ed.). Geneva: World Health Organization. p. 78. ISBN 9789241548434.
  44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Asim Kurjak, Frank A. Chervenak, eds. (2006). _Textbook of Perinatal Medicine, Second Edition_. CRC Press. p. 218. ISBN 1439814694.CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
  45. **^** Douwe Korff. "The right to life. A guide to the implementation of Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights" (PDF). European Court of Human Rights. p. 10. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
  46. **^** "The Constitution, as laid down on 17 May 1814 by the Constituent Assembly at Eidsvoll and subsequently amended, most recently in May 2014" (PDF). Storting. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 11 November 2015. "B, Article 6: An unborn child shall also be included among those entitled to the succession and shall immediately take her or his proper place in the line of succession as soon as she or he is born into the world."
  47. **^** Abdel-Rahim Omran, ed. (2012). _Family Planning in the Legacy of Islam_. Routledge. ISBN 1134936427.
  48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Abdulaziz Sachedina (2009). _Islamic Biomedical Ethics: Principles and Application_. Oxford University Press. p. 139. ISBN 0199702845.
  49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Blank  & Bonnicksen 2013, p. 85.
  50. **^** Kristin Savell. "Is the 'Born Alive' Rule Outdated and Indefensible?" (PDF). _Sydney Law Review_. Retrieved 8 November 2015.
  51. **^** Guido de Wert, Christine Mummery (2003). "Human embryonic stem cells: research, ethics and policy". _Human Reproduction_. Oxford Journals. **18** (4). doi:10.1093/humrep/deg143. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  52. **^** Criminal Code of Canada
  53. **^** "Chile's Constitution of 1980 with Amendments through 2012" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  54. **^** "Dominican Republic's Constitution of 2010" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  55. **^** "Ecuador's Constitution of 2008" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  56. **^** "El Salvador's Constitution of 1983 with Amendments through 2003" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  57. **^** "Guatemala's Constitution of 1985 with Amendments through 1993" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  58. **^** "Hungary's Constitution of 2011" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  59. **^** "Honduras's Constitution of 1982 with Amendments through 2012" (PDF). Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  60. **^** "Madagascar's Constitution of 2010" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  61. **^** "Peru's Constitution of 1993 with Amendments through 2009" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  62. **^** "Philippines's Constitution of 1987" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  63. **^** "Slovakia's Constitution of 1992 with Amendments through 2014" (PDF). Constitute Project. Retrieved 31 October 2015.
  64. **^** Penal Code of Solomon Islands
  65. **^** "Eighth Amendment of the Constitution Act, 1983". _Irish Statute Book_. p. Schedule, Part II. Retrieved 8 March 2018.
  66. **^** "Unborn 'does not have' inherent constitutional rights". _RTÉ.ie_. 7 March 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2018.
  67. **^** de Freytas-Tamura, Kimiko (26 May 2018). "Ireland Votes to Legalize Abortion in Blow to Catholic Conservatism". _The New York Times_. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 May 2018.
  68. **^** "Thirty-sixth Amendment of the Constitution Bill 2018". Houses of the Oireachtas. Retrieved 9 March 2018.
  69. **^** Jessica M. Boudreaux, John W. Thompson Jr (1 June 2015). "Maternal-Fetal Rights and Substance Abuse: Gestation Without Representation". _Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law_. **43**. Retrieved 8 November 2015.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  70. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Paul Benjamin Linton (2011). "The Legal Status of the Unborn Child Under State Law" (PDF). _St. Thomas Journal of Law & Public Policy_. Thomas More Society. Retrieved 6 November 2015.
  71. **^** Congress of the United States of America. (25 March 2004). _Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004._ H.R.1997. Retrieved 31 July 2006.
  72. **^** "The Bush Administration's Plan for Fetal Care." (7 February 2002). _On Point._ Retrieved 31 July 2006.
  73. **^** Kuang Yanping. "A Comparative Study on the Mainland, Macao, and Hong Kong's Civil Remedy of Fetus's Interests". _Journal of China Women's University_. Gender Study Network. Archived from the original on 22 November 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2015.
  74. **^** Mohammad Reza Mohammadzadeh Rahni, Peyman Kavousi, Reza Emami Rad (2014). "Investigating the Inheritance of Fetus in the Civil Law of Iran and France" (PDF). _Journal of Applied Environmental and Biological Sciences_. Retrieved 6 November 2015.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  75. **^** "Japanese Civil Code in English". Craftsman, LPC. Retrieved 8 November 2015.
  76. **^** "The Civil Code of the Philippines". Chan Robles Virtual Law Library. Retrieved 6 November 2015.
  77. **^** "Spain Civil Code (approved by Royal Decree of 24 July 1889)". WIPO. Retrieved 8 November 2015.
  78. **^** Jamal J. Nasir, ed. (1990). _The Islamic Law of Personal Status_. Brill Archive. p. 284. ISBN 1853332801.
  79. **^** "Bhutan Constitution" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 September 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2014.
  80. **^** Rosenburg, J. (2004). Low Birth Weight Is Linked to Timing of Prenatal Care and Other Maternal Factors. _International Family Planning Perspectives, 30 (2)_. Retrieved 31 July 2006.
  81. **^** "Some Legislators Want To Ban Pregnant Women From Smoking". (14 June 2006). _The Hometown Channel._ Retrieved 31 July 2006. [ _dead link_ ]
  82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Center for Reproductive Rights. (September 2000). Punishing Women for Their Behavior During Pregnancy: An Approach That Undermines Women’s Health and Children’s Interests Archived 1 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 31 July 2006.
  83. **^** Jyotsna Singh, India probes baby body parts find, BBS News, 23 July 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2008.

  84. v

  85. t
  86. e

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

  * History of abortion
  * Methods of abortion
  * Abortion debate
  * Abortion law

Movements|

  * Abortion-rights movements
  * Anti-abortion movements

Issues|

  * Abortion and mental health
  * Beginning of human personhood
  * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
  * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
  * Anti-abortion violence
  * Abortion under communism
  * Birth control
  * Crisis pregnancy center
  * Ethical aspects of abortion
  * Eugenics
  * Fetal rights
  * Forced abortion
  * Genetics and abortion
  * Late-term abortion
  * Legalized abortion and crime effect
  * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
  * Limit of viability
  * Men's rights
  * Minors and abortion
  * One-child policy
  * Paternal rights and abortion
  * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
  * Prenatal development
  * Reproductive rights
  * Self-induced abortion
  * Sex-selective abortion
  * Sidewalk counseling
  * Societal attitudes towards abortion
  * Toxic abortion
  * Unsafe abortion
  * Women's rights

By country|

| Africa|

  * Algeria
  * Angola
  * Benin
  * Botswana
  * Burkina Faso
  * Burundi
  * Cameroon
  * Cape Verde
  * Central African Republic
  * Chad
  * Egypt
  * Ghana
  * Namibia
  * Nigeria
  * South Africa
  * Uganda
  * Zimbabwe

---|---  
Asia|

  * Afghanistan
  * Armenia
  * Azerbaijan
  * Bahrain
  * Bangladesh
  * Bhutan
  * Brunei
  * Cambodia
  * China
  * Cyprus
  * Georgia
  * East Timor
  * India
  * Iran
  * Israel
  * Japan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Northern Cyprus
  * South Korea
  * Philippines
  * Qatar
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Turkey

Europe|

  * Albania
  * Andorra
  * Austria
  * Belarus
  * Belgium
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Kazakhstan
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Malta
  * Moldova
  * Monaco
  * Montenegro
  * Netherlands
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * Russia
  * San Marino
  * Serbia
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom

North America|

  * Belize
  * Canada
  * Costa Rica
  * Cuba
  * Dominican Republic
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Mexico
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama
  * Trinidad and Tobago
  * United States

Oceania|

  * Australia
  * Micronesia
  * Fiji
  * Kiribati
  * Marshall Islands
  * New Zealand
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Samoa
  * Solomon Islands
  * Tonga
  * Tuvalu
  * Vanuatu

South America|

  * Argentina
  * Bolivia
  * Brazil
  * Chile
  * Colombia
  * Ecuador
  * Guyana
  * Paraguay
  * Peru
  * Suriname
  * Uruguay
  * Venezuela

Law|

  * Case law
  * Constitutional law
  * History of abortion law
  * Laws by country
  * Buffer zones
  * Conscientious objection
  * Fetal protection
  * Heartbeat bills
  * Informed consent
  * Late-term restrictions
  * Parental involvement
  * Spousal consent

Methods|

  * Vacuum aspiration
  * Dilation and evacuation
  * Dilation and curettage
  * Intact D&X
  * Hysterotomy
  * Instillation
  * Menstrual extraction
  * Abortifacient drugs
    * Methotrexate
    * Mifepristone
    * Misoprostol
    * Oxytocin
  * Self-induced abortion
  * Unsafe abortion

Religion|

  * Buddhism
  * Christianity
    * Catholicism
  * Hinduism
  * Islam
  * Judaism
  * Scientology

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * v

  * t
  * e

Family rights

* * *

Elements|

  * Fetal rights
  * Children's rights
  * Matrimonial rights
  * Mothers' rights
  * Youth rights
  * Reproductive rights

Rights movements|

  * Children's
  * Fathers'
  * Mothers' rights
  * Parents'
  * Grandparents

See also|

  * Family law
  * Parental responsibility
  * Parental liability

Related|

  * Human rights

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fetal_rights&oldid=900180469"

Categories:

  * Abortion law
  * Family law
  * Abortion debate
  * Human rights by issue
  * Personhood

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter
  * CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)
  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from January 2017
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Articles with short description
  * Use dmy dates from May 2019
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014
  * All articles containing potentially dated statements
  * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2015
  * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * فارسی
  * 日本語
  * Português

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 3 June 2019, at 23:35 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

