

Skip to content

Tip: You can quickly leave this website by clicking on the "X" icon in the
bottom right or by pressing the Escape key twice. Users of the Microsoft Edge
web browser will not be able to use the “back” button to re-enter the website
after hitting the “X” or “Escape” button. __ Dismiss this notification

                
                                      * Call: 1.866.331.9474
                      * TTY: 1.866.331.8453
                      * Text: loveis to 22522
                      * En Espanol
                

![Loveisrespect.org](https://www.loveisrespect.org/wp-

content/uploads/2014/12/lir20-logo-1.png)

Loveisrespect.org

                
                                      * Get Help
                        * For Yourself
                          * Contact Us
                          * Referrals
                          * Safety Planning
                          * Support Systems
                          * Self-Care
                          * I Live with My Abuser
                          * I Have Children with My Abuser
                          * Can I Stop Being Abusive?
                        * For Someone Else
                          * Help a Friend
                          * Help a Coworker
                          * Help a Roommate
                          * Help My Parent
                          * Help a Stranger
                          * Help My Child
                          * Be an LGBTQ Ally
                        * Legal Help
                          * Calling the Police
                          * Documenting Abuse
                          * Restraining Orders
                          * LGBTQ Relationships and the Law
                          * Help for Undocumented Immigrants
                        * On Campus
                          * What is Title IX?
                          * Reporting Under Title IX
                          * Resources
                          * Ask an Advocate
                          * Video Series: What's Love Got to Do With It?
                      * Relationships 101
                        * Dating Basics
                          * Relationship Spectrum
                          * Dating FAQ
                          * What Should I Look for in a Partner?
                          * Should We Break Up?
                        * Healthy Relationships
                          * What is Consent?
                          * How Can We Communicate Better?
                          * Trust
                          * Setting Boundaries
                          * Conflict Resolution
                          * Sex and Healthy Relationships
                          * Healthy LGBTQ Relationships
                        * Is This Abuse?
                          * Types of Abuse
                          * Why People Abuse
                          * Power and Control Wheel
                          * Why Do People Stay in Abusive Relationships?
                          * Drugs, Alcohol and Abuse
                          * Abusive LGBTQ Relationships
                          * Texting and Sexting
                          * Social Networking Safety
                          * Check-Ins
                      * Resources
                        * Download Materials
                        * Understanding Teen Dating Violence And Sexual Assault
                        * Dating Abuse Statistics
                        * Love is Digital
                        * Start Talking
                        * Educators Toolkits
                        * Other Campaigns
                      * Teen DV Month
                        * Materials
                        * Healthy Relationship Poll
                        * Webinar
                        * Videos
                      * Quizzes
                        * Printable Quizzes
                      * About
                        * About loveisrespect
                        * Informed Consent
                        * Get Involved
                        * Sponsors & Partners
                        * Careers
                        * News Room
                        * Terms & Conditions Text for Help Services
                      * Blogs
                        * Dating & Hooking Up
                        * Safety & Self Care
                        * Dynamics of Abuse
                        * Supporting Others
                        * In The Media
                        * Inside LIR
                        * Teen DV Month
                        * Archive
                      * Donate
                

__ To search this site, enter a search term magnifying-glassSubmit search
query Submit search query

# Sex and Healthy Relationships

## Sex and Healthy Relationships

Healthy Relationships

## Healthy Sex is About Respect!

In a healthy relationship, both partners are able to express their feelings
and respect each other's boundaries about sex. You shouldn’t have to have sex
to keep your partner. You may feel comfortable kissing or holding hands but
not want to go any further. That’s okay!

Deciding whether you want to have sex or when you should is a decision you
should make when it feels right for YOU. In a healthy relationship, your
partner respects your decisions, even if they don't like them.

If you are thinking about when to have sex, keep in mind:

                
                                      * You should feel comfortable with your decision.
                      * Talk with your partner about safe sex practices, like getting tested for STIs and considering birth control options.
                      * Be honest with yourself and your partner. If you’re not ready, that’s okay and your partner should respect it.
                      * If something scares you or makes you feel uncomfortable, you can say no at any time.
                      * You have the right to talk openly and honestly about your fears, worries and feelings.
                      * If your partner tries to threaten or pressure you into having sex, that can be a sign of an unhealthy relationship. You deserve better.
                      * No matter how long you’ve been with someone or how many times you’ve done something, you have the right to say no at any time for any reason.
                      * If someone won't take no for an answer and repeatedly pressures you verbally, emotionally or physically, that can be a sign of abuse.
                      * You have control over your own body, and no one else has the right to tell you what to do with it.
                

### Why is It So Complicated?

Having sex can raise the intensity of emotions that people feel for each other
-- whether you’re in a serious or casual relationship. At times, this
elevation is a good and enjoyable thing, but sometimes it makes a difficult
situation worse. It’s important that you feel ready and confident in your
decisions about having sex.

Even if you are in a healthy relationship and would like to have sex with your
partner, some beliefs or expectations might make this decision more
complicated. You and the people in your life might have different ideas about
when or what type of sexual activity is alright and what is not.

Here are a few ways this might happen:

                
                                      * Your family does not allow you to date, let alone have sex and there is a risk they would find out.
                      * In your culture or religion, it is expected that you wait until marriage. You might agree, disagree or be questioning this belief.
                      * You feel that your friends or peers will not agree with your decision and you care about their opinions.
                

You might feel like you’re choosing between what you want and what others
want, yet you might also share some of the same beliefs. Just remember that
you are capable of making your own decisions and creating your own set of
values.

### Learn to Communicate

Only you know what’s on your mind, so unless you express yourself, the other
person is only left guessing. Communication is always key to a healthy
relationship, and the physical part of it is no different. It can be
uncomfortable being completely open when it comes to talking about sex, even
with a girlfriend or boyfriend. Still, it is important to push past that and
let them know what you like, what you don’t like or if you don’t want to go
any further. Encourage your partner to be open as well because it takes
practice and patience.

Learning to listen is equally, and possibly even more, essential to strong
communication. When you show the other person that what they say matters to
you, they will be more likely to trust you and listen to you in return. Sex
and intimacy are strongly affected by how both people feel, so it really pays
off to create a positive atmosphere.

### Break Out of the Box

When people are not sure how to act in a certain situation or not sure what
others will think is cool, they tend to try and be who they _should_ be and
not who they really are. A guy might be led to believe that he should have sex
with a lot of girls and not get emotionally attached to them. On the other
hand, a girl might be led to believe that having sex with too many guys is
“slutty,” and that girls should “play hard to get.” Stereotypes like these can
make it harder for everyone to be honest about what they really want and can
also make them feel self-conscious.

A relationship will be stronger and more real when both people can truly be
themselves both inside and outside of the bedroom. When we question these
“rules,” we respect our partner for who they are instead of who they “should
be.”

### What is Sexual Abuse?

Sexual abuse is any type of unwanted sexual contact. Forcing or pressuring
someone to do something they don’t want or don’t consent to is sexual assault.
No one should ever take advantage of you sexually when you are asleep,
intoxicated or under the influence of drugs. This can be a very serious and
dangerous form of abuse. Learn more about sexual abuse and what to do if you
experience it.

## Footer

### About

Loveisrespect is the ultimate resource to empower youth to prevent and end
dating abuse. It is a project of the National Domestic Violence Hotline.

Exempted from federal income tax under the provisions of Section 501(c) (3) of
the Internal Revenue Code.

* * *
                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Instagram
                      * Tumblr
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                

### Our Sponsors

                
                                      * ![](https://www.loveisrespect.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/hcsc-footer.png)
                      * ![](https://www.loveisrespect.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/fifth-footer.png)
                      * ![](https://www.loveisrespect.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/verizon-footer.png)
                

![](https://www.loveisrespect.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/FYSB-75x75.png)  
This project was supported by Grant Number 90EV0426 from the Administration on
Children, Youth and Families, Family and Youth Services Bureau, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. The opinions, findings, conclusions
and recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Administration on Children,
Youth and Families, Family and Youth Services Bureau, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.

* * *

This website is funded in part through a grant from the Office for Victims of
Crime, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Neither the
U.S. Department of Justice nor any or its components operate, control, are
responsible for, or necessarily endorse, this website (including, without
limitations, its content, technical infrastructure, and policies, and any
services or tools provided).

© 2017 – National Domestic Violence Hotline

Trigger

Safety Alert: Computer use can be monitored and is impossible to completely
clear. If you are afraid your internet usage might be monitored, call
loveisrespect at 1-866-331-9474 or TTY 1-866-331-8453. If you need to exit
this website in a hurry, hit the ESCAPE key twice or click the icon in the
bottom right. Users of web browser Microsoft Edge will be redirected to Google
if they hit the “X” or “Escape” button.

Okay

Click to leave this website now! **caret-downemailfacebookgoogleplusLove is
Respect Heart Iconlinkedinmagnifying-glasspdfpinterestreddittumblrtwitter**

                
                                      * Get Help
                        * For Yourself
                          * Contact Us
                          * Referrals
                          * Safety Planning
                          * Support Systems
                          * Self-Care
                          * I Live with My Abuser
                          * I Have Children with My Abuser
                          * Can I Stop Being Abusive?
                        * For Someone Else
                          * Help a Friend
                          * Help a Coworker
                          * Help a Roommate
                          * Help My Parent
                          * Help a Stranger
                          * Help My Child
                          * Be an LGBTQ Ally
                        * Legal Help
                          * Calling the Police
                          * Documenting Abuse
                          * Restraining Orders
                          * LGBTQ Relationships and the Law
                          * Help for Undocumented Immigrants
                        * On Campus
                          * What is Title IX?
                          * Reporting Under Title IX
                          * Resources
                          * Ask an Advocate
                          * Video Series: What's Love Got to Do With It?
                      * Relationships 101
                        * Dating Basics
                          * Relationship Spectrum
                          * Dating FAQ
                          * What Should I Look for in a Partner?
                          * Should We Break Up?
                        * Healthy Relationships
                          * What is Consent?
                          * How Can We Communicate Better?
                          * Trust
                          * Setting Boundaries
                          * Conflict Resolution
                          * Sex and Healthy Relationships
                          * Healthy LGBTQ Relationships
                        * Is This Abuse?
                          * Types of Abuse
                          * Why People Abuse
                          * Power and Control Wheel
                          * Why Do People Stay in Abusive Relationships?
                          * Drugs, Alcohol and Abuse
                          * Abusive LGBTQ Relationships
                          * Texting and Sexting
                          * Social Networking Safety
                          * Check-Ins
                      * Resources
                        * Download Materials
                        * Understanding Teen Dating Violence And Sexual Assault
                        * Dating Abuse Statistics
                        * Love is Digital
                        * Start Talking
                        * Educators Toolkits
                        * Other Campaigns
                      * Teen DV Month
                        * Materials
                        * Healthy Relationship Poll
                        * Webinar
                        * Videos
                      * Quizzes
                        * Printable Quizzes
                      * About
                        * About loveisrespect
                        * Informed Consent
                        * Get Involved
                        * Sponsors & Partners
                        * Careers
                        * News Room
                        * Terms & Conditions Text for Help Services
                      * Blogs
                        * Dating & Hooking Up
                        * Safety & Self Care
                        * Dynamics of Abuse
                        * Supporting Others
                        * In The Media
                        * Inside LIR
                        * Teen DV Month
                        * Archive
                      * Donate
                

Click to go back to top of page. __

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

