

  * MedicineNet 

  *     *       *         *           * SYMPTOM CHECKER
  * Disease & Conditions

    * Conditions A-Z
    * Procedures A-Z
    * Allergies
    * Alzheimer's
    * Arthritis
    * Asthma
    * Blood Pressure
    * Cancer
    * Cholesterol
    * Chronic Pain
    * Cold & Flu
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Digestion
    * Eyesight
    * Health & Living
    * Healthy Kids
    * Hearing & Ear
    * Heart
    * HIV/AIDS
    * Infectious Disease
    * Lung Conditions
    * Menopause
    * Men's Health
    * Mental Health
    * Migraine
    * Neurology
    * Oral Health
    * Pregnancy
    * Senior Health
    * Sexual Health
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep
    * Thyroid
    * Travel Health
    * Women's Health

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

hemorrhoids-update.jpg) Gastroenterology

#### Hemorrhoids

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

type-2-diabetes.jpg) Diabetes

#### Diabetes (Type 1 and Type 2)

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

bullying.jpg) Teen Health

#### Bullying

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

jock-itch.jpg) Dermatology

#### Jock Itch

  * Drugs & Supplements

    * Medications
    * Supplements and Vitamins

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-adult-

adhd.jpg) ADHD

#### Vyvanse vs. Strattera

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

avoid-insomnia-tips.jpg) Sleep Disorder

#### Benzodiazepines

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

depression.jpg) Depression

#### Zoloft

  * Health & Living

    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Exercise & Fitness
    * Nutrition, Food & Recipes
    * Prevention & Wellness

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

high-fiber-foods.jpg) Digestive Problems

#### Low Fiber Diet

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-exercise-and-

fitness-s.jpg) Fitness, Exercise, Sports

#### Aerobic Exercise

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-top-

foods-for-probiotics.jpg) Digestive Problems

#### Probiotics

  * Media

All  
Slideshows ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-

slideshow/thumb-weird-things-happen-to-your-skin-as-you-age.jpg)

#### Adult Skin Conditions

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-eye-

diseases.jpg)

#### Common Eye Problems and Infections

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

stds.jpg)

#### Sexually Transmitted Diseases

All  
Quizzes ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-

slideshow/thumb-best-diet-tips.jpg)

#### Diet and Nutrition Quiz

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

what-causes-heart-palpitations.jpg)

#### Heart Disease Quiz

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-kidney-

disease.jpg)

#### Kidney Disease Quiz

All  
Images ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-

slideshow/thumb-genital-warts-hpv.jpg)

#### Genital Warts

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

scabies.jpg)

#### Scabies

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/thumb-slideshow/thumb-

alopecia-areata-2.jpg)

#### Alopecia Areata

  * MedTerms Dictionary
  * Slideshows
  * Quizzes
  * Images

  * Privacy Policy

  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Terms of Use
  * Advertising Policy

  * ![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct594277_s1.gif)

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/footer/badges/rgb_tag_registered.png)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)

  * ![](https://choices.truste.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

©1996-2018 MedicineNet, Inc. All rights reserved. Terms of Use.

MedicineNet does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See
additional information.

home/healthy kids health center/healthy kids a-z list/puberty center /puberty
article

# Puberty

  * Puberty facts
  * What is puberty?
  * When does puberty occur?
  * What determines when puberty begins?
  * What are the physical **stages** of puberty in girls and boys?
  * What other changes in the body occur during puberty in boys and girls?
  * What emotional changes occur in puberty in boys and girls?
  * What are the medical concerns associated with normal puberty?
  * What are medical conditions associated with early or late puberty?

  * Medical Author: Melissa Conrad Stoppler, MD

![Melissa Conrad Stöppler,

MD](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/bio/stoppler.png)

#### Melissa Conrad Stoppler, MD

Melissa Conrad Stoppler, MD, is a U.S. board-certified Anatomic Pathologist
with subspecialty training in the fields of Experimental and Molecular
Pathology. Dr. Stoppler's educational background includes a BA with Highest
Distinction from the University of Virginia and an MD from the University of
North Carolina. She completed residency training in Anatomic Pathology at
Georgetown University followed by subspecialty fellowship training in
molecular diagnostics and experimental pathology.

  * Medical Editor: William C. Shiel Jr., MD, FACP, FACR

![William C. Shiel Jr., MD, FACP,

FACR](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/bio/shiel.png)

#### William C. Shiel Jr., MD, FACP, FACR

Dr. Shiel received a Bachelor of Science degree with honors from the
University of Notre Dame. There he was involved in research in radiation
biology and received the Huisking Scholarship. After graduating from St. Louis
University School of Medicine, he completed his Internal Medicine residency
and Rheumatology fellowship at the University of California, Irvine. He is
board-certified in Internal Medicine and Rheumatology.

  * Puberty Center
  * Take the Quiz on Puberty
  * Parenting Principles Slideshow Pictures
  * Parenting and Healthy Eating Slideshow Pictures
  * Puberty In Girls FAQs
  * Patient Comments: Puberty - Physical Changes
  * Patient Comments: Puberty - Other Changes
  * Patient Comments: Puberty - Early or Late
  * Find a local Pediatrician in your town

  * Puberty facts

  * What is puberty?
  * When does puberty occur?
  * What determines when puberty begins?
  * What are the physical **stages** of puberty in girls and boys?
  * What other changes in the body occur during puberty in boys and girls?
  * What emotional changes occur in puberty in boys and girls?
  * What are the medical concerns associated with normal puberty?
  * What are medical conditions associated with early or late puberty?

* * *

### Puberty facts

  * Puberty is the period of sexual maturation and achievement of fertility.
  * The time when puberty begins varies greatly among individuals; however, puberty usually occurs in girls between the ages of 10 and 14 and between the ages of 12 and 16 in boys.
  * Both genetic and environmental factors are involved in the timing of puberty.
  * Body fat and/or body composition may play a role in regulating the onset of puberty.
  * Puberty is associated with the development of secondary sex characteristics and rapid growth.
  * Central precocious puberty (CPP) is puberty that occurs earlier than normal due to release of hormones from the hypothalamus of the brain.
  * Girls are more likely than boys to have precocious puberty.
  * Puberty may also be accompanied by emotional and mood changes.
  * Some medical conditions may worsen or first become apparent at puberty.

* * *

### What is puberty?

Puberty is the period during which growing boys or girls undergo the process
of sexual maturation. Puberty involves a series of physical stages or steps
that lead to the achievement of fertility and the development of the so-called
secondary sex characteristics, the physical features associated with adult
males and females (such as the growth of pubic hair). While puberty involves a
series of biological or physical transformations, the process can also have an
effect on the psychosocial and emotional development of the adolescent.

* * *

### When does puberty occur?

The onset of puberty varies among individuals. Puberty usually occurs in girls
between the ages of 10 and 14, while in boys it generally occurs later,
between the ages of 12 and 16. In some African-American girls, puberty begins
earlier, at about age 9, meaning that puberty occurs from ages 9 to 14.

Adolescent girls reach puberty today at earlier ages than were ever recorded
previously. Nutritional and other environmental influences may be responsible
for this change. For example, the average age of the onset of menstrual
periods in girls was 15 in 1900. By the 1990s, this average had dropped to 12
and a half years of age.

### Signs and Symptoms of Central Precocious Puberty

"Secondary sex changes" are those physical changes associated with the
progressive rise in sex hormones -- estrogen and progesterone in females and
testosterone in males. Such secondary sex changes include

  * breast tissue development,
  * enlargement of the testes (testicles) and penis, and
  * presence of pubic hair, axillary hair, and facial hair.

Other developmental changes include

  * initiation of menstrual periods,
  * increasing in sweat production,
  * development of body odor,
  * lowering of the pitch of voice, rapid height acquisition ("growth spurt"), and
  * increase in size and strength of muscles.

Learn more about the physical and emotional changes of central precocious
puberty »

* * *

### What determines when puberty begins?

The timing of the onset of puberty is not completely understood and is likely
determined by a number of factors. One theory proposes that reaching a
critical weight or body composition may play a role in the onset of puberty.
It has been proposed that the increase in childhood obesity may be related to
the overall earlier onset of puberty in the general population in recent
years.

Leptin, a hormone produced by fat cells (adipocytes) in the body, has been
suggested as one possible mediator of the timing of puberty. In research
studies, animals deficient in leptin did not undergo puberty, but puberty
began when leptin was administered to the animals. Further, girls with higher
concentrations of the hormone leptin are known to have an increased percentage
of body fat and an earlier onset of puberty than girls with lower levels of
leptin. The concentration of leptin in the blood is known to increase just
before puberty in both boys and girls.

Leptin, however, is likely only one of multiple influences on the
hypothalamus, an area of the brain that releases a hormone known as
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which in turn signals the pituitary
gland to release luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH). LH and FSH secretion by the pituitary is responsible for sexual
development.

Genetic factors are likely involved in the timing of puberty, and the timing
of puberty has often been described to "run in families." Additionally, a gene
has been identified that appears to be critical for the normal development of
puberty. The gene, known as GPR54, encodes a protein that appears to have an
effect on the secretion of GnRH by the hypothalamus. Individuals who do not
have a functioning copy of this gene are not able to enter puberty normally.

* * *

### What are the physical **stages** of puberty in girls and boys?

  * Readers Comments **6**
  * Share Your Story

The changes that happen during the process of puberty have a typical pattern
in both boys and girls, with a generally predictable sequence of events. In
most girls, the first sign of puberty is the beginning of breast development
(breast buds), which occurs at an average age of approximately 11 years. In
girls, the growth of pubic hair typically begins next, followed by the growth
of hair in the armpits. A minority of girls, however, begin to develop pubic
hair prior to breast development. The onset of menstruation (having periods)
usually happens later than the other physical changes and usually occurs
around two and a half years after the onset of puberty.

A regular pattern of ovulation, corresponding to achievement of fertility,
usually develops rapidly once a girl begins having menstrual periods. However,
girls who have a later onset of menstruation (after age 13) tend to have lower
rates of regular ovulation in the years following the onset of menstruation.
Studies have shown that one-half of adolescent girls who first begin to
menstruate after age 13 will not ovulate regularly over the next four and a
half years.

In boys, an increase in the size of the testicles is the first change observed
at the onset of puberty. Enlargement of the testicles begins at an approximate
average age of 11 and a half years in boys and lasts for about six months.
After enlargement of the testicles, the penis also increases in size.
Enlargement of the testicles and penis almost always occurs before the
development of pubic hair. The next stage is the growth of pubic hair and hair
in the armpits. Next, the voice becomes deeper and muscles increase in size.
The last step is usually the development of facial hair.

Fertility is achieved in males near the onset of puberty, when a surge in
testosterone triggers the production of sperm.

The sequence of changes in puberty has been characterized by physicians and is
referred to as sexual maturity rating (SMR) or Tanner stages, named after a
physician who published a description of the sequence of physical changes in
puberty in 1969. Tanner stages are determined by the development of the
secondary sex characteristics and encompass changes in the size and appearance
of the external genitalia, the development of pubic hair, and breast
development in girls. Tanner stages allow doctors to classify the extent of
development of sex characteristics into five distinct steps ranging from stage
1 (prepubertal) to stage 5 (mature adult type).

![](https://images.medicinenet.com//images/slideshow/teen-guy-locker-room-

gross-outs-s1-photo-of-mrsa-collage.jpg)

#### SLIDESHOW

Bad Gross-outs for Teen Boy's Locker Room in Pictures See Slideshow

* * *

### What other changes in the body occur during puberty in boys and girls?

  * Readers Comments **4**
  * Share Your Story

#### The "growth spurt"

A rapid increase in height, referred to as a growth spurt, usually accompanies
puberty. This rapid increase in height typically lasts for two to three years.
About 17%-18% of adult height is attained during puberty. Although the
increase in height affects both the trunk and the limbs, growth in the limbs
usually happens first. The growth spurt characteristically occurs earlier in
girls than in boys, with girls having the growth spurt approximately two years
prior to boys, on average. In girls, the growth spurt typically precedes the
onset of menstruation by about six months.

#### Bone growth and mineralization

Puberty is accompanied by growth of bones and increases in bone density in
both boys and girls. In girls, bone mineralization peaks around the time of
the onset of menstrual periods, after the time of peak height velocity (growth
spurt). Studies have shown that bone width increases first, followed by bone
mineral content, and lastly by bone density. Because of the lag between bone
growth and achievement of full bone density, adolescents may be at increased
risk for fractures during this time.

#### Weight changes

Changes in weight and body composition occur in both boys and girls.
Adolescent girls develop a greater proportion of body fat than boys, with
redistribution of the fat toward the upper and lower portions of the body,
leading to a curvier appearance. While boys also have an increase in the
growth of body fat, their muscle growth is faster. By the end of puberty, boys
have a muscle mass about one and a half times greater than that of comparably
sized girls.

#### Other changes

Maturation of the cardiovascular systems and lungs results in an increased
working capacity of these organs, associated with an overall increase in
endurance and strength. These changes are more pronounced in boys than in
girls.

* * *

### What emotional changes occur in puberty in boys and girls?

Both boys and girls can experience emotional changes that accompany the myriad
physical changes of puberty. These changes are not the same for all
adolescents. Changes can occur in the way a teen responds to family or friends
and views him- or herself. Many adolescents experience mood swings, anxiety,
confusion, and sensitivity. On the other hand, not all emotional changes of
puberty are related to negative thoughts or feeling upset. Puberty is also a
time in which the young person learns about his or her own interests and goals
and learns to relate to others in a more mature way. While some emotional
changes are a normal part of puberty, it is important to seek medical help if
these emotional changes are unusually severe, affect day-to-day functioning,
or result in thoughts of harming oneself or others.

### Latest Healthy Kids News

  * Kids of Opioid-Using Parents Attempt Suicide
  * How Does Room Temperature Affect Test Scores?
  * Cholesterol Levels Improving Among U.S. Kids
  * Best Place for Your Child's Sports Physical Exam?
  * Putting Child to Sleep in a Car Seat Is Deadly
  * Want More News? Sign Up for MedicineNet Newsletters!

### Daily Health News

  * Heartburn Drugs Can Be Fatal
  * More Prostate Cancer Checkups
  * Diabetes Control No Heart Help
  * Anal Cancer Stigma and Awareness
  * Human Endurance Has Its Limits
  * ![XML](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/hp_icon_weeknews.gif) More Health News »

### Trending on MedicineNet

  * Measles (Rubeola)
  * Anal Cancer
  * Lewy Body Dementia
  * Legionnaires' Disease
  * Genital Warts (HPV)

* * *

### What are the medical concerns associated with normal puberty?

  * Share Your Story

While puberty is a normal condition and not an illness, many medical
conditions and illnesses may first appear during puberty. Some conditions
potentially associated with puberty include the following:

  * **Acne** : Acne is an inflammation of the sebaceous glands and hair follicles of the skin, which is most pronounced on the face but may occur on the neck, back, chest, or other areas. The hormonal changes in puberty lead to the development of acne in many adolescent boys and girls.
  * **Gynecomastia** : _Gynecomastia_ is the term used to describe enlargement of the male breasts. The hormonal changes of puberty can cause a transient gynecomastia in normal boys that typically lasts for six to 18 months. Pubertal gynecomastia occurs at an average age of 13 in boys and affects up to one-half of normal adolescent boys.
  * **Anemia** : The normal pubertal progression in males is associated with increases in the ferritin (iron) and hemoglobin concentrations in the blood, but this increase is not observed in females. Adolescent girls tend to consume less iron-containing foods than boys, and this, combined with blood losses through menstrual bleeding, may place adolescent girls at risk for anemia.
  * **Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)** : If teens become sexually active at puberty, they are at risk for HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.
  * **Scoliosis** : Because of rapid growth during puberty, scoliosis (abnormal curvature of the spine) can be worsened or may first become apparent during puberty.
  * **Vision changes** : Nearsightedness (myopia) has a high incidence during puberty because of growth in the axial diameter of the eye.
  * **Musculoskeletal injuries** : Adolescents may be particularly prone to musculoskeletal injuries during the growth spurt and during growth of muscle mass. Since bone growth usually precedes full bone mineralization, adolescents are at risk for fractures. Also, since the growth in the limbs usually occurs prior to growth in the trunk, some joints may be left with a limited range of motion that increases the risk for sprains and strains.
  * **Dysfunctional uterine bleeding** : Girls who have recently begun menstruating may have irregular, prolonged, or heavy menstrual bleeding. Anovulation (not ovulating) is the most common reason for abnormal menstrual bleeding in adolescent girls.

* * *

### What are medical conditions associated with early or late puberty?

  * Readers Comments **1**
  * Share Your Story

#### Precocious puberty

Precocious puberty is the medical term for puberty that occurs earlier than
usual. This is sometimes referred to as central precocious puberty or CPP when
it is due to the brain releasing hormones that control puberty at an earlier
age than normal. While medical professionals are not in full agreement about
the age ranges for the definition of precocious puberty, many doctors believe
that a medical evaluation for precocious puberty should be performed if the
signs and symptoms of puberty (breast or pubic hair development) occur prior
to age 7 in Caucasian girls and prior to age 6 in African-American girls. Boys
who show signs of developing secondary sex characteristics prior to age 9 are
also considered to have precocious puberty. Precocious puberty can be
associated with psychological difficulties that may impact a child's emotional
development.

Precocious puberty is much more common in girls than in boys. Many girls
experience precocious puberty in the absence of any disease or condition. In
boys, however, precocious puberty is more likely to be associated with an
underlying medical problem. While in many cases the exact cause of precocious
puberty cannot be determined, a small number of cases are related to
abnormalities of the ovaries or testes, thyroid gland abnormalities or other
hormone problems, genetic conditions, tumors or infections of the brain, and
injury to the brain.

Precocious puberty may be treated by treating the underlying condition that is
responsible for the condition or by lowering the high levels of sex hormones
with medications (known as GnRH agonists) that block the production of sex
hormones to stop sexual development from progressing.

#### Delayed puberty

Delayed puberty is the late onset of puberty. Puberty is usually considered to
be delayed when there has been no increase in testicular volume by 14 years of
age in boys and no breast development by 13 and a half years of age in girls.
Sometimes, delayed puberty tends to "run in families," and normal adolescent
development proceeds normally after the delay. This is sometimes called a
constitutional delay and is responsible for the vast majority of cases of
delayed puberty. Constitutional delay that affects both growth and achievement
of puberty is much more common in boys than in girls.

Chronic medical conditions, such as diabetes or cystic fibrosis, may also
cause the delayed onset of puberty. Genetic conditions, problems with the
pituitary or thyroid glands, problems with the ovaries or testes, and
malnutrition are other causes of delayed puberty. Many girls who exercise
strenuously have very little body fat and also experience a delay in the onset
of puberty, since a certain amount of body fat appears to be required for the
initiation of puberty. Girls who are competitive athletes may have a delay in
the onset of menstruation of up to one year or more when compared with
nonathletes.

### Subscribe to MedicineNet's Children's Health & Parenting Newsletter

By clicking "Submit," I agree to the MedicineNet Terms and Conditions and
Privacy Policy. I also agree to receive emails from MedicineNet and I
understand that I may opt out of MedicineNet subscriptions at any time.

## Health Solutions From Our Sponsors

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A;
  * 3 Migraine Essentials

  * Puberty Center

_Medically Reviewed on 5/7/2018_

References

REFERENCES:

American Academy of Pediatrics. http://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-
stages/gradeschool/puberty/Pages/default.aspx.

Kaplowitz, Paul B. "Precocious Puberty." Medscape.com. Feb. 14, 2018.
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/924002-overview.

### Related Article

![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/thumb-quiz/thumb-puberty-in-

girls.jpg)

## Puberty In Girls Quiz: Stages of Puberty

What is puberty? Learn about the sexual development of adolescent teen girls
and stages of puberty. When do girls hit puberty? When does puberty end? How
long does puberty last?

Read more: Puberty In Girls Quiz: Stages of Puberty

### Patient Comments

  * Puberty - Physical Changes

What were the first physical changes you experienced during puberty?

Post View 6 Comments

  * Puberty - Other Changes

Describe what puberty was like for you or your child. What changes were most
significant?

Post View 4 Comments

  * Puberty - Medical Concerns

What were the biggest medical concerns during puberty for you or your child?

Post

  * Puberty - Early or Late

Did you or your child experience an early or late puberty? Please share your
story.

Post View 1 Comment

Complete List

### Top Puberty Related Articles

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/thumb-acne-pimples.jpg)

#### Acne

Acne is a localized skin inflammation as a result of overactivity of oil
glands at the base of hair follicles. This inflammation, depending on its
location, can take the form of a superficial pustule (contains pus), a pimple,
a deeper cyst, congested pores, whiteheads, or blackheads. Treatments vary
depending on the severity of the acne.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/thumb-cystic-fibrosis.jpg)

#### Cystic Fibrosis

Cystic fibrosis is a disease of the mucus and sweat glands. Cystic fibrosis is
an inherited disease. The outcome of the disease leaves the body malnourished,
with bulky and fouls smelling stools, vitamin insufficiency, gas, painful or
swollen abdomen, infertility, susceptible to heat emergencies, and respiratory
failure. There is no cure for cystic fibrosis, treatment of symptoms is used
to manage the disease.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/thumb-diabetes.jpg)

#### Diabetes Mellitus

Diabetes is a chronic condition characterized by high levels of sugar
(glucose) in the blood. The two types of diabetes are referred to as type 1
(insulin dependent) and type 2 (non-insulin dependent). Symptoms of diabetes
include increased urine output, thirst, hunger, and fatigue. Treatment of
diabetes depends on the type.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-gilbert-syndrome.jpg)

#### Gilbert Syndrome

Gilbert syndrome is a benign genetic condition that causes abnormal breakdown
of bilirubin, a compound that is formed when hemoglobin from red blood cells
degrades. Elevated bilirubin can cause, jaundice, which is yellowing of the
eyes. Gilbert syndrome does not need to be treated and has a good prognosis.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/thumb-gum-disease.jpg)

#### Gum Disease

Gum disease is caused by plaque and may result in tooth loss without proper
treatment. Symptoms and signs of gum disease (gingivitis or periodontal
disease) include receding gums, bad breath and pocket formation between the
teeth and gums. Treatment depends upon the stage of the gum disease, how you
responded to earlier treatments, and your overall health.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-hemoglobin.jpg)

#### Hemoglobin

Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying protein molecule in the blood, specifically
in the red blood cells. High hemoglobin count may be caused by dehydration,
smoking, emphysema, tumors, or abuse of Epogen. Low levels of hemoglobin may
be caused by anemia, blood loss, nutritional deficiency, bone marrow problems,
chemotherapy, kidney failure, or sickle cell disease.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-myasthenia-gravis.jpg)

#### Myasthenia Gravis

Myasthenia gravis, a chronic autoimmune neuromuscular disease. Varying degrees
of weakness of the voluntary muscles of the body are the main characteristics.
A defect in the transmission of nerve impulses of the muscles is the cause of
myasthenia gravis. Myasthenic crisis is when the muscles that control
breathing weaken, which requires immediate medical attention. Symptoms include
weakness of the eye muscles, facial expression, and difficulty swallowing.
Treatment of myasthenia gravis includes medical therapies to control the
symptoms of the disease.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/quiz/featured-quiz/featured-puberty-in-girls.jpg)

#### Puberty in Girls Quiz

Take the Puberty In Girls Quiz to learn the myths and facts about normal
adolescent growth and development for teens and tweens.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-women-std.jpg)

#### Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs In Women)

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are among the most common infectious
diseases in the United States. STDs can be spread through any type of sexual
activity involving the sex organs, the anus or mouth, or through contact with
blood during sexual activity. Examples of STDs include, chancroid, chlamydia,
gonorrhea, granuloma inguinale, lymphogranuloma venereum, syphilis, genital
herpes, genital warts, hepatitis B, trichomoniasis, pubic lice (crabs), and
scabies.Treatment is generally with antibiotics; however, some STDs that go
untreated can lead to death.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-acne.jpg)

#### 15 Tips for Clear Skin

Acne, pimples, zits and blemishes often appear on the face, back, chest, neck,
and shoulders where skin has the most amount of oil glands. Few of us are
immune to breakouts, but treatments can minimize outbreaks. Follow these 15
tips for a clear complexion and skin.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-teen-girls.jpg)

#### Teen Girls Tricky Issues

Being a teenage girl comes with a variety of challenges. Here are tips on
dealing with dating, sexting, cyber bullying, mean girls, periods, bad breath,
and more as health experts explain when and how to get help.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-teens.jpg)

#### Teenagers

Teenagers recognize that they are developmentally between child and adult.
Teen health prevention includes maintaining a healthy diet, exercising
regularly, preventing injuries and screening annually for potential health
conditions that could adversely affect teenage health.

  * ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/forum/featured-turner-syndrome.jpg)

#### Turner Syndrome

Turner syndrome is an inherited chromosomal condition affecting women. Women
with Turner syndrome do not have ovarian function, and features of the
syndrome include webbed neck, lymphedema of the hands and feet, heart defects,
kidney problems, and skeletal abnormalities. The X chromosome is related to
Turner syndrome. Treatment focuses on the symptoms of the syndrome.

CONTINUE SCROLLING FOR RELATED SLIDESHOW

### Featured Slideshows

  * ![Protect Your Eyesight: Warning Signs of Common Eye Conditions](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-type-1-diabetes.jpg)

Type 2 DiabetesCan you reverse type 2 diabetes?

  * ![Migraine or Headache, What's the Difference?](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-rheumatoid-arthritis.jpg)

Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)What's the difference between RA and arthritis?

  * ![Psoriasis: See what it looks like and how to treat it](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/slideshow/featured-slideshow/featured-deep-vein-thrombosis.jpg)

Deep Vein ThrombosisHow to know if you have a blood clot in your leg

Recognize These Skin Conditions?

What Bit Me?

What is Crohn's Disease?

Strep Throat vs. Sore Throat

Warning Signs of Type 2 Diabetes

19 Eye Conditions You Need to Know

Why Do I Pee So Often?

What Can Turmeric Do for You?

Low-T: A Normal Part of Aging?

Is It an STD?

Who's at Risk for Hepatitis C?

Breast Cancer: What Happens Next

Schizophrenia and Mental Health

Early Signs of Thyroid Problems

17 Worst Belly Fat Foods

How to Get Rid of Hemorrhoids

Living With AFib

See a Baby Develop in the Womb

What is Deep Vein Thrombosis?

Put an End to Nail Fungus

Ringworm Means I’ve Got Worms?

How Do You Get Scabies?

13 Baking Soda Uses for Your Body

Coping With IBS

Telltale Signs of Child ADHD

The Stigma of Psoriasis

Cancer Symptoms Not to Ignore

What Feet Say About Your Health

Most Expensive Medical Conditions

Early Signs of Heart Disease

Clues You Could Have MS

How to Lower Your Cholesterol

Which Fruits Have the Most Sugar?

14 Healthy Foods on a Budget

ADHD in Adults

What Poop Type and Color Mean

  *     *       *         * MedicineNet
  * ![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct594277_s1.gif) ![](https://images.medicinenet.com/images/footer/badges/rgb_tag_registered.png)

  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)

  * ![](https://choices.truste.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C)1996-2018 MedicineNet, Inc. All rights reserved. Terms of Use.

MedicineNet does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See
additional information.

#### Health Categories

  * Medical Slideshows
  * Diseases & Conditions
  * Symptoms & Signs
  * Procedures & Tests
  * Medications
  * Healthy Living
  * Vitamins & Supplements
  * Image Collection
  * Quizzes
  * MedTerms Dictionary
  * Pet Health

#### Popular Health Centers

  * Allergies
  * Arthritis
  * Blood Pressure
  * Cancer
  * Chronic Pain
  * Cold & Flu
  * Depression
  * Diabetes
  * Digestion
  * Health & Living
  * Healthy Kids
  * Hearing & Ear

  * Heart

  * HIV/AIDS
  * Infectious Disease
  * Men's Health
  * Mental Health
  * Neurology
  * Pregnancy
  * Sexual Health
  * Skin
  * Thyroid
  * Women's Health
  * More...

#### MedicineNet

  * Privacy Policy
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Site Map
  * WebMD Corporate
  * WebMD
  * WebMDRx
  * Medscape
  * Medscape Reference
  * eMedicineHealth
  * RxList
  * OnHealth

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

