

Open main menu

![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Search

# History of the Aztecs

                
                                      * Read in another language 
                      * Watch this page 
                      * Edit
                

This article includes a list of references, but **its sources remain unclear**
because it has **insufficientinline citations**. Please help to improve this
article by introducing more precise citations. _( February 2015)_ _(Learn how
and when to remove this template message)_

* * *

The Aztecs were a Pre-Columbian Mesoamerican people of central Mexico in the
14th, 15th, and 16th centuries. They called themselves Mexicah (pronounced
[meˈʃikaʔ]).

The capital of the Aztec Empire was Tenochtitlan. During the empire, the city
was built on a raised island in Lake Angels. Modern-day Mexico City was
constructed on the ruins of Tenochtitlan. The Spanish colonisation of the
Americas reached the mainland during the reign of Hueyi Tlatoani Moctezuma II
(Montezuma II). In 1521, Hernán Cortés, along with an allied army of other
Native Americans, conquered the Aztecs through germ warfare (germ theory not
being established until 1560 by earliest records, this was an unintentional
result of Europeans coming to the New World), siege warfare, psychological
warfare, and from direct combat.

From 1376 until 1572, the Mexicah were a tributary of Azcapotzalco. The Aztec
rulers Acamapichtli, Huitzilihuitl and Chimalpopoca were, in fact, vassals of
Tezozomoc, the Tepanec ruler of Azcapotzalco.

When Tezozomoc died in 1421, his son Malazia ascended to the throne of
Azcapotzalco. Maxtla (as Malazia was also known) sought to tighten
Azcapotzalco's grip on the nearby city-states in the Valley of Mexico. In the
process, Chimalpopoca, tlatoani of Tenochtitlan, was assassinated by Maxtla's
agents while Nezahualcoyotl of Texcoco was forced into exile.[1]

## Contents

##

Arrival in the Valley of MexicoEdit

In the Valley of Mexico (c. AD 1250), there existed numerous city-states,
including Chalco, Xochimilco, Tlacopan, Culhuacan, and Atzcapotzalco. The most
powerful were Culhuacan on the south shore of Lake Texcoco and Azcapotzalco on
the west shore.

As a result, when the Mexica arrived in the Valley of Mexico as a semi-nomadic
tribe, they found most of the area already occupied. In roughly 1248,[2] they
first settled on Chapultepec, a hill on the west shore of Lake Texcoco, the
site of numerous springs.

In time, the Tepanecs of Azcapotzalco ousted the Mexica from Chapultepec and
the ruler of Culhuacan, Cocoxtli, gave the Mexicah permission to settle in the
empty barrens of Tizaapan in 1299. There they married and assimilated into
Culhuacan culture.

In 1323, they asked the new ruler of Culhuacan, Achicometl, for his daughter,
in order to make her the goddess Yaocihuatl. Unknown to the king, the Mexicah
actually planned to sacrifice her. The Mexicah believed that by doing this the
princess would join the gods as a deity. As the story goes, during a festival
dinner, a priest came out wearing her flayed skin as part of the ritual. Upon
seeing this, the king and the people of Culhuacan were horrified and expelled
the Mexicah.

Forced to flee, in 1325 they went to a small island on the west side of Lake
Texcoco where they began to build their city Tenochtitlan, eventually creating
a large artificial island. It is said that the Aztec god, Huitzilopochtli,
instructed the Aztecs to found their city at the location where they saw an
eagle, on a cactus, with a snake in its talons (which is on the current
Mexican flag). The Aztecs, apparently, saw this vision on the small island
where Tenochtitlan was founded.

Another Mexica (meːˈʃiʔkaʔ) group settled on the north side of this island:
this would become the city of Tlatelolco. Originally, this was an independent
Mexicah kingdom, but eventually it was absorbed by Tenochtitlan, and treated
as a "fifth" quadrant. The famous marketplace described by Hernán Cortés and
Bernal Diaz del Castillo was actually located in Tlatelolco.

In 1376 the Mexica elected their first tlatoani, Acamapichtli, following
customs learned from the Culhuacan. These customs required cleaning daily
nonstop as a ritual.

##

Aztec Triple AllianceEdit

Main article: Aztec Triple Alliance

The Triple Alliance of Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and Tlacopan would, in the next
100 years, come to dominate and extend its power to both the Gulf of Mexico
and the Pacific shores. From the beginning of the Triple Alliance,
Tenochtitlan was mostly in charge of the military and conquest, whereas the
other two cities had other responsibilities. This military dominance of
Tenochtitlan gradually led to this city becoming the dominant power in the
alliance. When the alliance received tributes 2/5 went to Tenochitlan, 2/5 to
Texcoco, and 1/5 to Tlacopan.[3]

### The reign of Itzcoatl 1427–1440Edit

The first Tlatoani of the Triple Alliance was Itzcoatl and he, along with his
Texcocan co-ruler Nezahualcoyotl, began expanding the territory dominated by
the alliance towards the south, conquering Nahua-speaking cities like
Cuauhnahuac (now Cuernavaca), and towards Huexotla, Coatlinchan, and Tepoztlan
in the modern-day state of Morelos which was then dominated by the Tlahuica.
During this period the Nahuan cities immediately on the lakeside, such as
Xochimilco, Culhuacan and Mixquic were also subdued.

### Moctezuma I and Tlacaelel 1440–1469Edit

Two of the primary architects of the Aztec empire were the half-brothers
Tlacaelel and Moctezuma I. They were sons of Huitzilíhuitl, the 3rd _Hueyi
Tlatoani_ , half-brothers to Chimalpopoca, the 4th _Hueyi Tlatoani_ , and
nephews of Itzcoatl, the 5th. Moctezuma I succeeded Itzcoatl as the 6th _Hueyi
Tlatoani_ in 1449. Tlacaelel became the power behind the throne and reformed
both the Aztec state and the Aztec religion.

Moctezuma I began the expansion in earnest. First he had to reconquer towns
which were first conquered by Itzcoatl, but had since rebelled. He asked a
number of smaller cities to contribute to the construction of a new Great
Temple, and only Chalco refused, which caused Moctezuma to start a war against
them which lasted for several years. He then conquered Huastec territory under
a pretext of securing Aztec merchants in that area, and then he went to war
against the Mixtecs of Coixtlahuaca. Coixtlahuaca was successfully conquered
although the Mixtec ruler Atonal received military assistance from the Nahua
states of Tlaxcala and Huexotzinco, by now enemies of the Aztecs. After the
defeat of Coixtlahuaca many Mixtec artisans were relocated to the Aztec
capital.[4] Later Moctezuma marched upon the Totonacan cities of Vera Cruz and
conquered _Xalapa_ , _Cosamaloapan_ , Cotaxtla (modern day Cuetlachtlan),
Ahuilizapan (Modern day Orizaba) and north into Huastec territory conquering
Tuxpan and Xilotepec.

#### TlacaelelEdit

Tlacaelel was one of the primary architects of the Aztec empire. Rising to
prominence during the war against the Tepanec in the late 1420s, Tlacaelel
wielded power as something of a Grand Vizier during the reigns of four _Hueyi
Tlatoani_ , until his death in 1487.

Tlacaelel recast or strengthened the concept of the Aztecs as a chosen people
and elevated the tribal god/hero Huitzilopochtli to the top of the pantheon of
gods. In tandem with this, Tlacaelel increased the level and prevalence of
human sacrifice, particularly during a period of natural disasters that
started in 1446 (according to Durán). During the reign of Moctezuma I, he
instigated the flower wars in which the Aztecs fought Tlaxcala and other
Nahuan city-states.

To strengthen the Aztec nobility, he helped create and enforce sumptuary laws,
prohibiting commoners from wearing certain adornments such as lip plugs, gold
armbands, and cotton cloaks.

At the start of Tlacaelel's tenure, the Mexica were vassals. By the end, they
had become the Aztecs, rulers of a socially stratified and expansionistic
empire.

### The reigns of Axayacatl 1469–1481 and Tizoc 1481–1486Edit

Moctezuma I's son, Axayacatl, ascended to the throne in 1469. During his
reign, Tenochtitlan absorbed the kingdom of Tlatelolco. Axayacatl's sister was
married to the _tlatoani_ of Tlatelolco, and, as a pretext for war, Axayacatl
declared that she was mistreated.

He went on to conquer the Matlatzinca and Mazahua cities of Tollocan,
Ocuillan, and Malinalco west of the Valley of Mexico.

At this point Tenochtitlan experienced a brief "civil war" when the small city
of Tlatelolco, considered a part of Tenochtitlan by the Aztecs, rebelled under
their Tlatoani Moquihuix, who sought to ally himself with the longstanding
enemies of the Tenochca, the Chalca, Tlaxcalteca, Chololteca and Huexotzinca.
The Tlatelolca were defeated and Axayacatl then ordered the execution of all
the rulers who had aided him, including the ruler of Xochimilco.

Continuing campaigns in the west in 1479, he suffered an unprecedented defeat
by the Purépechas at Tzintzuntzan. This was the Aztecs' first great defeat;
once recovered he had to consolidate control of the Huasteca region which had
already been conquered by his predecessor.

In 1481 Axayacatl's brother Tizoc ruled briefly, but his rule was marred by
the humiliation he received in his coronation war: fighting the Otomies at
Metztitlan he brought home only 40 prisoners for sacrifice at his coronation
ceremony.[5] After this defeat Tizoc had to fight principally to maintain
control of the already conquered territories, and failing to subdue new towns
he was replaced, possibly poisoned, by his younger brother Ahuitzotl.

### The reign of Moctezuma II XocoyotzinEdit

Moctezuma II was, although many sources depict him otherwise, a notable
warrior who extended the tributary system, and consolidated the conquests made
by his predecessors as well as conquering new territories. His campaigns
reached as far south as Tapachula in the Soconusco region and the Chontal Maya
states of Xicallanco in Tabasco. Only the Aztec archenemies of Tlaxcala,
Huexotzinco and the Purépecha remained undefeated, as well as the Mixtec
kingdoms of Tututepec and Yopitzinco which didn't interest the Aztecs. Thus
the Aztec Empire had its largest geographical extent when the Spaniards
arrived in 1519. In some sources, it claims that Moctezuma II, and the Aztecs,
believed the arriving Spanish to linked to the supposed return of an exiled
god, Quetzlcoatl, who was supposed to return pale and bearded.

##

Fall of the Aztec EmpireEdit

                
                                _For more on the conquest of Mexico by Spain, see alsoSpanish Conquest of Mexico, Siege of Tenochtitlan, and Hernán Cortés._
                

The Aztecs were conquered by Spain in 1521 after a long siege of the capital,
Tenochtitlan, where much of the population died from hunger and smallpox.
Cortés, with 508 Spaniards, did not fight alone but with as many as 150,000 or
200,000 allies from Tlaxcala, and eventually other Aztec tributary states. It
was not difficult for Cortes to find allies to fight with him, the Aztecs were
not generally liked by the neighbouring city-states. Cuauhtémoc, the last
_Hueyi Tlatoani_ surrendered to Cortés on August 13, 1521.

It took nearly another 60 years of war before the Spaniards completed the
conquest of Mesoamerica (the Chichimeca wars), a process that could have taken
longer were it not for three separate epidemics, including a rare strain of
paratyphoid fever,[6] that took a heavy toll on the remaining Native American
population. The Spanish conquest of Yucatán took almost 170 years.

After the fall of Tenochtitlan, most of the other Mesoamerican cultures
remained intact. In fact, the conquest of the Aztec empire did not have an
immediate impact on other Mesoamerican cultures.

As allies of the Spaniards, the Tlaxcalans gained the most. The Spaniards
would eventually break the alliance, but not until decades later.

##

FootnotesEdit

                
                                      1. **^** "Pre-Columbian civilizations". _britannica.com_.
                      2. **^** Smith (1984) p. 173. In arriving at 1248, Smith averages together dates from Fernando de Alva Cortés Ixtlilxochitl (1245), the Annals of Tlatelolco (1257), the Annals of Cuauhtitlanzx (1246), Fernando Alvarado Tezozomoc (1247), and Diego Duran (1245).
                      3. **^** Ancient Mexico and Central America
                      4. **^** According to Richard Townsends "The Aztecs" pp88. Thames and Hudson 1992.
                      5. **^** Townsend, Richard 1992. pp 96.
                      6. **^** "Mexico: 500 years later, scientists discover what killed the Aztecs". AFP. 15 January 2018 – via The Guardian.
                

## Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Aztec history**_.

##

See alsoEdit

                
                                      * Aztec Empire
                      * Women in Aztec civilization
                      * Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire
                      * Index — Aztec history
                

##

ReferencesEdit

                
                                      * Bancroft, Hubert Howe (1876). _The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America: Primitive History_. Vol. 5. D. Appleton.
                      * Berdan, Frances F. (2005) _The Aztecs of Central Mexico: An Imperial Society_. 2nd ed. Thomson-Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
                      * Berdan, Frances F., Richard E. Blanton, Elizabeth H. Boone, Mary G. Hodge, Michael E. Smith and Emily Umberger (1996) Aztec Imperial Strategies. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, DC.
                      * Boone, Elizabeth H. 1989. "Incarnations of the Aztec Supernatural: The Image of Huitzilopochtli in Mexico and Europe." _Transactions of the American Philosophical Society_ , New Ser., Vol. 79, No. 2., pp. i–iv+1-107.
                      * Boone, Elizabeth H. (2000) _Stories in Red and Black: Pictorial Histories of the Aztecs and Mixtecs_. University of Texas Press, Austin.
                      * Carrasco, Davíd (1999) _City of Sacrifice: The Aztec Empire and the Role of Violence in Civilization_. Beacon Press, Boston.
                      * Carrasco, Pedro (1999) _The Tenochca Empire of Ancient Mexico: The Triple Alliance of Tenochtitlan, Tetzcoco, and Tlacopan_. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
                      * Clendinnen, Inga (1991) _Aztecs: An Interpretation_. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
                      * Davies, Nigel (1973) _The Aztecs: A History_. University of Oklahoma, Norman.
                      * Gillespie, Susan D. (1989). _The Aztec Kings: The Construction of Rulership in Mexican History_. University of Arizona Press. ISBN 978-0-8165-1095-5.
                      * Graulich, Michel (1997) _Myths of Ancient Mexico_. Translated by Bernard R. Ortiz de Montellano and Thelma Ortiz de Montellano. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
                      * Guggenheim Museum (editor) (2004) _The Aztec Empire_ (Curated by Felipe Solís). Guggenheim Museum, New York.
                      * Hassig, Ross (1988) _Aztec Warfare: Imperial Expansion and Political Control_. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
                      * León-Portilla, Miguel (Ed.) (1992) [1959]. _The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the Conquest of Mexico_. Ángel María Garibay K. (Nahuatl-Spanish trans.), Lysander Kemp (Spanish-English trans.), Alberto Beltran (illus.) (Expanded and updated ed.). Boston: Beacon Press. ISBN 0-8070-5501-8.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
                      * León-Portilla, Miguel (1963) _Aztec Thought and Culture: A Study of the Ancient Náhuatl Mind_. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
                      * López Luján, Leonardo (2005) _The Offerings of the Templo Mayor of Tenochtitlan_. Revised ed. Translated by Bernard R. Ortiz de Montellano and Thelma Ortiz de Montellano. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
                      * Matos Moctezuma, Eduardo (1988) _The Great Temple of the Aztecs_. Thames and Hudson, New York.
                      * Matos Moctezuma, Eduardo and Felipe R. Solís Olguín (editors) (2002) _Aztecs_. Royal Academy of Arts, London.
                      * Ortiz de Montellano, Bernard R. (1990) _Aztec Medicine, Health, and Nutrition_. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick.
                      * Smith, Michael E. (1984); "The Aztlan Migrations of Nahuatl Chronicles: Myth or History?", in _Ethnohistory_ 31(3): 153 – 186.
                      * Smith, Michael E. (2003) _The Aztecs_. 2nd ed. Blackwell Publishers, Oxford.
                      * Smith, Michael E, "Life in the Provinces of the Aztec Empire", _Scientific American_.
                      * Soustelle, J., (1961) _The Daily life of the Aztecs_ , London, WI
                      * Woods, M., (2000) "Conquistadors", Ubuversity of California Press Berkeley and Los Angeles, California.
                      * Townsend, Richard F. (2000) _The Aztecs_. revised ed. Thames and Hudson, NY.
                

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1&mobile=1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_the_Aztecs&oldid=899285045"

Last edited on 29 May 2019, at 01:30

## ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.

                
                                      * Terms of Use
                      * Privacy
                      * Desktop
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

