

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
  * How To
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Advanced
  * Journal list
  * Help

  * Journal List

  * Cell Adh Migr
  * v.10(1-2); Jan-Apr 2016
  * PMC4853053

![Logo of celladmig](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-celladmig.gif)

Cell Adh Migr. 2016 Jan-Apr; 10(1-2): 226â€“235.

Published online 2015 Sep 30. doi: 10.1080/19336918.2015.1093275

PMCID: PMC4853053

PMID: 26421650

# The hydatidiform mole

Jean-Jacques Candeliera,b

### Jean-Jacques Candelier

aUnite 1197 INSERM, Stem cell-niches Interactions: Physiology, Tumors and
Tissular Repair, Hopital Paul Brousse, Batiment Lavoisier,, Villejuif, France

bUniversity of Paris-Saclay, Saint-Aubin, France

Find articles by Jean-Jacques Candelier

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information Disclaimer

aUnite 1197 INSERM, Stem cell-niches Interactions: Physiology, Tumors and
Tissular Repair, Hopital Paul Brousse, Batiment Lavoisier,, Villejuif, France

bUniversity of Paris-Saclay, Saint-Aubin, France

**CONTACT** Jean-Jacques Candelier rf.dusp-u@reilednac.seuqcaj-naej

Received 2015 Jul 10; Revised 2015 Sep 1; Accepted 2015 Sep 5.

Copyright (C) 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.

## ABSTRACT

The hydatidiform mole (HM) is a placental pathology of androgenetic origin.
Placental villi have an abnormal hyperproliferation event and hydropic
degeneration. Three situations can be envisaged at its origin: 1. The
destruction/expulsion of the female pronucleus at the time of fertilization by
1 or 2 spermatozoa with the former being followed by an endoreplication of the
male pronucleus leading to a complete hydatidiform mole (CHM) 2. A triploid
zygote (fertilization by 2 spermatozoa) leading to a partial hydatidiform mole
(PHM) but can also lead to haploid and diploid clones. The diploid clone may
produce a normal fetus while the haploid clone after endoreplication generates
a CHM 3. A nutritional defect during the differentiation of the oocytes or the
deterioration of the limited oxygen pressure during the first trimester of
gestation may lead to the formation of a HM.

In countries with poor medical health care system, moles (mainly the CHM) can
become invasive or, in rare cases, lead to gestational choriocarcinomas.

**KEYWORDS:** choriocarcinoma, epigenetic, fertilization, hydatidiform mole,
invasive mole, trophoblast

## Introduction

In humans, 5-6 d post conception, the zygote gradually becomes a blastocyst.
The peripheral cells of this blastocyst differentiate into 2 layers: a
cellular trophoblast called the cytotrophoblast (CTB) and an expanding
peripheral syncytial layer, the syncytiotrophoblast (STB), which then invades
the endometrium and uterine vasculature (Fig. 1). These two tissues associated
with the extra-embryonic mesoderm are at the origin of the placenta. When the
proliferation/invasion phenomena are not well controlled, the trophoblast
cells can give rise to a rare complication of pregnancy known as a
hydatidiform mole (complete or partial). These hydatidiform moles belong to
the gestational trophoblastic diseases of which represent the most common
pathologies. These are the only pathologies of the group that can be recurrent
in the same patient. The recurrent moles are a rarer occurrence and indicate a
genetic predisposition. These tumors are also the only ones of androgenetic
origin. In other words, the tumor cells do not have the alleles of the ovule
which has been fertilized, contrary to all the other cells of the woman
carrying this anomaly. Parthenogenesis but not androgenesis was observed in
primates1 and partial moles (and not complete mole) was observed in
chimpanzee, but the invasive forms were only found to exist in humans.2

![An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

Object name is
kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g001.jpg](/pmc/articles/PMC4853053/bin/kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g001.jpg)

Open in a separate window

Figure 1.

Macroscopic and histological aspects of HM.

## Anatomy and histology

### Description

The moles were first described by Hippocrates (470-410 BC) who explained their
formation through the consumption of dirty water by the pregnant women, where
the water originates from the marshes. However, the terms mole and
hydatidiform were later employed by William Smelie (1752). This author
describes this pathology as a bunch of grapes consisting of different
sizes.3,4 The moles exhibit diffuse trophoblastic hyperplasia where the
structures of villosities are particularly aberrant and hydropic (Fig. 1).
Such disorganization of the trophoblast, results in the limited recognition of
the presence of vascular structures.5 The problem of vascular maturation in
the moles could be due to the increased level of apoptosis in the precursor
components of the blood-vessels6 or to the defective recruitment of pericytes
around the villous stromal vessels.7 Despite the presence of these vessels, it
is not certain that they contain various haematopoietic components. This
persistent vascular immaturity of the villous stroma could lead to hydropic
villi mainly in CHM. In the case of PHM, these trophoblastic anomalies are
less present and usually contain identifiable embryonic or fetal tissues,
which is very infrequent in the case of the CHM.8 Surprisingly, this
trophoblastic hyperplasia can continue to form to such an extent whereby it
invades and subsequently exceeds the uterine cavity (Fig. 1). This observation
suggests that these moles are not rejected by the uterus. Some authors could
regard it as a missed abortion.9 In the Middle Ages one imagined that each
focal swelling corresponded to an egg. Hertig and his colleagues in 195610
proposed a logical progression between the various types of moles, from PHM to
CHM then to an invasive mole, followed by a very aggressive tumor, the
choriocarcinoma. Today, it is known that it is not plausible, in particular
because a woman can develop a choriocarcinoma after a HM but also after a
normal pregnancy.11,12 It is more pertinent to speak of preneoplasia
(premalignant) for the HM and of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia
(malignant diseases) for the invasive moles and the choriocarcinomas.13

### Differentiation

The cells of the CTB actively proliferate immediately after implantation and
invade the endometrium and the spiral arteries in a regulated manner, allowing
the plugging of these vessels (Fig. 2). On the surface of villi the CTB cells
generate, by asymmetrical cell division, the multinucleated
syncytiotrophoblasts (STB) (Fig. 2). This STB loses any pre-existing mitotic
activity and it is very sensitive to the presence of oxygen. The STB secretes
numerous hormones, such as human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). The CTB cell
proliferation is responsible of the production of 2 types of mature villi
which are; floating and anchoring villi (Fig. 3). The proliferation is faster
in the center of the placenta when compared to the periphery.14 The plugging
of the trophoblastic cells avoids the teratogenic effect of too high oxygen
pressure (pO2) in the embryo. During the 10-12 first weeks of the gestation,
the STB does not secrete antioxidant enzymes. Conversely, this hypoxia
supports placenta angiogenesis and the proliferation of the CTB cells.15
Around 10 weeks of gestation, the trophoblastic plugs are dissolved and the
progressive maternal spiral arteries remodel into large diameter vessels
(utero-placental arteries), which are responsible for the increased level of
blood flow (Fig. 3). The maternal blood can now circulate easily between the
villi, supply required nutrients from the mother to the fetus and eliminate
the toxic elements from the fetus. These modifications occur in parallel to
the significant growth of the fetus. During gestation, the CTB decreases in
thickness at term, the STB is in close contact with placental vessels allowing
efficient nutrient uptake by the fetus.5

![An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

Object name is
kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g002.jpg](/pmc/articles/PMC4853053/bin/kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g002.jpg)

Open in a separate window

Figure 2.

Placenta during the first trimester and its histological description.

![An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

Object name is
kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g003.jpg](/pmc/articles/PMC4853053/bin/kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g003.jpg)

Open in a separate window

Figure 3.

Placental development and its regulations according to pO2 variations. During
the first trimester the plugging ("plug") of the arteries, generates weak pO2.
The variations of pO2 induce a modification of different molecule synthesis,
which supports the transition, spatially and temporally, from the
proliferation phase to the differentiation phase of the trophoblast at the end
of the first trimester and the remodeling of the arteries.

### Regulators

The utero-placental regulators are organized at an early stage of pregnancy
and correspond to a dialog between maternal cells (decidual cells, NK cells,
macrophages) and trophoblastic cells. This effective dialog limits, in space
and in time, the proliferation and invasion of extravillous CTB, respectively,
to one third of the internal myometrium and until the 16th week of
gestation.16 The hypoxic environment of the first trimester of pregnancy
promotes the cellular proliferation of trophoblast and avoids oxidative
stress, the alteration of the villi and inhibits the differentiation of
extravillous trophoblast to the invasive phenotype. This hypoxic environment
is maintained for approximately 10 weeks of gestation. After this stage, the
pO2 increases and the placenta phenotype becomes invasive, allowing the
remodelling of the spiral arteries; leading to increased blood perfusion of
the placenta (Fig. 3). Any deviations in these regulators (pO2 or/and
trophoblast response), results in the placenta developing a proliferative
phenotype; a situation that could be the cause of one of the histological
aspects of molar pregnancies.

These regulators are controlled by a number of factors present in the
trophoblast, such as hypoxia-inducible factor 1Î± (HIF1Î±),17 and in the
decidua, such as transforming growth factor Î² (TGFÎ²) and Decorin.18 The
expression of transcription factor HIF1Î± is high during the early stages of
pregnancy and decreases after 9 weeks of gestation, when pO2 begins to
increase.17 Under reduced pO2, the trophoblast cells activate HIF1Î±, which in
turn upregulates TGFÎ² expression.17 The TGFÎ² and Decorin subsequently inhibit
the growth, migration and invasion of extravillous trophoblast.16 However, the
neoplasic placenta resists the negative regulations of TGFÎ². This resistance
may be related to the decreased expression of tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs).19 Other factors such as Leukemia Inhibitory Factor
(LIF), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3(STAT3) and specific
integrins are expressed with increasing pO2 and promote invasion. STAT3
activation is necessary for the invasive phenotype of trophoblastic cells and
can be controlled via LIF. LIF provides a soluble extracellular signal that
stimulates trophoblast invasion.20 Thus, CTB cells present a dynamic
expression of certain adhesion molecules (integrins, E-cadherin) depending on
the oxygen pressure.21-23 Authors show that, when the placenta transforms from
the proliferative phase to the differentiation phase, the trophoblastic cells
switch their expression of specific integrins (Î±6/Î²4 to Î±1/Î²1 and Î±5/Î²1),
which is also associated with a decreased expression of the E-cadherin (Fig.
3). If the CTB cells do not adopt the required cell adhesions, cell
proliferation is favored over invasion.22 This transition to the invasive
phenotype of trophoblast is also very dependent on the expression of the
canonical Wnt pathway associated with the expression of transcription factor
4(TCF-4) and with the recruitment of Î²-catenin.24 The hyperactivation of the
Wnt pathway and nuclear expression of Î²-catenin are involved in the formation
of hydatidiform moles.25 At the time of the trophoblastic transition, a
differential expression of growth factor receptors is also observed. Epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene
homolog 4 (ERBB4) are expressed in the proliferative phenotype while ERBB2 and
3 are expressed in the invasive phenotype (Fig. 3). These receptors are
activated by EGF and heparin binding EGF (HB-EGF) solely throughout the
proliferative phase. In the case of CHM, there is an increase in the
expression of the EGFR, which may explain the hyperplasia of the
trophoblast.26 The invasive trophoblast also produces proteases (specifically
MMP2 and MMP9) that degrade the proteins of the extracellular matrix in the
decidua, which in turn would facilitate the invasion. We can also observe the
expression of inhibitors of these proteases as TIMPs and plasminogen activator
inhibitors (PAIs ) in the trophoblast and decidua, which would impede the
invasion of the trophoblast cells.24 Finally, the different forms of hCG
present unique kinetics during gestation. The hyperglycosylated hCG (HhCG) is
strongly synthesized by the cells of the extravillous CTB in early pregnancy,
which promotes the implantation of the embryo (hCG is normally produced by the
STB27 and its concentration rapidly decreases to less than 2% after the first
trimester).28 Deregulation of the production of hCG is associated with
hydatidiform moles, particularly the HhCG rate is increased by 5% in complete
moles and approximately 4% for the partial mole.29 The transition to an
invasive tumor is also associated with a significant increase of HhCG,
reaching 30/35% of the total hCG in invasive moles and up 100% for
choriocarcinomas.29-31 Overall, these different factors involved in regulated
manner, are associated to the change in pO2. The factors act together or in
succession during the end of the first trimester of pregnancy and are
responsible for transition of the proliferation phase to the invasion phase of
the placenta and its well development (Fig. 3).

## Epidemiology

In developed countries, the incidence of CHM is approximately 1-3 per 1000
pregnancies and those of the PHM about 3 per 1000 pregnancies.32 These moles
are sporadic and not recurrent except for rare cases known as singleton cases
(when a single family member has recurrent HM) and familial recurrent HMs
(when at least 2 women have one or several HMs); where the genetic origin has
been shown and correspond to an autosomal recessive disease with mutations in
2 genes, NLRP7 and more rarely, KHDC3L.33,34 The frequency of common moles
varies considerably in developing countries, where cases are 10 times more
likely in some Asian or African countries.35,36 These situations tend to have
decreased with time due to the advances in medical monitoring and better
sources of food.36 After one molar pregnancy, the chance of a second complete
or partial mole is 1-2%. The risk of a third molar pregnancy increases
substantially to 15-20% and is not decreased by changing partners and may be
related to familial or sporadic biparental molar disease.32,37,38 More
generally, it is considered that the risk of an additional mole in the next
pregnancy is approximately 5-10 fold higher than the baseline risk for the
"normal" population.39 However, the spontaneous rejection of mole formation
has also been observed. Conversely, it is impossible to know whether it is
more frequent with PHM. The difficulty, even today, is to obtain a correct
diagnosis between partial and complete moles when these pathological entities
are poorly developed during the first trimester of pregnancy. The term,
partial mole was accepted in 1977 and coincides with the improved technology
of ultrasounds. During the first trimester, the villi are not yet
substantially hydropic and still present vessels. The classification of these
tumors during this period of development presents many uncertainties.40,41
Higher frequencies of molar pregnancies are seen in the upper and lower
extremes of maternal age; younger than 13-18 y or older than 45-50 y.39,42 The
ratio of complete to partial moles changes significantly with age. It is
higher in the upper extremes of maternal age, 63% for those aged 13-18 y and
55% to 93% for those aged 41-50 y respectively.39 However, the study by Savage
and Williams43 provides detailed data regarding the risk of partial and
complete molar pregnancies with increasing maternal age and confirms that the
risk of partial molar pregnancy varies relatively little with age, while
complete molar pregnancies contributing to the main component of the overall
increase with age. This work shows that the PHM likely corresponds to
fertilization anomalies observed in the general population unlike CHM (PHM are
biparental but 2 spermatozoa are fertilizing).43,44

The CHM are more frequently invasive than PHM. This malignant change in molar
pregnancies seems to be associated with the male origin of the DNA.39 The
possibility that heterozygous moles (see above) arising from 2 sperm
fertilising the "empty egg" may have a higher risk of malignant change is
another observation.45 Approximately 80% of the HM is self-limiting i.e.,
prevents itself from becoming invasive. The proportion of HM which change into
invasive moles ranges from 7-17% or in rare cases 2-5% to a choriocarcinoma; a
malignant, rapidly growing and metastatic cancer.4,46 60% of all the
choriocarcinoma are not preceded by a clinically recognized HM.47,48 The CHM
carry approximately a 15% risk of malignant change, while the PHM have a much
lower risk of malignant change; approximatly 0.5-1%.43 The fact that these HM
can be repetitive with different male partners rather suggests an underlying
oocyte problem.38 Therefore, an important question to address would be; what
is the karyotype of these moles?

## Genetic background

Since the 1980s, several theoretical models have been proposed to explain the
occurrence of these moles. In the case of complete moles, the oocyte would
lose its nucleus just after sperm penetration followed by a duplication of the
paternal chromosomes (Fig. 4 (1)), unless 2 sperm are fertilizing (Fig. 4
(2)). The oocytes may present a level of immaturity which could be responsible
for a delay in the division of the female pronucleus when compared to the male
pronucleus. Thus, during the first cell divisions of the zygote, this
dyssynchrony would promote the destruction / rejection of the maternal
chromosomes. It may be observed, in rare cases of CHM, the presence of one
maternal chromosome among the duplicated paternal chromosomes, which provides
an additional argument for advocates of this hypothesis.49 Among the CHM, 80%
to 90% have a diploid genome and are androgenetic. Among them, the majority
are monospermic and 10%-20% are dispermic. The remaining 10% to 20% have a
2-parent genomic contribution to their genome.4,50

![An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

Object name is
kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g004.jpg](/pmc/articles/PMC4853053/bin/kcam-10-1-2-1093275-g004.jpg)

Open in a separate window

Figure 4.

The cytogenetic origin of HM. CHM develops after monospermic (1) or dispermic
(2) fertilization of an ovum whose maternal chromosomes have been lost (or
destroyed) just after conception. The result is an androgenetic diploid zygote
with in case of (1) an endoreplication of the paternal chromosomes. Using the
hypothesis of Golubovsky (3) a normal ovum is fertilized by 2 spermatozoa and
the triploid zygote is at the origin of all the types of HM including the PHM,
which are generally triploid by dispermy. In rare cases (4) -some patients
have recurrent CHM - the zygote has a bi- parental diploid karyotype. Genetic
studies in these patients and their families have found an association with
mutations in 2 genes NLRP7 and more rarely KHDC3L.

In other rarer cases (1% CHM) (Fig. 3 (4)), fertilization takes place between
a healthy sperm and a haploid egg carrying a mutated copy of the gene NLRP7
(47 different mutations have been described) or KHDC3L gene (minor gene),
which are probably involved in maintaining the integrity and organization of
the oocyte cortical region and the orientation of cells in the pre-
implantatory embryo toward the formation of the trophoblast or embryo.51 This
results in biparental diploid CHM that are recurrent in the same woman, which
is not the case for androgenetic moles (the most common moles) that are
generally sporadic and non-recurrent. Once again, we find that with these
recurrent moles, the expression of the mutated genes responsible for the
abnormal differentiation of oocytes, which corroborates our earlier hypothesis
regarding the oocyte immaturity. For partial moles, fertilization takes place
between the oocyte and 2 sperm (or more rarely with a diploid sperm). The
zygote is thus triploid (Fig. 4 (3)).8 In rare cases the PHM have also been
reported with other karyotypes (diploid biparental, triploid dyginic,
tetraploid triandric).52

These explanations were reconsidered in 2003 by Golubovsky53. He points out
that (1) it would need a regular "stock" of anuclear oocytes in order to
ensure the frequency of the CHM, (2) the empty oocytes can be obtained "in
vitro" but question their viability "in vivo" and/or whether they can be
fertilized (3) in the case of twins, of which one is a CHM and the other a
fetus, it has been observed that the prevalence of CHM diploids is
androgenetic 46XX,54 which can be explain by diploidization concept and the
monozygotic origin of such associations (Fig. 4 (3)). With regards to the
first remark, the fast disappearance of the maternal chromosomes in the zygote
is presented and not in the oocytes, which avoids the problem of the stock of
empty oocytes. To explain the appearance of a complete mole, Golubovsky
suggests a haploid oocyte fertilized by 2 spermatozoids. During the first
divisions, the triploid zygote would be at the origin of a cellular clone with
2n chromosomes and of another with 1n paternal chromosomes. The 2n clone will
form a normal fetus and the clone with 1n after endoreplication of the
chromosomes will give rise to a CHM (twin fetus) (to refer to Fig. 4 (3)).
From the epidemiologic point of view, the frequency of these triploidies (1%
of all the conceptuses) logically could include all the types of HM, in
particular the partial moles as they are of triploid origin. It should be
noted that the frequency of the triploidies obtained by digyny increases with
the age of the patient, contrary to the triploidies obtained by diandry that
are more frequent in the younger patients. Thus, the number of PHM of
dispermic origin are reduced with the age of the patient.55 This new
explanatory framework proposes that the oocyte presents an abnormal cortical
reaction which would support the entry of 2 spermatozoids51 (normally, the
release of the cortical granules enzymatic contents prohibits the access to
the oocyte to more than one sperm). These various hypotheses assume that the
differentiation of the oocyte was inadequate, which reinforces the hypothesis
of an immature oocyte. Other observations show that the nutritional
environment of the woman during her pregnancy can also be responsible.

## Epigenetic factors

Numerous risk factors for molar pregnancies have been suggested, including
paternal age,56 maternal genetic anomalies,57 blood group,58 oral
contraceptives,59 maternal age60 and environmental factors; in particular
vitamin A and the folates.61 However, the only clear data is related to
maternal age39 and the previous occurrence of a prior molar pregnancy.37 The
excess risk is rather associated with CHM and less with PHM. Despite this,
findings from various studies in animals show that diet can reset the genetic
imprint,62 which is important for the normal development of the human embryo.
Moreover, a deficit of vitamin A or/and of folates during the period of 18 to
21 d of gestation is associated with an absence of vascularisation of the
placental villosities,63 which is observed in the CHM. It is also noted that a
reduction in vitamin A in the food of the patients at the time of their
pregnancy could explain the geographical distribution of these moles.64

Our recent study65 carried out in Morocco and Senegal, where the annual cycle
of the seasons is defined with one period of severe diet (limited fresh
products), showed a strong correlation between the nutritional deficit of the
mothers at the time of the conception of their daughters and the development
of a CHM during the pregnancy of the daughters as an adult. It is mainly a
deficit in vitamin A and/or B9 (folates) during the first weeks of the
development of the female fetus which could deteriorate the normal
differentiation of their oocytes. Vitamin A plays a significant role in the
progress of meiosis; its insufficiency is responsible for the development of
an immature oocyte66,67 and prevents meiosis II from being carried out
correctly.68 The folates are necessary for the synthesis of proteins and the
DNA. Their effects were observed on the one hand, in the differentiation of
the oocyte and the zygote, in particular to the integrity and organization of
the cortical zone51 and on the other hand over the instability of the
chromosomes of maternal origin.69 At the time of fertilization, the male
pronucleus continues its mitotic division; the chromosomes of the female
pronucleus would be destroyed or rejected quickly. Moreover, vitamin A and
folates intervene in the mechanisms of the DNA methylation during the
reprogramming of the parental imprinting. Contrary to other human genes, these
genes (approximately 1% of the genome) are expressed only in a monoallelic way
according to the paternal or maternal origin of the zygote chromosomes. It is
the existence in the Human species of these imprinted genes that prevent the
parthenogenesis70 and allows the successful development of the human embryo.
Such deficits that occur during oogenesis are responsible for the qualitative
and functional anomalies of the oocyte.61 Such methylation defects affect the
imprinted genes in the oocyte. The maternal methylation disappears and is
replaced with paternal methylation. Undoubtedly this is one of the reasons why
the affected women may have HM with various sexual partners.71

Other studies carried out in Hawaii where the risk of CHM is weak, show that
the women whose migration toward Hawaii was recent; present a high rate of
CHM. In fact, these women were born in the Philippines where this rate of CHM
is high. The Japanese women who settled in Hawaii, but whose migration is much
older, do not present any additional risk (Japan at the time was a high-risk
country).72 Moreover, in Japan between the years 1974 and the 2000, the
incidence of the HM significantly decreased by 2.79/1000 alive births in 1976
to 1.61/1000 in 1997. However, this regression is associated only with the
fall of the CHM which decreased from 1.71/1000 alive births in 1985 to
0.49/1000 in 2000 and not to the PHM. Nonetheless, the first were shown to be
androgenetic while the latter were shown to be triploid diandric. After the
deprivations of the war (1937-1945), the economic conditions gradually
improved and the gametogenesis among women gradually normalized, explaining
the reduction of the CHM.73 The PHM which are mainly the result of the
anomalies of the process gametogenesis/fertilization in the human species are
not influenced by such variations in the nutritional environment.

In conclusion, the data suggests that it is the mother of the patient with the
mole occurrence who is responsible for this pathology and not the patient
themselves. This can be attributed to the transgenerational effect.65 Finally
what is known about the history of the HM remains partly an enigma.

## Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Dr Zara Hannoun for her kind and pertinent reviewing of this
manuscript.

## References

  1. Vrana KE, Hipp JD, Goss AM, McCool BA, Riddle DR, Walker SJ, Wettstein PJ, Studer LP, Tabar V, Cunniff K, et al. Nonhuman primate parthenogenetic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003; 100 Suppl 1:11911-6; PMID:14504386; http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2034195100 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  2. Debyser IWJ SH, Zwart P. Partial hydatidiform mole in a pregnant chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). Zoo Biol 1993; 12:299-305; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/zoo.1430120307 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  3. Brews A. A Follow-up survey of the cases of hydatidiform mole and chorion-epithelioma treated at the London hospital since 1912: (Section of Obstetrics and Gynaecology). Proc R Soc Med 1935; 28:1213-28. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  4. Slim R, Mehio A.. The genetics of hydatidiform moles: new lights on an ancient disease. Clin Genet 2007; 71:25-34; PMID:17204043; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00697.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  5. Candelier JJ, Frappart L, Diatta AL, Yadaden T, Cisse ML, Afoutou JM, Picard JY, Mennesson B, Slim R, Si-Tayeb K, et al. Differential expression of E-cadherin, Î²-catenin, and Lewis x between invasive hydatidiform moles and post-molar choriocarcinomas. Virchows Arch 2013; 462:653-63; PMID:23681114; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00428-013-1427-z [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  6. Kim MJ, Kim KR, Ro JY, Lage JM, Lee HI.. Diagnostic and pathogenetic significance of increased stromal apoptosis and incomplete vasculogenesis in complete hydatidiform moles in very early pregnancy periods. Am J Surg Pathol 2006; 30:362-9; PMID:16538057 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  7. Kim KR, Sung CO, Kwon TJ, Lee J, Robboy SJ.. Defective pericyte recruitment of villous stromal vessels as the possible etiologic cause of hydropic change in complete hydatidiform mole. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0122266; PMID:25849742; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0122266 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  8. Szulman AE, Surti U.. The syndromes of hydatidiform mole. II. Morphologic evolution of the complete and partial mole. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978; 132:20-7; PMID:696779 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  9. Hertig AT EH. Genesis of hydatidiform mole. Arch Pathol 1940; 30:260-91. [Google Scholar]

  10. Hertig AT, Rock J, Adams EC.. A description of 34 human ova within the first 17 days of development. Am J Anat 1956; 98:435-93; PMID:13362122; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/aja.1000980306 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  11. Osada H, Kawata M, Yamada M, Okumura K, Takamizawa H.. Genetic identification of pregnancies responsible for choriocarcinomas after multiple pregnancies by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991; 165:682-8; PMID:1679964; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0002-9378(91)90309-F [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  12. Philippe E. [Gestational trophoblastic diseases]. Ann Pathol 1994; 14:11-4; PMID:8155186 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  13. Froeling FE, Seckl MJ.. Gestational trophoblastic tumours: an update for 2014. Curr Oncol Rep 2014; 16:408; PMID:25318458; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11912-014-0408-y [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  14. Pijnenborg R, Bland JM, Robertson WB, Dixon G, Brosens I.. The pattern of interstitial trophoblastic invasion of the myometrium in early human pregnancy. Placenta 1981; 2:303-16; PMID:7301778; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0143-4004(81)80027-6 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  15. Burton GJ. Oxygen, the Janus gas; its effects on human placental development and function. J Anat 2009; 215:27-35; PMID:19175804; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7580.2008.00978.x [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  16. Wells M. The pathology of gestational trophoblastic disease: recent advances. Pathology 2007; 39:88-96; PMID:17365825; http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00313020601137367 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  17. Caniggia I, Mostachfi H, Winter J, Gassmann M, Lye SJ, Kuliszewski M, Post M.. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 mediates the biological effects of oxygen on human trophoblast differentiation through TGFbeta(3). J Clin Invest 2000; 105:577-87; PMID:10712429; http://dx.doi.org/10.1172/JCI8316 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  18. Xu G, Guimond MJ, Chakraborty C, Lala PK.. Control of proliferation, migration, and invasiveness of human extravillous trophoblast by decorin, a decidual product. Biol Reprod 2002; 67:681-9; PMID:12135914; http://dx.doi.org/10.1095/biolreprod67.2.681 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  19. Xu G, Chakraborty C, Lala PK.. Expression of TGF-Î² signaling genes in the normal, premalignant, and malignant human trophoblast: loss of smad3 in choriocarcinoma cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001; 287:47-55; PMID:11549251; http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5533 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  20. Poehlmann TG, Fitzgerald JS, Meissner A, Wengenmayer T, Schleussner E, Friedrich K, Markert UR.. Trophoblast invasion: tuning through LIF, signalling via Stat3. Placenta 2005; 26 Suppl A:S37-41; PMID:15837065; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.placenta.2005.01.007 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  21. Damsky C, Schick SF, Klimanskaya I, Stephens L, Zhou Y, Fisher S.. Adhesive interactions in peri-implantation morphogenesis and placentation. Reprod Toxicol 1997; 11:367-75; PMID:9100312; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0890-6238(96)00149-9 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  22. Damsky CH, Librach C, Lim KH, Fitzgerald ML, McMaster MT, Janatpour M, Zhou Y, Logan SK, Fisher SJ.. Integrin switching regulates normal trophoblast invasion. Development 1994; 120:3657-66; PMID:7529679 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  23. Zhou Y, Fisher SJ, Janatpour M, Genbacev O, Dejana E, Wheelock M, Damsky CH.. Human cytotrophoblasts adopt a vascular phenotype as they differentiate. A strategy for successful endovascular invasion? J Clin Invest 1997; 99:2139-51; PMID:9151786; http://dx.doi.org/10.1172/JCI119387 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  24. Knofler M, Pollheimer J.. Human placental trophoblast invasion and differentiation: a particular focus on Wnt signaling. Front Genet 2013; 4:190; PMID:24133501; http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2013.00190 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  25. Pollheimer J, Loregger T, Sonderegger S, Saleh L, Bauer S, Bilban M, Czerwenka K, Husslein P, Knofler M.. Activation of the canonical wingless/T-cell factor signaling pathway promotes invasive differentiation of human trophoblast. Am J Pathol 2006; 168:1134-47; PMID:16565489; http://dx.doi.org/10.2353/ajpath.2006.050686 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  26. Fock V, Plessl K, Fuchs R, Dekan S, Milla SK, Haider S, Fiala C, Knofler M, Pollheimer J.. Trophoblast subtype-specific EGFR/ERBB4 expression correlates with cell cycle progression and hyperplasia in complete hydatidiform moles. Hum Reprod 2015; 30:789-99; PMID:25740878; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dev027 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  27. Handschuh K, Guibourdenche J, Tsatsaris V, Guesnon M, Laurendeau I, Evain-Brion D, Fournier T.. Human chorionic gonadotropin produced by the invasive trophoblast but not the villous trophoblast promotes cell invasion and is down-regulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma. Endocrinology 2007; 148:5011-9; PMID:17628005; http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/en.2007-0286 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  28. Sasaki Y, Ladner DG, Cole LA.. Hyperglycosylated human chorionic gonadotropin and the source of pregnancy failures. Fertil Steril 2008; 89:1781-6; PMID:17675003; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2007.03.010 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  29. Cole LA. New discoveries on the biology and detection of human chorionic gonadotropin. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2009; 7:8; PMID:19171054; http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1477-7827-7-8 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  30. Cole LA, Butler SA, Khanlian SA, Giddings A, Muller CY, Seckl MJ, Kohorn EI.. Gestational trophoblastic diseases: 2. Hyperglycosylated hCG as a reliable marker of active neoplasia. Gynecol Oncol 2006; 102:151-9; PMID:16631241; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2005.12.045 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  31. Cole LA, Dai D, Butler SA, Leslie KK, Kohorn EI.. Gestational trophoblastic diseases: 1. Pathophysiology of hyperglycosylated hCG. Gynecol Oncol 2006; 102:145-50; PMID:16631920; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2005.12.047 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  32. Seckl MJ, Sebire NJ, Berkowitz RS.. Gestational trophoblastic disease. Lancet 2010; 376:717-29; PMID:20673583; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60280-2 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  33. Murdoch S, Djuric U, Mazhar B, Seoud M, Khan R, Kuick R, Bagga R, Kircheisen R, Ao A, Ratti B, et al. Mutations in NALP7 cause recurrent hydatidiform moles and reproductive wastage in humans. Nat Genet 2006; 38:300-2; PMID:16462743; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng1740 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  34. Parry DA, Logan CV, Hayward BE, Shires M, Landolsi H, Diggle C, Carr I, Rittore C, Touitou I, Philibert L, et al. Mutations causing familial biparental hydatidiform mole implicate c6orf221 as a possible regulator of genomic imprinting in the human oocyte. Am J Hum Genet 2011; 89:451-8; PMID:21885028; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.08.002 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  35. Boufettal H, Coullin P, Mahdaoui S, Noun M, Hermas S, Samouh N.. [Complete hydatiforme mole in Morocco: epidemiological and clinical study]. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris) 2011; 40:419-29; PMID:21458172; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jgyn.2011.02.008 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  36. Steigrad SJ. Epidemiology of gestational trophoblastic diseases. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2003; 17:837-47; PMID:14614884; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1521-6934(03)00049-X [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  37. Sebire NJ, Fisher RA, Foskett M, Rees H, Seckl MJ, Newlands ES.. Risk of recurrent hydatidiform mole and subsequent pregnancy outcome following complete or partial hydatidiform molar pregnancy. Bjog 2003; 110:22-6; PMID:12504931; http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-0528.2003.02388.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  38. Tuncer ZS, Bernstein MR, Wang J, Goldstein DP, Berkowitz RS.. Repetitive hydatidiform mole with different male partners. Gynecol Oncol 1999; 75:224-6; PMID:10525376; http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/gyno.1999.5562 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  39. Savage PM, Sita-Lumsden A, Dickson S, Iyer R, Everard J, Coleman R, Fisher RA, Short D, Casalboni S, Catalano K, et al. The relationship of maternal age to molar pregnancy incidence, risks for chemotherapy and subsequent pregnancy outcome. J Obstet Gynaecol 2013; 33:406-11; PMID:23654327; http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/01443615.2013.771159 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  40. Paradinas FJ. The diagnosis and prognosis of molar pregnancy: the experience of the National Referral Centre in London. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1998; 60 Suppl 1:S57-64; PMID:9833616; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0020-7292(98)80006-4 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  41. Seckl MJ, Sebire NJ, Fisher RA, Golfier F, Massuger L, Sessa C.. Gestational trophoblastic disease: ESMO clinical practice guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2013; 24 Suppl 6:vi39-50; PMID:23999759; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdt345 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  42. Sebire NJ, Foskett M, Fisher RA, Rees H, Seckl M, Newlands E.. Risk of partial and complete hydatidiform molar pregnancy in relation to maternal age. Bjog 2002; 109:99-102; PMID:11843379; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0528.2002.t01-1-01037.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  43. Savage P, Williams J, Wong SL, Short D, Casalboni S, Catalano K, Seckl M.. The demographics of molar pregnancies in England and Wales from 2000-2009. J Reprod Med 2010; 55:341-5; PMID:20795349 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  44. Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP.. Chorionic tumors. N Engl J Med 1996; 335:1740-8; PMID:8929267; http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199612053352306 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  45. Baasanjav B, Usui H, Kihara M, Kaku H, Nakada E, Tate S, Mitsuhashi A, Matsui H, Shozu M.. The risk of post-molar gestational trophoblastic neoplasia is higher in heterozygous than in homozygous complete hydatidiform moles. Hum Reprod 2010; 25:1183-91; PMID:20208060; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deq052 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  46. Lurain JR, Brewer JI, Torok EE, Halpern B.. Natural history of hydatidiform mole after primary evacuation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983; 145:591-5; PMID:6829636 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  47. Kani KK, Lee JH, Dighe M, Moshiri M, Kolokythas O, Dubinsky T.. Gestatational trophoblastic disease: multimodality imaging assessment with special emphasis on spectrum of abnormalities and value of imaging in staging and management of disease. Curr Probl Diagn Radiol 2012; 41:1-10; PMID:22085657; http://dx.doi.org/10.1067/j.cpradiol.2011.06.002 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  48. Sengupta BS, Persaud V, Wynter HH.. Choriocarcinoma in Jamaica. Int Surg 1977; 62:84-7; PMID:844972 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  49. Fisher RA, Nucci MR, Thaker HM, Weremowicz S, Genest DR, Castrillon DH.. Complete hydatidiform mole retaining a chromosome 11 of maternal origin: molecular genetic analysis of a case. Mod Pathol 2004; 17:1155-60; PMID:15314611; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3800175 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  50. Lurain JR. Gestational trophoblastic disease I: epidemiology, pathology, clinical presentation and diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic disease, and management of hydatidiform mole. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2010; 203:531-9; PMID:20728069; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.073 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  51. Akoury E, Zhang L, Ao A, Slim R.. NLRP7 and KHDC3L, the two maternal-effect proteins responsible for recurrent hydatidiform moles, co-localize to the oocyte cytoskeleton. Hum Reprod 2015; 30:159-69; PMID:25358348; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deu291 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  52. Slim R, Wallace EP.. NLRP7 and the genetics of hydatidiform moles: recent advances and new challenges. Front Immunol 2013; 4:242; PMID:23970884; http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2013.00242 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  53. Golubovsky MD. Postzygotic diploidization of triploids as a source of unusual cases of mosaicism, chimerism and twinning. Hum Reprod 2003; 18:236-42; PMID:12571155; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deg060 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  54. Niemann I, Bolund L, Sunde L.. Twin pregnancies with diploid hydatidiform mole and co-existing normal fetus may originate from one oocyte. Hum Reprod 2008; 23:2031-5; PMID:18556678; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/den226 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  55. Neuber M, Rehder H, Zuther C, Lettau R, Schwinger E.. Polyploidies in abortion material decrease with maternal age. Hum Genet 1993; 91:563-6; PMID:8340110; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00205080 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  56. Messerli ML, Lilienfeld AM, Parmley T, Woodruff JD, Rosenshein NB.. Risk factors for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985; 153:294-300; PMID:2996354; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9378(85)80115-0 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  57. Lawler SD, Pickthall VJ, Fisher RA, Povey S, Evans MW, Szulman AE.. Genetic studies of complete and partial hydatidiform moles. Lancet 1979; 2:580; PMID:89576; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(79)91632-5 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  58. Parazzini F, La Vecchia C, Franceschi S, Pampallona S, Decarli A, Mangili G, Belloni C.. ABO blood-groups and the risk of gestational trophoblastic disease. Tumori 1985; 71:123-6; PMID:2988164 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  59. Parazzini F, Cipriani S, Mangili G, Garavaglia E, Guarnerio P, Ricci E, Benzi G, Salerio B, Polverino G, La Vecchia C.. Oral contraceptives and risk of gestational trophoblastic disease. Contraception 2002; 65:425-7; PMID:12127642; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-7824(02)00293-7 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  60. Parazzini F, La Vecchia C, Pampallona S.. Parental age and risk of complete and partial hydatidiform mole. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1986; 93:582-5; PMID:3755352; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0528.1986.tb07957.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  61. Parazzini F, La Vecchia C, Mangili G, Caminiti C, Negri E, Cecchetti G, Fasoli M.. Dietary factors and risk of trophoblastic disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158:93-9; PMID:2827487; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0002-9378(88)90785-5 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  62. Waterland RA, Jirtle RL.. Early nutrition, epigenetic changes at transposons and imprinted genes, and enhanced susceptibility to adult chronic diseases. Nutrition 2004; 20:63-8; PMID:14698016; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2003.09.011 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  63. Reynolds SR. Hydatidiform mole: a vascular congenital anomaly. Obstet Gynecol 1976; 47:244-50; PMID:175322 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  64. Berkowitz RS, Cramer DW, Bernstein MR, Cassells S, Driscoll SG, Goldstein DP.. Risk factors for complete molar pregnancy from a case-control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985; 152:1016-20; PMID:4025447; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0002-9378(85)90550-2 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  65. Coullin P, Diatta AL, Boufettal H, Feingold J, Leguern E, Candelier JJ.. The involvement of the trans-generational effect in the high incidence of the hydatidiform mole in Africa. Placenta 2015; 36:48-51; PMID:25468544; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.placenta.2014.10.017 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  66. Bowles J, Koopman P.. Sex determination in mammalian germ cells: extrinsic versus intrinsic factors. Reproduction 2010; 139:943-58; PMID:20395427; http://dx.doi.org/10.1530/REP-10-0075 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  67. Clagett-Dame M, Knutson D.. Vitamin A in reproduction and development. Nutrients 2011; 3:385-428; PMID:22254103; http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/nu3040385 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  68. Yokobayashi S, Liang CY, Kohler H, Nestorov P, Liu Z, Vidal M, van Lohuizen M, Roloff TC, Peters AH.. PRC1 coordinates timing of sexual differentiation of female primordial germ cells. Nature 2013; 495:236-40; PMID:23486062; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature11918 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  69. Laanpere M, Altmae S, Stavreus-Evers A, Nilsson TK, Yngve A, Salumets A.. Folate-mediated one-carbon metabolism and its effect on female fertility and pregnancy viability. Nutr Rev 2010; 68:99-113; PMID:20137055; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00266.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  70. Kawahara M, Wu Q, Takahashi N, Morita S, Yamada K, Ito M, Ferguson-Smith AC, Kono T.. High-frequency generation of viable mice from engineered bi-maternal embryos. Nat Biotechnol 2007; 25:1045-50; PMID:17704765; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nbt1331 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  71. Judson H, Hayward BE, Sheridan E, Bonthron DT.. A global disorder of imprinting in the human female germ line. Nature 2002; 416:539-42; PMID:11932746; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/416539a [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  72. Jacobs PA, Hunt PA, Matsuura JS, Wilson CC, Szulman AE.. Complete and partial hydatidiform mole in Hawaii: cytogenetics, morphology and epidemiology. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1982; 89:258-66; PMID:7073993; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0528.1982.tb04693.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  73. Matsui H, Iitsuka Y, Yamazawa K, Tanaka N, Seki K, Sekiya S.. Changes in the incidence of molar pregnancies. A population-based study in Chiba Prefecture and Japan between 1974 and 2000. Hum Reprod 2003; 18:172-5; PMID:12525462; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deg008 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

* * *

Articles from Cell Adhesion & Migration are provided here courtesy of **Taylor
& Francis**

## Formats:

  * Article |

  * PubReader |

  * ePub (beta) |

  * PDF (1.0M) |

  * Citation

## Share

  * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
  * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
  * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+ 

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=celladmig&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC4853053/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

