

__Member Login

__

                
                                      * __Ovulation Calendar
                      * __Pregnancy Calculator
                      * __Baby Names
                

__Member Login

American Pregnancy Association ![American Pregnancy Association

Logo](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/themes/apa/library/img/logo_horiz.png)

_Follow Your Pregnancy Week-By-Week_  
Subscribe to our **free** week-by-week email newsletter

__Enroll Now

Toggle navigation

                
                                      *  Trying To Conceive 
                        *  Getting Pregnant
                        *  Infertility
                        *  Adoption
                        *  Planning and Preparing
                        *  Prenatal Testing
                        *  Preventing Pregnancy
                      *  Your Pregnancy 
                        *  Your Developing Baby
                        *  Pregnancy Wellness
                        *  Multiples Pregnancy
                        *  Week by Week
                        *  Naturally
                      *  Pregnancy Concerns 
                        *  Unplanned Pregnancy
                        *  Pregnancy Complications
                        *  Birth Defects & Disorders
                        *  Is it Safe While Pregnant
                        *  Medications & Pregnancy
                        *  Pregnancy Loss
                      *  Birth & Beyond 
                        *  Labor and Birth
                        *  Birth & Beyond
                        *  Breastfeeding
                        *  Women's Health
                      *  About 
                        * Blog
                        *  Discussion
                        *  About APA
                        *  Online Advertising
                        *  Medical Advisory Committee
                        *  Corporate Sponsor Info
                        *  Corporate Sponsors
                        * Delivering Excellence
                        *  Fertility Shop
                      * (800) 672-2296
                      * Live Chat
                      * English
                        * Español
                        * 中文
                

Donate

# Determining Your Fertility Window

Home / Getting Pregnant / Determining Your Fertility Window

![Determining fertility

window](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2013/01/determining_fertility_window-620x620.jpg)

If you are new to the trying to conceive (TTC) world, you are probably
learning more than you ever thought you would need to know about how your
reproductive system works. Things like how long sperm can survive inside the
female reproductive tract or how long an egg is viable after it is released
from the ovary may have once seemed trivial or inconsequential, but this
information takes on a deeper significance now that you are actively trying to
conceive.

As you may already know, in order for conception to take place, at least one
healthy and vigorous sperm must be waiting in the fallopian tube at the moment
ovulation occurs and must be able to fertilize the egg within **12-24 hours of
the egg being released from the ovary**.

Since sperm can only live for a maximum of **5 days** in the female
reproductive tract, only a small number of sperm will even survive the long
journey through the female reproductive tract. Therefore, couples trying to
conceive should plan to have intercourse a number of times in the days just
prior to ovulation.

To do this means you must be able to predict when you will ovulate, a task
that is sometimes more difficult than you might think. Fortunately, for those
of us who need help, there are several reliable ways to predict when your most
fertile days will occur during each cycle.

Before we embark on a discussion of how to pinpoint your fertile window, it
might be helpful to briefly review the stages of your menstrual cycle, as
hormonal changes that occur during the different phases set the stage for
ovulation and provide clues as to when ovulation is coming.

![Mother trying to determine her fertility

window](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2013/01/fertility-

window.jpg)

In the first several days of the menstrual cycle (called the follicular
phase), certain hormones, specifically follicle stimulating hormone (FSH),
begin the maturation process of follicles (the sacs that hold the egg) in the
ovaries. In the second week of your cycle, FSH levels begin to decline and a
single dominant follicle continues to develop.

This growing follicle produces increasing amounts of estrogen, which initiates
the ovulatory phase. Estrogen plays a key role in the ovulatory process and
helps to prepare the body for pregnancy. This hormone helps build the lining
of the endometrium, facilitates the secretion of fertile-quality cervical
mucus (which helps to protect and transport sperm through the reproductive
tract) and triggers the production of the luteinizing hormone (LH).

By paying close attention to how your body responds to increasing estrogen in
the first couple weeks of your menstrual cycle, you can begin to predict
ovulation. For example, many women know ovulation is just around the corner
when they see an increase in production of fertile-quality cervical mucus.

## Tools for predicting ovulation

Modern technology has provided present day TTCers with several reliable and
convenient tools for predicting ovulation. Here is a brief introduction to
some of the available tests and devices that can be used to help you pinpoint
your fertile window.

                
                                      * Ovulation Kits (OPKs) are a popular method for predicting ovulation. OPKs detect the presence of luteinizing hormone (LH) in your urine. In many women, the amount of LH in the body surges approximately **12-36 hours before ovulation occurs**. By testing with OPKs, you can identify this LH surge, which allows you to know that ovulation is just around the corner and that you are in your fertile window.
                      * Ovulation Microscopes or saliva ferning scopes, allow women to identify their most fertile days by observing the visual changes that take place in saliva throughout the monthly cycle. Just prior to ovulation, women experience an "estrogen surge," and a distinct fern-like pattern in the saliva becomes visible under the microscope due to increased estrogen levels.
                

Because the estrogen surge typically precedes the luteinizing hormone surge
(luteinizing hormone is the hormone detected by urine-based ovulation tests),
ovulation microscopes can often provide more advanced notice of ovulation,
giving trying to conceive women more time to appropriately plan their “baby
dancing”.

                
                                      * Electronic fertility monitors, like the OvaCue, provide a higher degree of accuracy and more advanced warning of impending ovulation than other ovulation prediction methods. The OvaCue fertility monitor is a hand-held electronic monitor with a color screen, a spoon-sized oral sensor, and a vaginal sensor. A mobile version of the OvaCue monitor is now available so that users can track their fertility directly on their iPhone or other iOS compatible device.
                      * The OvaCue provides 5-7 day advance notice of peak fertility and confirms ovulation by using the patented Electrolyte MethodTM to measure and track changes in the electrolyte levels in the saliva and cervical mucus. As a woman moves through her menstrual cycle, the levels of various hormones circulating in her body go up and down, and these hormonal fluctuations produce changes in the electrolyte characteristics of her saliva and cervical mucus.
                

Using measurements obtained from the oral and vaginal sensors, the OvaCue
produces a numerical reading that reveals the relative trends in electrolyte
levels. This allows the OvaCue to identify the hormonal changes that occur
during the ovulatory process, thereby allowing it to predict and confirm
ovulation. There are a few different electronic fertility monitors available,
the OvaCue is manufactured by Fairhaven Health, LLC.

If you are trying to get pregnant and looking for resources to support your
efforts, we invite you to check out the fertility product and resource guide
provided by our corporate sponsor. Review resource guide here.

Taking the time and effort to determine your fertile window can help take some
of the stress and frustration out of your TTC journey. So, while there are
many different ways to predict ovulation, the most important thing is to
choose a method that works for you!

If you are trying to get pregnant, the President of the American Pregnancy
Association wrote the book, the Essential Guide to Getting Pregnant,
specifically to help those who were trying to get pregnant. The book shares
what each couple needs to know to maximize their chances to conceive. The book
goes into detail with information to help you understand and target your
fertility window.

Last updated: October 8, 2018 at 9:40 am

__Share

__Pin

__Tweet

__Share

120 Shares

__Share

__Pin

__Tweet

__Share

120 Shares

__Search

![](https://americanpregnancy.org/app/uploads/2016/05/ovacue-

mobile300x250.jpg)

Find Healthcare Providers That Can Help You Through Your Pregnancy.

Type Of Provider

Acupuncturist Adoption Professional Birth Center Childbirth Educator
Chiropractor Counselor Doula Family Law General Practitioner Genetic Counselor
Holistic Healthcare Specialist Homeopath Hospital Infertility Specialist
Lactation Consultant Life Insurance Massage Therapist Maternity Home Medicaid
Office Midwife Nutritionist Ob-Gyn Pediatrician Pharmacy Physical Therapist
Pregnancy Center Support Group WIC Center Yoga or Fitness Instructor

Zip Code

Radius 1 mile 5 miles 10 miles 15 miles 20 miles 30 miles 50 miles 100 miles

### Education Supported By

                
                                      * ![Amareta](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/amereta.gif)
                      * ![DNA Diagnostic Center](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/ddc.png)
                      * ![Dream Belly](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/dream-belly.png)
                      * ![eHealthcare Solutions](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/ehealthcare-solutions.png)
                      * ![Fairhaven Health](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/fairhaven-health.png)
                      * ![IsoLove](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/isolove.jpg)
                      * ![Milkies](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/milkies.png)
                      * ![My Fetal Life](https://americanpregnancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/MyFetalLife-image-for-APA.png)
                      * ![Nordic Naturals](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/nordic-naturals.png)
                      * ![Safe Catch](https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/safe-catch.png)
                      * ![Viacord](  https://americanpregnancy.org/imgs/sponsor-logos/viacord.png)
                

#### Helpful Information

                
                                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * Corporate Sponsors
                

#### Planning

                
                                      * Adoption
                      * Birth & Beyond
                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * Labor and Birth
                

#### Pregnancy

                
                                      * Planning and Preparing
                      * Getting Pregnant
                      * Pregnancy Concerns
                      * Your Pregnancy
                

#### Connect

                
                                      * ____
                      * ____
                

* * *

__Contact Us Here __Donate to APA

(C) 2019 American Pregnancy Association. | Web Design by AXZM

__

The information on this site is not intended or implied to be a substitute for
professional medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. All content, including
text, graphics, images, and information, contained on or available through
this website is for general information purposes only. The purpose of this is
to help with education and create better conversations between patients and
their healthcare providers.

Getting Pregnant AXZM

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

