
                
                                      * 800.223.2273 
                      * MyChart
                      * Need help?
                      * From out of town?
                      * Giving
                      * Careers
                      * Search
                

![Cleveland Clinic logo](/-/scassets/images/org/logo/logo-

ccf.ashx?la=en&hash=1AC03A77F0EFD3CE883B2F5FEBFDED5E33EBF191)

Menu __ Search

## Cleveland Clinic Menu

                
                                      * ClevelandClinic.org
                      * Find a Doctor
                      * Locations & Directions
                      * Patients & Visitors
                      * Health Library
                      * Institutes & Departments
                

MyChartNeed help?

Call for Additional Assistance 800.223.2273

                
                                      * ClevelandClinic.org
                      * Find a Doctor
                      * Locations & Directions
                      * Patients & Visitors
                      * Health Library
                      * Institutes & Departments
                

Home / Health Library / Disease & Conditions

# Miscarriage

Miscarriage is also called spontaneous abortion. About half of the
miscarriages that happen in the first trimester are caused by chromosomal
abnormalities. Risk factors, diagnosis, and follow-up are discussed.

                
                                      * Appointments 216.444.6601
                      * Appointments & Locations
                      * Contact Us
                

Miscarriage Menu

Overview Diagnosis and Tests Outlook / Prognosis

### What is a miscarriage?

A miscarriage, also called a spontaneous abortion, is the spontaneous ending
of a pregnancy About 1/3 to 1/2 of all pregnancies end in miscarriage before a
woman misses a menstrual period or even knows she is pregnant. About 10-20% of
women who know they are pregnant will miscarry.

A miscarriage is most likely to occur within the first 3 months of pregnancy,
before 20 weeks’ gestation. Only 1% of miscarriages occur after 20 weeks’
gestation. These are termed late miscarriages.

### What are the risk factors for a miscarriage?

A risk factor is a trait or behavior that increases a person’s chance of
developing a disease or predisposes a person to a certain condition. Risk
factors for miscarriage include:

                
                                      * Maternal age: Studies show that the risk of miscarriage is 12% to 15% for women in their 20s and rises to about 25% for women at age 40. The increased incidence of chromosomal abnormalities contributes to the age-related risk of miscarriage.
                      * Certain health conditions in the mother as listed in the section, "What causes miscarriage?"
                

### What causes miscarriage?

About half of all miscarriages that occur in the first trimester are caused by
chromosomal abnormalities — which might be hereditary or spontaneous — in the
father’s sperm or the mother’s egg. Chromosomes are tiny structures inside the
cells of the body that carry many genes, the basic units of heredity.

Genes determine all of a person’s physical attributes, such as sex, hair and
eye color, and blood type. Most chromosomal problems occur by chance and are
not related to the mother’s or father’s health.

Miscarriages are also caused by a variety of unknown and known factors, such
as:

                
                                      * Infection.
                      * Exposure to environmental and workplace hazards such as high levels of radiation or toxic agents.
                      * Hormonal irregularities.
                      * Improper inplantation of fertilized egg in the uterine lining.
                      * Maternal age.
                      * Uterine abnormalities.
                      * Incompetent cervix. (The cervix begins to widen and open too early, in the middle of pregnancy, without signs of pain or labor.)
                      * Lifestyle factors such as smoking, drinking alcohol, or using illegal drugs.
                      * Disorders of the immune system including lupus, an autoimmune disease.
                      * Severe kidney disease.
                      * Congenital heart disease.
                      * Diabetes that is not controlled.
                      * Thyroid disease.
                      * Radiation.
                      * Certain medicines, such as the acne drug Accutane®.
                      * Severe malnutrition.
                      * Group B beta strep.
                

**Note:** There is no proof that stress, or physical or sexual activity causes
miscarriage.

Sometimes, treatment of a mother’s illness can improve the chances for a
successful pregnancy.

### What are the symptoms of a miscarriage?

Symptoms of a miscarriage include:

                
                                      * Bleeding that progresses from light to heavy.
                      * Cramps.
                      * Abdominal pain.
                      * Low back ache that may range from mild to severe.
                

If you are experiencing the symptoms listed above, contact your healthcare
provider right away. He or she will tell you to come in to the office or go to
the emergency room.

### What are some of the symptoms after a miscarriage?

Spotting and mild discomfort are common symptoms after a miscarriage. If you
have heavy bleeding, fever, chills, or pain, contact your healthcare provider
immediately as these may be signs of an infection.

Next: Diagnosis and Tests

Share **Facebook** Twitter **LinkedIn** Email __ Print

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our
site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic
products or services. Policy

### Related Institutes & Services

##### Ob/Gyn & Women's Health Institute

Find the latest information on Women’s Health, including the use of minimally
invasive surgical techniques, treatments for infertility, menstrual disorders,
urogynecology and pelvic floor disorders, menopause and more.

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our
site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic
products or services. Policy

### References:

                
                                      * Miscarriage Accessed 1/16/2013
                      * Miscarriage at a glance Accessed 1/16/2013
                

_This information is provided by the Cleveland Clinic and is not intended to
replace the medical advice of your doctor or healthcare provider. Please
consult your healthcare provider for advice about a specific medical
condition. This document was last reviewed on: 12/12/2012_

Cleveland Clinic News & More

## Cleveland Clinic News & More

![Loading...](/assets/imgs/cc_bug_ani.gif)

Show More

                
                                      * Appointments 216.444.6601
                      * Appointments & Locations
                      * Contact Us
                

**Facebook** Twitter **YouTube** Instagram **LinkedIn** Pinterest __ Snapchat

##### Actions

Appointments & AccessPay Your BillFinancial AssistanceAccepted InsuranceMake a
DonationRefer a PatientPhone DirectoryEvents Calendar

##### Blog, News & Mobile Apps

Consult QDHealth EssentialsNewsroomMobile Apps

##### About Cleveland Clinic

About UsLocationsQuality & Patient SafetyOffice of Diversity &
InclusionPatient ExperienceResearch & InnovationsCommunity
CommitmentCareersFor EmployeesResources for Medical Professionals

##### Site Information & Policies

Send Us FeedbackSite MapAbout this WebsiteCopyright, Reprint &
LicensingWebsite Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyNotice of Privacy PracticesNon-
Discrimination Notice

9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | (C) 2019 Cleveland
Clinic. All Rights Reserved.

![Back to Top](/assets/imgs/back-to-top-button.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

