

Jump to navigation Skip navigation

American Civil Liberties Union

Email Address *

ZIP Code *

Search form

Enter your keywords

                
                                      * Get Updates
                      * Become a Member
                      * Renew
                      * Take Action
                      * Donate
                        * Make a Gift
                        * Join/Become a Member
                        * Renew Your Membership
                        * Monthly Giving
                        * Fundraise for the ACLU
                        * Other Ways to Give
                
                      * Know your rights
                
                      * Defending our rights
                
                        * Defending Our Rights
                        * Court Battles
                        * Supreme Court Cases
                        * Federal Advocacy
                        * Find Your Local Affiliate
                

Go to Defending Our Rights

The ACLU works tirelessly in courts, legislatures, and communities to defend
and preserve the Constitutionâ€™s promise of liberty for everyone in our
country.

                
                                      * Blogs
                

### Blogs

                
                                        * Speak Freely 
                        * Free Future 
                        * The Campaign
                

### Feeds

                
                                        * Editor's Picks 
                        * People Power 
                        * Breaking News
                

See all blogs and feeds

                
                                      * About
                
                        * About
                        * Leadership
                        * History
                        * Press Releases
                        * Local Affiliates
                        * Careers
                        * Ambassadors
                        * Officers and Board
                        * Financial Info and Reports
                        * How You Can Help
                        * FAQ
                        * Centers
                        * Contact Us
                

Go to About the ACLU

For almost 100 years, the ACLU has worked to defend and preserve the
individual rights and liberties guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the
United States.

                
                                      * Shop
                

# What's Wrong with Fetal Rights

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Reddit
                      * Email
                      * Print
                

**A Look at Fetal Protection Statutes and Wrongful Death Actions on Behalf of
Fetuses**

_No state interest described by fetal rights advocates has enough force to
override a woman's fundamental rights of privacy, bodily integrity, and self-
determination. . . . Until the child is brought forth from the woman's body,
our relationship with it must be mediated by her.*_

A pregnant woman and her fetus should never be regarded as separate,
independent, and even adversarial, entities. Yet that is precisely what some
anti-choice organizations, legal theorists, legislators, prosecutors, doctors,
and courts have attempted to do in the past decade. They have tried to build
support for the notion that the fetus has legal rights independent of the
woman carrying it in her womb. Although this concept is sometimes put forward
in very sympathetic contexts, it is laced with risks for women's rights.
Theories of "fetal rights" have been promoted through different approaches in
both legislation and litigation. Below, we will examine the threat to the
constitutional right of reproductive choice inherent in two of these
approaches: fetal protection statutes and wrongful death actions on behalf of
fetuses.

          * Janet Gallagher, _Prenatal Invasions & Interventions: What's Wrong with Fetal Rights, 10 Harvard Women's Law Journal 9, 37, 57 (1987)._

**I. Fetal Protection Statutes**

In the past two years, a number of states have considered or enacted
legislation designed to protect fetuses and punish individuals who injure them
or cause their death. The ACLU recognizes that a woman may suffer a serious
physical and emotional injury if her pregnancy is ended by an assault, a drunk
driving accident, or other criminal or negligent acts. But we have serious
reservations about legislation designed to protect fetuses, because it can
endanger women's rights by reinforcing claims of "fetal rights" in the law.

Anti-choice organizations have long promoted fetal protection legislation as
one prong of their campaign to eliminate the right to choose. It is no
accident that anti-choice groups like Americans United for Life have drafted
and circulated such legislation all over the country. Passage of fetal
protection laws gives anti-choice forces a propaganda coup and a launching pad
for arguments to restrict abortion. In a 1984 presidential election debate,
Ronald Reagan cited a California "feticide" law as support for regarding
abortion as murder, asking, "Isn't it strange that that same woman could have
taken the life of her unborn child and it was abortion, not murder, but if
somebody else does it, that's murder?"

The ACLU fully supports a woman's right to obtain redress under civil law for
an injury to her fetus, and we support society's right to punish criminal
conduct. But we urge legislators and advocates of choice to take a careful
look at bills designed to protect fetuses. They must be alert to the pitfalls
in such bills and refrain from supporting statutes that endanger civil
liberties.

**A. The Varieties of Fetal Protection Legislation**

Legislation to protect fetuses can take many different forms. The extent to
which such a bill may endanger reproductive rights depends on its specific
terms and implications. For example, states may: 1) amend existing homicide
statutes to include the fetus as a possible victim; 2) pass statutes defining
the fetus as a person or human being, thereby making the fetus fall within the
compass of other statutes applicable to all persons or human beings; 3) enact
freestanding statutes to define and penalize a new crime of injury to a fetus,
fetal homicide, or "feticide"; 4) extend wrongful death statutes to permit
civil suits against individuals who cause the death of a fetus; or 5) enact
new statutes to penalize injury to a pregnant woman that causes her fetus to
die or be injured. In some instances, two or more of these approaches to fetal
protection may be combined in a single bill.

**B. Fetal Protection Legislation Can Infringe on the Right to Abortion**

To conform with the constitutional right to choose established in _Roe v.
Wade, fetal protection legislation must exempt abortion from punishment. The
exemption should explicitly cover: 1) abortions performed by health care
workers with the consent of the woman or in medical emergencies; and 2) self-
abortions._

An exemption specifying " _legal abortions" is not adequate, because a narrow
interpretation of what constitutes a "legal" abortion could restrict the
performance of abortions to physicians only, and put mid-level health care
practitioners, or women who self-abort, in jeopardy of being prosecuted for
murder. Prosecutions for self-abortion occur even in the absence of fetal
protection laws and provide cruel examples of what might result from such
legislation. In the past three years alone, women in Florida, Tennessee, and
Illinois faced criminal charges after desperate attempts at aborting
themselves. In _State v. Ashley, Florida authorities are pursuing a
manslaughter charge against a 19-year-old single mother who shot herself in
the stomach after learning she could not obtain Medicaid funds for an
abortion.__

Fetal protection legislation lacking an adequate exemption for abortion could
make _all abortions in a state illegal if _Roe v. Wade were later overturned
or undermined. Even when fetal protection statutes do have such exemptions,
zealous anti-choice prosecutors may try to intimidate abortion providers by
threatening to use the statutes as grounds to indict them for murder if there
are any deviations from strict abortion laws or regulations.__

**C. Fetal Protection Statutes May Encourage the "Policing" of Pregnancy**

Fetal protection bills must also exempt conduct of the pregnant woman herself.
If they do not, they will encourage the "policing" of pregnancy by those
attempting to control the conduct of pregnant women. Over the last twenty
years, we've seen numerous women subjected to prosecution or civil lawsuits
for engaging in (both legal and illegal) conduct that is potentially harmful
to a fetus. If fetal protection laws without adequate exceptions are adopted,
state or local officials might feel licensed to prosecute a woman who smokes
or drinks alcohol during pregnancy and subsequently miscarries or bears a
stillborn fetus, or perhaps even a live baby in need of special medical
attention. And women might be sued for "prenatal negligence" by their own
children, as happened in _Grodin v. Grodin, a 1980 case from Michigan in which
a court held that a child could sue his mother for having taken tetracycline
during pregnancy, allegedly resulting in discoloration of the child's teeth._

We could also expect to see still more criminal prosecutions or child abuse or
neglect proceedings brought against women who make childbirth choices of which
doctors or judges disapprove. In 1982, Kentucky officials charged a lay
midwife and her clients with reckless homicide in the death of a fetus during
a home birth. And just this year, a Wisconsin judge ordered the detention of a
woman who had disclosed her intention of giving birth at home over a doctor's
objection. Such prosecutions and lawsuits for prenatal negligence infringe
upon women's constitutional rights to privacy, equal protection, and due
process. They treat pregnant women differently simply because they are
pregnant, subjecting them to standards that do not apply to anyone else.

**D. Fetal Protection Bills May Violate Other Constitutional Rights**

Some fetal protection bills disregard the Constitution's promise that citizens
are entitled to due process of law. They violate due process guarantees if
they lack a _scienter requirement or are unacceptably vague. A _scienter
requirement specifies that the perpetrator of a crime must have _intended to
commit the crime. Such a requirement is usually necessary for a person to be
convicted of an offense in criminal law. When legislation fails to address
intent, as some fetal protection bills do, a person may be prosecuted and
punished for a crime that he or she did not intend to commit, when a lesser
charge would be more just.___

Fetal protection bills also run the risk of being unconstitutionally vague if
they do not define all of their terms and spell out precisely what conduct is
prohibited. A fetal protection statute that leaves the public, health care
workers, and law enforcement authorities uncertain as to its meaning is
especially dangerous because it threatens to chill the exercise of
constitutionally protected reproductive rights.

**E. Factors to Evaluate**

Fetal protection bills must be analyzed very carefully. Serious thought should
be given to the bills' possible uses and ramifications. We urge you to consult
with the ACLU Reproductive Freedom Project about any fetal protection bills
introduced in your legislature. Here is a checklist of some important factors
that you should evaluate in the bills and discuss with us:

                
                                      * **Does the bill cast the fetus, the woman, or both as the victim? Bills that cast the woman alone as the injured party are less likely to be read by the courts as vesting the fetus with rights independent of the woman or giving a born child rights to sue its mother.**
                      * **Does the bill have an exemption for abortions performed by health care workers with the consent of the woman or in medical emergencies, as well as an exemption for self-abortions? Bills that lack such exemptions undermine reproductive choice.**
                      * **Does the bill exempt conduct of the pregnant woman herself? Failure to exempt the pregnant woman's conduct will encourage the "policing" of pregnancy and infringe upon all pregnant women's constitutional rights to privacy, equal protection, and due process.**
                      * **What language does the bill employ to describe the fetus? Insist that it be free of anti-choice rhetoric, such as "pre-born," "unborn baby," "unborn child," or "unborn human."**
                      * **Does the bill create criminal or civil liability? A criminal law that will deprive a defendant of his or her liberty has greater constitutional implications than does a law creating a right to file a civil lawsuit for money damages.**
                      * **Does a bill proposing a criminal penalty include a _scienter requirement? The legislation must contain a requirement of knowledge or intent to commit the crime in order to comply with the due process guarantee of the Constitution._**
                      * **Does the bill define all of its terms and spell out precisely what conduct is prohibited? A bill will not comply with the constitutional guarantee of due process if it is so vaguely written that it leaves the public, health care workers, and law enforcement authorities unsure of its meaning and reach.**
                      * **In a bill proposing a criminal penalty for causing the death of a fetus, how does that penalty compare to the penalty for causing the death of a live person? The penalty for killing a fetus should not be as severe as the penalty for killing a person.**
                

**F. The Need for Sensitive Advocacy Concerning Fetal Protection Bills**

The ACLU Reproductive Freedom Project recommends extreme caution about fetal
protection bills because of the potential dangers for reproductive rights. We
urge supporters of civil liberties to be sensitive about evaluating proposed
bills on three different levels: 1) legal; 2) political; and 3) rhetorical. By
"legal," we mean that they must determine whether or not the proposed
legislation will infringe on individual rights. By "political," we mean that
they must be aware what group, individual, or impetus is behind the
legislation. And by "rhetorical," we mean that they must take care when they
discuss or criticize fetal protection bills; our language should reflect
understanding of why many people, including some who are pro-choice, might
support fetal protection legislation. While we need to make clear that we
respect and sympathize with the many emotional dimensions of this issue, every
effort must be made to ensure that fetal protection statutes will not pave the
way for government actions that threaten women's rights or reproductive
choice.

**II. Wrongful Death Actions on Behalf of Fetuses**

Many states have "wrongful death" statutes, which allow someone acting on
behalf of a deceased person -- usually a surviving relative or an
administrator of the estate -- to recover damages for a wrongful or negligent
act that caused the person's death. The state courts are divided on whether or
not stillborn fetuses may be regarded as "persons" for the purpose of bringing
wrongful death actions on their behalf. The ACLU takes the position that when
a prospective parent's plans to continue a pregnancy to term have
beenfrustrated by others, that individual should be compensated for the loss
of the pregnancy and the harm suffered. The prospective parent should bring a
cause of action and be compensated under tort law, the area of the law
concerned with compelling wrongdoers to compensate those whom they have
injured. We do not, however, believe that legal action should be brought by a
parent or other party _on behalf of a stillborn fetus, either under a wrongful
death statute or under tort law generally._

Legal claims made on behalf of stillborn fetuses risk intruding upon women's
constitutionally protected privacy rights. A recent Florida case in which we
participated, _Young v. St. Vincent's Medical Center, demonstrates the
important issues at stake when a wrongful death action is brought on behalf of
a fetus. In April 1995, the Florida District Court of Appeals asked the
Florida Supreme Court to decide whether a stillborn fetus has a right of
recovery under Florida's Wrongful Death Act. This question arose because a
woman had brought a wrongful death action on behalf of her stillborn fetus to
seek damages for a hospital's alleged negligence. The state court of appeals,
as well as the district court, dismissed the plaintiff's claim on the ground
that Florida law permits a cause of action for wrongful death only for those
_born alive.__

The ACLU Reproductive Freedom Project and the ACLU of Florida filed a friend-
of-the-court brief urging the Florida Supreme Court to continue to limit
wrongful death actions to those _born alive. In earlier cases, the court had
consistently held that a stillborn fetus -- who was not _born alive -- could
not be considered a "person" with the right to bring legal action. We argued
that any recognition of a cause of action on behalf of the stillborn fetus, if
understood to separate the interests of the fetus from those of the woman
carrying it, could needlessly compromise a pregnant woman's right of
reproductive choice.__

The central question posed by _Young v. St. Vincent's Medical Center was not
whether the prospective parent's loss should be compensated, but rather, _how
it should be compensated. The Project and the ACLU of Florida urged that any
money damages should go to the prospective parent, who should be compensated
for the loss of her child and the harm she suffered when her choice to
continue a pregnancy to term was frustrated. The understandable impulse to
compensate the loss of a fetus, we argued, should not lead to an award of
damages to the stillborn fetus. Instead, the prospective parent's loss could
and should be compensated within the existing tort law framework, which
recognizes a unified legal interest between the pregnant woman and her
fetus.__

Moreover, the ACLU brief argued that according independent legal rights to
fetuses opens the door to causes of action against pregnant women in violation
of their autonomy and privacy. Any equating of a fetus with a "person" or
"child" in the wrongful death context would have ramifications in other realms
of the law. It might, for example, spur claims for "prenatal negligence" by
children suing their own mothers, like _Grodin v. Grodin, the Michigan case
mentioned earlier in which a child alleged that his mother's conduct during
pregnancy had discolored his teeth. Recognition of independent "fetal rights"
would encourage prosecutors and medical personnel to punish women for drug use
duringpregnancy or other conduct that could potentially harm a fetus. As the
brief states,_

> [G]ranting a fetus autonomous legal rights would subject virtually all of a
pregnant woman's actions to monitoring, questioning, and judgment, laying a
foundation for civil liability and even punitive government action against the
woman. . . . [T]he impulse to hold a pregnant woman accountable for any and
all decisions that may, in some unforeseen manner, affect her fetus, could
only lead to an arbitrary legal standard by which to assess the propriety of
her actions. The woman's privacy and autonomy would thus be drastically
reduced. Any development of "fetal rights" as a legal doctrine would
undoubtedly intensify efforts by legal and medical authorities to "police"
pregnancy.

Recognition of a cause of action (or right to sue) for a fetus could also
result in scrutiny of and interference with a pregnant woman's medical
choices. Doctors who disapproved of women's decisions to give birth at home or
refuse cesarean sections might feel justified in seeking court orders to
compel the women to act according to the doctors' advice. The ACLU has on many
occasions successfully opposed such court orders or had them reversed,
including the shocking case, _In re A.C. (1990), in which a hospital hastened
the death of a woman stricken with cancer by forcing her to undergo an
unwanted cesarean section. Although a number of courts have now ruled against
coerced cesarean sections, acceptance of the notion of "fetal rights" could
encourage doctors to seek court orders to compel women to undergo this
invasive surgery, in violation of the women's rights to privacy, bodily
integrity, and due process._

On March 14, 1996, the Florida Supreme Court upheld the lower court's decision
in _Young v. St. Vincent's Medical Center and dismissed the wrongful death
claim on behalf of the fetus. This decision followed a related victory in
_Peters v. Hospital Authority of Elbert County, where the Georgia Supreme
Court agreed with our friend-of-the-court brief arguing that only a
prospective parent, and not a stillborn fetus, should be permitted to seek
recovery in a tort action.__

**III. Conclusion**

While acknowledging the deep emotions that fetuses may evoke for millions of
Americans, the ACLU opposes the creation of theories of "fetal rights."
Permitting legal actions on behalf of stillborn fetuses or enacting laws to
protect fetuses opens a Pandora's box in terms of how the law treats pregnancy
and childbirth. However great our compassion and concern for bereaved
prospective parents, we must examine such lawsuits and legislation with a
critical eye. If they pose a real threat to reproductive rights, as they often
do, then we must intervene and oppose them.

## Defend our abortion rights

Take the pledge

Related Issues

                
                                      * Abortion
                      * Reproductive Freedom
                

## Stay Informed

Email Address *

ZIP Code *

                
                                      * Publications
                      * Multimedia
                      * Press Releases
                      * Contact
                      * Donate
                
                      * ACLU on Facebook
                      * ACLU on Twitter
                      * ACLU on YouTube
                      * The ACLU RSS Feed
                

Charity Navigator

BBB Accredited Charity

                
                                      * User agreement
                      * Privacy statement
                      * Accessibility
                

This is the website of the American Civil Liberties Union.

Learn more about the American Civil Liberties Union and its affiliated
organization, the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation.

Â© 2019 ACLU

We the People Dare to Create a More Perfect Union

![](https://smetrics.aclu.org/b/ss/aclumain/1/H.27.5/8054109)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

