

# Persistent vegetative state

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

## Persistent vegetative state

Specialty| Neurology

A **persistent vegetative state** ( **PVS** ) is a disorder of consciousness
in which patients with severe brain damage are in a state of partial arousal
rather than true awareness. After four weeks in a vegetative state (VS), the
patient is classified as in a persistent vegetative state. This diagnosis is
classified as a _permanent vegetative state_ some months (3 in the US and 6 in
the UK) after a non-traumatic brain injury or one year after a traumatic
injury. Today, doctors and neuroscientists prefer to call the state of
consciousness a _syndrome_ ,[1] primarily because of ethical questions about
whether a patient can be called "vegetative" or not.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Definition
    * 1.1 Medical definition
    * 1.2 Lack of legal clarity
    * 1.3 Vegetative state
    * 1.4 Persistent vegetative state
  * 2 Signs and symptoms
    * 2.1 Recovery
  * 3 Causes
  * 4 Diagnosis
    * 4.1 Diagnostic experiments
    * 4.2 Misdiagnoses
  * 5 Treatment
    * 5.1 Zolpidem
  * 6 Epidemiology
  * 7 History
  * 8 Society and culture
    * 8.1 Ethics and policy
    * 8.2 Notable cases
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

## Definition[edit]

There are several definitions that vary by technical versus layman's usage.
There are different legal implications in different countries.

### Medical definition[edit]

A wakeful unconscious state that lasts longer than a few weeks is referred to
as a persistent (or 'continuing') vegetative state.[3]

### Lack of legal clarity[edit]

Unlike brain death, permanent vegetative state (PVS) is recognized by _statute
law_ as death in very few legal systems. In the US, courts have required
petitions before termination of life support that demonstrate that any
recovery of cognitive functions above a vegetative state is assessed as
impossible by authoritative medical opinion.[4] In England and Wales the legal
precedent for withdrawal of clinically assisted nutrition and hydration in
cases of patients in a PVS was set in 1993 in the case of Tony Bland, who
sustained catastrophic anoxic brain injury in the 1989 Hillsborough
disaster.[3] An application to the Court of Protection is no longer required
before nutrition and hydration can be withdrawn or withheld from PVS (or
'minimally conscious' - MCS) patients.[5]

This legal grey area has led to vocal advocates that those in PVS should be
allowed to die. Others are equally determined that, if recovery is at all
possible, care should continue. The existence of a small number of diagnosed
PVS cases that have eventually resulted in improvement makes defining recovery
as "impossible" particularly difficult in a legal sense.[6] This legal and
ethical issue raises questions about autonomy, quality of life, appropriate
use of resources, the wishes of family members, and professional
responsibilities.

### Vegetative state[edit]

The vegetative state is a chronic or long-term condition. This condition
differs from a coma: a coma is a state that lacks both awareness and
wakefulness. Patients in a vegetative state may have awoken from a coma, but
still have not regained awareness. In the vegetative state patients can open
their eyelids occasionally and demonstrate sleep-wake cycles, but completely
lack cognitive function. The vegetative state is also called a "coma vigil".
The chances of regaining awareness diminish considerably as the time spent in
the vegetative state increases.[7]

### Persistent vegetative state[edit]

Persistent vegetative state is the standard usage (except in the UK) for a
medical diagnosis, made after numerous neurological and other tests, that due
to extensive and irreversible brain damage a patient is _highly unlikely_ ever
to achieve higher functions above a vegetative state. This diagnosis does not
mean that a doctor has diagnosed improvement as impossible, but does open the
possibility, in the US, for a judicial request to end life support.[6]
Informal guidelines hold that this diagnosis can be made after four weeks in a
vegetative state. US caselaw has shown that successful petitions for
termination have been made after a diagnosis of a persistent vegetative state,
although in some cases, such as that of Terri Schiavo, such rulings have
generated widespread controversy.

In the UK, the term 'persistent vegetative state' is discouraged in favor of
two more precisely defined terms that have been strongly recommended by the
Royal College of Physicians (RCP). These guidelines recommend using a
**continuous vegetative state** for patients in a vegetative state for more
than four weeks. A medical determination of a **permanent vegetative state**
can be made if, after exhaustive testing and a customary 12 months of
observation,[8] a medical diagnosis is made that it is _impossible_ by any
informed medical expectations that the mental condition will ever improve.[9]
Hence, a "continuous vegetative state" in the UK may remain the diagnosis in
cases that would be called "persistent" in the US or elsewhere.

While the actual testing criteria for a diagnosis of "permanent" in the UK are
quite similar to the criteria for a diagnosis of "persistent" in the US, the
semantic difference imparts in the UK a _legal_ presumption that is commonly
used in court applications for ending life support.[8] The UK diagnosis is
generally only made after 12 months of observing a static vegetative state. A
diagnosis of a persistent vegetative state in the US usually still requires a
petitioner to prove in court that recovery is impossible by informed medical
opinion, while in the UK the "permanent" diagnosis already gives the
petitioner this presumption and may make the legal process less time-
consuming.[6]

In common usage, the "permanent" and "persistent" definitions are sometimes
conflated and used interchangeably. However, the acronym "PVS" is intended to
define a "persistent vegetative state", without necessarily the connotations
of permanence, and is used as such throughout this article.

Bryan Jennett, who originally coined the term "persistent vegetative state",
has now recommended using the UK division between continuous and permanent in
his most recent book _The Vegetative State_. This is only for purposes of
precision, on the grounds that "the 'persistent' component of this term ...
may seem to suggest irreversibility".[10]

The Australian National Health and Medical Research Council has suggested
"post coma unresponsiveness" as an alternative term for "vegetative state" in
general.[11]

## Signs and symptoms[edit]

Most PVS patients are unresponsive to external stimuli and their conditions
are associated with different levels of consciousness. Some level of
consciousness means a person can still respond, in varying degrees, to
stimulation. A person in a coma, however, cannot. In addition, PVS patients
often open their eyes in response to feeding, which has to be done by others;
they are capable of swallowing, whereas patients in a coma subsist with their
eyes closed (Emmett, 1989).

Cerebral cortical function (e.g. communication, thinking, purposeful movement,
etc) is lost while brainstem functions (e.g. breathing, maintaining
circulation and hemodynamic stability, etc) are preserved. Non-cognitive upper
brainstem functions such as eye-opening, occasional vocalizations (e.g.
crying, laughing), maintaining normal sleep patterns, and spontaneous non-
purposeful movements often remain intact.

PVS patients' eyes might be in a relatively fixed position, or track moving
objects, or move in a _disconjugate_ (i.e., completely unsynchronized) manner.
They may experience sleep-wake cycles, or be in a state of chronic
wakefulness. They may exhibit some behaviors that can be construed as arising
from partial consciousness, such as grinding their teeth, swallowing, smiling,
shedding tears, grunting, moaning, or screaming without any apparent external
stimulus.

Individuals in PVS are seldom on any life-sustaining equipment other than a
feeding tube because the brainstem, the center of vegetative functions (such
as heart rate and rhythm, respiration, and gastrointestinal activity) is
relatively intact (Emmett, 1989).

### Recovery[edit]

Many people emerge spontaneously from a vegetative state within a few
weeks.[10] The chances of recovery depend on the extent of injury to the brain
and the patient's age – younger patients having a better chance of recovery
than older patients. A 1994 report found that of those who were in a
vegetative state a month after a trauma, 54% had regained consciousness by a
year after the trauma, whereas 28% had died and 18% were still in the
vegetative state. But for non-traumatic injuries such as strokes, only 14% had
recovered consciousness at one year, 47% had died, and 39% were still
vegetative. Patients who were vegetative six months after the initial event
were much less likely to have recovered consciousness a year after the event
than in the case of those who were simply reported vegetative at one
month.[12] A _New Scientist_ article from 2000 gives a pair of graphs[13]
showing changes of patient status during the first 12 months after head injury
and after incidents depriving the brain of oxygen.[14] After a year, the
chances that a PVS patient will regain consciousness are very low[15] and most
patients who do recover consciousness experience significant disability. The
longer a patient is in a PVS, the more severe the resulting disabilities are
likely to be. Rehabilitation can contribute to recovery, but many patients
never progress to the point of being able to take care of themselves.

There are two dimensions of recovery from a persistent vegetative state:
recovery of consciousness and recovery of function. Recovery of consciousness
can be verified by reliable evidence of awareness of self and the environment,
consistent voluntary behavioral responses to visual and auditory stimuli, and
interaction with others. Recovery of function is characterized by
communication, the ability to learn and to perform adaptive tasks, mobility,
self-care, and participation in recreational or vocational activities.
Recovery of consciousness may occur without functional recovery, but
functional recovery cannot occur without recovery of consciousness (Ashwal,
1994).

## Causes[edit]

There are three main causes of PVS (persistent vegetative state):

  1. Acute traumatic brain injury
  2. Non-traumatic: neurodegenerative disorder or metabolic disorder of the brain
  3. Severe congenital abnormality of the central nervous system

Medical books (such as Lippincott, Williams, and Wilkins. (2007). In A Page:
Pediatric Signs and Symptoms) describe several potential causes of PVS, which
are as follows:

  * Bacterial, viral, or fungal infection, including meningitis
  * Increased intracranial pressure, such as a tumor or abscess
  * Vascular pressure which causes intracranial hemorrhaging or stroke
  * Hypoxic ischemic injury (hypotension, cardiac arrest, arrhythmia, near-drowning)
  * Toxins such as uremia, ethanol, atropine, opiates, lead, colloidal silver[16]
  * Trauma: Concussion, contusion
  * Seizure, both nonconvulsive status epilepticus and postconvulsive state (postictal state)
  * Electrolyte imbalance, which involves hyponatremia, hypernatremia, hypomagnesemia, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia, and hypocalcemia
  * Postinfectious: Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
  * Endocrine disorders such as adrenal insufficiency and thyroid disorders
  * Degenerative and metabolic diseases including urea cycle disorders, Reye syndrome, and mitochondrial disease
  * Systemic infection and sepsis
  * Hepatic encephalopathy

In addition, these authors claim that doctors sometimes use the mnemonic
device AEIOU-TIPS to recall portions of the differential diagnosis: Alcohol
ingestion and acidosis, Epilepsy and encephalopathy, Infection, Opiates,
Uremia, Trauma, Insulin overdose or inflammatory disorders, Poisoning and
psychogenic causes, and Shock.

## Diagnosis[edit]

Despite converging agreement about the definition of persistent vegetative
state, recent reports have raised concerns about the accuracy of diagnosis in
some patients, and the extent to which, in a selection of cases, residual
cognitive functions may remain undetected and patients are diagnosed as being
in a persistent vegetative state. Objective assessment of residual cognitive
function can be extremely difficult as motor responses may be minimal,
inconsistent, and difficult to document in many patients, or may be
undetectable in others because no cognitive output is possible (Owen et al.,
2002). In recent years, a number of studies have demonstrated an important
role for functional neuroimaging in the identification of residual cognitive
function in persistent vegetative state; this technology is providing new
insights into cerebral activity in patients with severe brain damage. Such
studies, when successful, may be particularly useful where there is concern
about the accuracy of the diagnosis and the possibility that residual
cognitive function has remained undetected.

### Diagnostic experiments[edit]

Researchers have begun to use functional neuroimaging studies to study
implicit cognitive processing in patients with a clinical diagnosis of
persistent vegetative state. Activations in response to sensory stimuli with
positron emission tomography (PET), functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), and electrophysiological methods can provide information on the
presence, degree, and location of any residual brain function. However, use of
these techniques in people with severe brain damage is methodologically,
clinically, and theoretically complex and needs careful quantitative analysis
and interpretation.

For example, PET studies have shown the identification of residual cognitive
function in persistent vegetative state. That is, an external stimulation,
such as a painful stimulus, still activates "primary" sensory cortices in
these patients but these areas are functionally disconnected from "higher
order" associative areas needed for awareness. These results show that parts
of the cortex are indeed still functioning in "vegetative" patients (Matsuda
et al., 2003).

In addition, other PET studies have revealed preserved and consistent
responses in predicted regions of auditory cortex in response to intelligible
speech stimuli. Moreover, a preliminary fMRI examination revealed partially
intact responses to semantically ambiguous stimuli, which are known to tap
higher aspects of speech comprehension (Boly, 2004).

Furthermore, several studies have used PET to assess the central processing of
noxious somatosensory stimuli in patients in PVS. Noxious somatosensory
stimulation activated midbrain, contralateral thalamus, and primary
somatosensory cortex in each and every PVS patient, even in the absence of
detectable cortical evoked potentials. In conclusion, somatosensory
stimulation of PVS patients, at intensities that elicited pain in controls,
resulted in increased neuronal activity in primary somatosensory cortex, even
if resting brain metabolism was severely impaired. However, this activation of
primary cortex seems to be isolated and dissociated from higher-order
associative cortices (Laureys et al., 2002).

Also, there is evidence of partially functional cerebral regions in
catastrophically injured brains. To study five patients in PVS with different
behavioral features, researchers employed PET, MRI and magnetoencephalographic
(MEG) responses to sensory stimulation. In three of the five patients, co-
registered PET/MRI correlate areas of relatively preserved brain metabolism
with isolated fragments of behavior. Two patients had suffered anoxic injuries
and demonstrated marked decreases in overall cerebral metabolism to 30–40% of
normal. Two other patients with non-anoxic, multifocal brain injuries
demonstrated several isolated brain regions with higher metabolic rates, that
ranged up to 50–80% of normal. Nevertheless, their global metabolic rates
remained <50% of normal. MEG recordings from three PVS patients provide clear
evidence for the absence, abnormality or reduction of evoked responses.
Despite major abnormalities, however, these data also provide evidence for
localized residual activity at the cortical level. Each patient partially
preserved restricted sensory representations, as evidenced by slow evoked
magnetic fields and gamma band activity. In two patients, these activations
correlate with isolated behavioral patterns and metabolic activity. Remaining
active regions identified in the three PVS patients with behavioral fragments
appear to consist of segregated corticothalamic networks that retain
connectivity and partial functional integrity. A single patient who suffered
severe injury to the tegmental mesencephalon and paramedian thalamus showed
widely preserved cortical metabolism, and a global average metabolic rate of
65% of normal. The relatively high preservation of cortical metabolism in this
patient defines the first functional correlate of clinical– pathological
reports associating permanent unconsciousness with structural damage to these
regions. The specific patterns of preserved metabolic activity identified in
these patients reflect novel evidence of the modular nature of individual
functional networks that underlie conscious brain function. The variations in
cerebral metabolism in chronic PVS patients indicate that some cerebral
regions can retain partial function in catastrophically injured brains (Schiff
et al., 2002).

### Misdiagnoses[edit]

Statistical PVS misdiagnosis is common. An example study with 40 patients in
the United Kingdom reported 43% of their patients classified as PVS were
believed so and another 33% had recovered whilst the study was underway.[17]
Some PVS cases may actually be a misdiagnosis of patients being in an
undiagnosed minimally conscious state.[18] Since the exact diagnostic criteria
of the minimally conscious state were only formulated in 2002, there may be
chronic patients diagnosed as PVS before the secondary notion of the minimally
conscious state became known.

Whether or not there is any conscious awareness with a patient's vegetative
state is a prominent issue. Three completely different aspects of this should
be distinguished. First, some patients can be conscious simply because they
are misdiagnosed (see above). In fact, they are not in vegetative states.
Second, sometimes a patient was correctly diagnosed but is then examined
during the early stages of recovery. Third, perhaps some day the notion itself
of vegetative states will change so to include elements of conscious
awareness. Inability to disentangle these three example cases causes
confusion. An example of such confusion is the response to a recent experiment
using functional magnetic resonance imaging which revealed that a woman
diagnosed with PVS was able to activate predictable portions of her brain in
response to the tester's requests that she imagine herself playing tennis or
moving from room to room in her house. The brain activity in response to these
instructions was indistinguishable from those of healthy patients.[19][20][21]

In 2010, Martin Monti and fellow researchers, working at the MRC Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit at the University of Cambridge, reported in an article in
the _New England Journal of Medicine_ [22] that some patients in persistent
vegetative states responded to verbal instructions by displaying different
patterns of brain activity on fMRI scans. Five out of a total of 54 diagnosed
patients were apparently able to respond when instructed to think about one of
two different physical activities. One of these five was also able to "answer"
yes or no questions, again by imagining one of these two activities.[23] It is
unclear, however, whether the fact that portions of the patients' brains light
up on fMRI could help these patients assume their own medical decision
making.[23]

In November 2011, a publication in _The Lancet_ presented bedside EEG
apparatus and indicated that its signal could be used to detect awareness in
three of 16 patients diagnosed in the vegetative state.[24]

## Treatment[edit]

Currently no treatment for vegetative state exists that would satisfy the
efficacy criteria of evidence-based medicine. Several methods have been
proposed which can roughly be subdivided into four categories: pharmacological
methods, surgery, physical therapy, and various stimulation techniques.
Pharmacological therapy mainly uses activating substances such as tricyclic
antidepressants or methylphenidate. Mixed results have been reported using
dopaminergic drugs such as amantadine and bromocriptine and stimulants such as
dextroamphetamine.[25] Surgical methods such as deep brain stimulation are
used less frequently due to the invasiveness of the procedures. Stimulation
techniques include sensory stimulation, sensory regulation, music and
musicokinetic therapy, social-tactile interaction, and cortical
stimulation.[26]

### Zolpidem[edit]

There is limited evidence that the hypnotic drug zolpidem has an effect.[27]
The results of the few scientific studies that have been published so far on
the effectiveness of zolpidem have been contradictory.[28][29]

## Epidemiology[edit]

In the United States, it is estimated that there may be between 15,000 and
40,000 patients who are in a persistent vegetative state, but due to poor
nursing home records exact figures are hard to determine.[30]

## History[edit]

The syndrome was first described in 1940 by Ernst Kretschmer who called it
_apallic syndrome_.[31] The term _persistent vegetative state_ was coined in
1972 by Scottish spinal surgeon Bryan Jennett and American neurologist Fred
Plum to describe a syndrome that seemed to have been made possible by
medicine's increased capacities to keep patients' bodies alive.[10][32]

## Society and culture[edit]

### Ethics and policy[edit]

An ongoing debate exists as to how much care, if any, patients in a persistent
vegetative state should receive in health systems plagued by limited
resources. In a case before the New Jersey Superior Court, _Betancourt v.
Trinitas Hospital_ , a community hospital sought a ruling that dialysis and
CPR for such a patient constitutes futile care. An American bioethicist, Jacob
M. Appel, argued that any money spent treating PVS patients would be better
spent on other patients with a higher likelihood of recovery.[33] The patient
died naturally prior to a decision in the case, resulting in the court finding
the issue moot.

In 2010, British and Belgian researchers reported in an article in the _New
England Journal of Medicine_ that some patients in persistent vegetative
states actually had enough consciousness to "answer" yes or no questions on
fMRI scans.[34] However, it is unclear whether the fact that portions of the
patients' brains light up on fMRI will help these patient assume their own
medical decision making.[34] Professor Geraint Rees, Director of the Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience at University College London, responded to the study
by observing that, "As a clinician, it would be important to satisfy oneself
that the individual that you are communicating with is competent to make those
decisions. At the moment it is premature to conclude that the individual able
to answer 5 out of 6 yes/no questions is fully conscious like you or I."[34]
In contrast, Jacob M. Appel of the Mount Sinai Hospital told the _Telegraph_
that this development could be a welcome step toward clarifying the wishes of
such patients. Appel stated: "I see no reason why, if we are truly convinced
such patients are communicating, society should not honour their wishes. In
fact, as a physician, I think a compelling case can be made that doctors have
an ethical obligation to assist such patients by removing treatment. I suspect
that, if such individuals are indeed trapped in their bodies, they may be
living in great torment and will request to have their care terminated or even
active euthanasia."[34]

### Notable cases[edit]

  * Tony Bland - first patient in English legal history to be allowed to die
  * Paul Brophy - first American to die after court-authorization
  * Sunny von Bülow - lived almost 28 years in a persistent vegetative state until her death
  * Gustavo Cerati - Argentine singer-songwriter, composer and producer who died after four years in a coma
  * Prichard Colón - Puerto Rican former professional boxer and gold medal winner who spent years in a vegetative state after a bout
  * Nancy Cruzan - American woman involved in a landmark United States Supreme Court case
  * Gary Dockery - American police officer who entered, emerged and later reentered a persistent vegetative state
  * Eluana Englaro - Italian woman from Lecco whose life was ended after a legal case after spending 17 years in a vegetative state
  * Lia Lee - Hmong child who spent 26 years in a vegetative state and was the subject of a 1997 book by Anne Fadiman
  * Elaine Esposito - American child who was a previous record holder for having spent 37 years in a coma
  * Haleigh Poutre
  * Karen Ann Quinlan
  * Terri Schiavo
  * Aruna Shanbaug
  * Ariel Sharon
  * Vice Vukov
  * Chayito Valdez
  * Helga Wanglie
  * Otto Warmbier
  * Abdelhak Nouri

## See also[edit]

  * Anencephaly
  * Brain death
  * Botulism
  * Catatonia
  * Karolina Olsson
  * Locked-in syndrome
  * Process Oriented Coma Work, for an approach to working with residual consciousness in patients in comatose and persistent vegetative states

## References[edit]

  1. **^** Laureys, Steven; Celesia, Gastone G; Cohadon, Francois; Lavrijsen, Jan; León-Carrión, José; Sannita, Walter G; Sazbon, Leon; Schmutzhard, Erich; von Wild, Klaus R (2010-11-01). "Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: a new name for the vegetative state or apallic syndrome". _BMC Medicine_. **8** : 68. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-68. ISSN 1741-7015. PMC 2987895. PMID 21040571.
  2. **^** Laureys S, Celesia GG, Cohadon F, Lavrijsen J, León-Carrión J, Sannita WG, Sazbon L, Schmutzhard E, von Wild KR, Zeman A, Dolce G (2010). "Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: a new name for the vegetative state or apallic syndrome". _BMC Med_. **8** : 68. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-68. PMC 2987895. PMID 21040571.
  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Royal College of Physicians 2013 Prolonged Disorders of Consciousness: National Clinical Guidelines, https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/resources/prolonged-disorders-consciousness-national-clinical-guidelines
  4. **^** Jennett, B (1999). "Should cases of permanent vegetative state still go to court?. Britain should follow other countries and keep the courts for cases of dispute". _BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.)_. **319** (7213): 796–97. doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7213.796. PMC 1116645. PMID 10496803.
  5. **^** Royal College of Physicians 2013 Prolonged Disorders of Consciousness: National Clinical Guidelines
  6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Diagnosing The Permanent Vegetative State by Ronald Cranford, MD
  7. **^** PVS, The Multi-Society Task Force on (1994-05-26). "Medical Aspects of the Persistent Vegetative State". _New England Journal of Medicine_. **330** (21): 1499–1508. doi:10.1056/NEJM199405263302107. ISSN 0028-4793. PMID 7818633.
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wade, DT; Johnston, C (1999). "The permanent vegetative state: Practical guidance on diagnosis and management". _BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.)_. **319** (7213): 841–4. doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7213.841. PMC 1116668. PMID 10496834.
  9. **^** _Guidance on diagnosis and management: Report of a working party of the Royal College of Physicians_. Royal College of Physicians: London. 1996.
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Bryan Jennett. _The Vegetative State: Medical facts, ethical and legal dilemmas_ (PDF). University of Glasgow: Scotland. Retrieved 2007-11-09.
  11. **^** _Post-coma unresponsiveness (Vegetative State): a clinical framework for diagnosis_. National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC): Canberra. 2003. Archived from the original on 2006-08-20.
  12. **^** Jennett, B (2002). "Editorial: The vegetative state. The definition, diagnosis, prognosis and pathology of this state are discussed, together with the legal implications". _British Medical Journal_. **73** (4): 355–357. doi:10.1136/jnnp.73.4.355. PMC 1738081. PMID 12235296. Retrieved 2012-06-11.
  13. **^** . 2014-02-02 https://web.archive.org/web/20170711065457/https://www.newscientist.com/data/images/archive/2246/22464701.jpg. Archived from the original on 2017-07-11. Retrieved 2019-01-07. Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
  14. **^** Nell Boyce (July 8, 2000). "Is anyone in there?". _New Scientist_ : 36.
  15. **^** Schapira, Anthony (December 18, 2006). _Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience_. Mosby. p. 126. ISBN 978-0323033541.
  16. **^** Mirsattari SM, Hammond RR, Sharpe MD, Leung FY, Young GB (April 2004). "Myoclonic status epilepticus following repeated oral ingestion of colloidal silver". _Neurology_. **62** (8): 1408–10. doi:10.1212/01.WNL.0000120671.73335.EC. PMID 15111684.
  17. **^** K Andrews; L Murphy; R Munday; C Littlewood (1996-07-06). "Misdiagnosis of the vegetative state: retrospective study in a rehabilitation unit". _British Medical Journal_. **313** (7048): 13–16. doi:10.1136/bmj.313.7048.13. PMC 2351462. PMID 8664760.
  18. **^** Giacino JT, et al. (2002). "Unknown title". _Neurology_. **58** (3): 349–353. doi:10.1212/wnl.58.3.349. PMID 11839831.
  19. **^** Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, Pickard JD (2006-09-08). "Detecting awareness in the vegetative state". _Science_. **313** (5792): 1402. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1022.2193. doi:10.1126/science.1130197. PMID 16959998.
  20. **^** "Vegetative patient 'communicates': A patient in a vegetative state can communicate just through using her thoughts, according to research". BBC News. September 7, 2006. Retrieved 2008-08-14.
  21. **^** Stein R (September 8, 2006). "Vegetative patient's brain active in test: Unprecedented experiment shows response to instructions to imagine playing tennis". _San Francisco Chronicle_. Retrieved 2007-09-26.
  22. **^** Willful Modulation of Brain Activity in Disorders of Consciousness at nejm.org
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Richard Alleyne and Martin Beckford, Patients in 'vegetative' state can think and communicate, _Telegraph_ (United Kingdom), Feb 4, 2010
  24. **^** Cruse Damian; et al. (2011). "Bedside detection of awareness in the vegetative state: a cohort study". _The Lancet_. **378** (9809): 2088–2094. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.3928. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61224-5. PMID 22078855.
  25. **^** Dolce, Giuliano; Sazbon, Leon (2002). _The post-traumatic vegetative state_. ISBN 9781588901163.
  26. **^** Georgiopoulos M, et al. (2010). "Vegetative state and minimally conscious state: a review of the therapeutic interventions". _Stereotact Funct Neurosurg_. **88** (4): 199–207. doi:10.1159/000314354. PMID 20460949.
  27. **^** Georgiopoulos, M; Katsakiori, P; Kefalopoulou, Z; Ellul, J; Chroni, E; Constantoyannis, C (2010). "Vegetative state and minimally conscious state: a review of the therapeutic interventions". _Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery_. **88** (4): 199–207. doi:10.1159/000314354. PMID 20460949. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  28. **^** Snyman, N; Egan, JR; London, K; Howman-Giles, R; Gill, D; Gillis, J; Scheinberg, A (2010). "Zolpidem for persistent vegetative state--a placebo-controlled trial in pediatrics". _Neuropediatrics_. **41** (5): 223–227. doi:10.1055/s-0030-1269893. PMID 21210338.
  29. **^** Whyte, J; Myers, R (2009). "Incidence of clinically significant responses to zolpidem among patients with disorders of consciousness: a preliminary placebo controlled trial". _Am J Phys Med Rehabil_. **88** (5): 410–418. doi:10.1097/PHM.0b013e3181a0e3a0. PMID 19620954.
  30. **^** Hirsch, Joy (2005-05-02). "Raising consciousness". _The Journal of Clinical Investigation_. **115** (5): 1102. doi:10.1172/JCI25320. PMC 1087197. PMID 15864333.
  31. **^** Ernst Kretschmer (1940). "Das apallische Syndrom". _Neurol. Psychiat_. **169** : 576–579. doi:10.1007/BF02871384.
  32. **^** B Jennett; F Plum (1972). "Persistent vegetative state after brain damage: A syndrome in search of a name". _The Lancet_. **1** (7753): 734–737. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(72)90242-5. PMID 4111204.
  33. **^** Appel on Betancourt v. Trinitas
  34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Richard Alleyne and Martin Beckford, Patients in 'vegetative' state can think and communicate, _Telegraph_ (United Kingdom), Feb 4, 2010

_This article contains text from the NINDS public domain pages on TBI.[1] and
[2]._

## External links[edit]

Classification|

D

  * **ICD-9-CM** : 780.03
  * **MeSH** : D018458

---|---  
External resources|

  * **Patient UK** : Persistent vegetative state

  * Sarà, M.; Sacco, S.; Cipolla, F.; Onorati, P.; Scoppetta, C; Albertini, G; Carolei, A (2007). "An unexpected recovery from permanent vegetative state". _Brain Injury_. **21** (1): 101–103. doi:10.1080/02699050601151761. PMID 17364525.

  * Canavero S, et al. (2009). "Recovery of consciousness following bifocal extradural cortical stimulation in a permanently vegetative patient". _Journal of Neurology_. **256** (5): 834–6. doi:10.1007/s00415-009-5019-4. PMID 19252808.
  * Canavero S (editor) (2009). _Textbook of therapeutic cortical stimulation_. New York: Nova Science. ISBN 9781606925379.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
  * Canavero S, Massa-Micon B, Cauda F, Montanaro E (May 2009). "Bifocal extradural cortical stimulation-induced recovery of consciousness in the permanent post-traumatic vegetative state". _J Neurol_. **256** (5): 834–6. doi:10.1007/s00415-009-5019-4. PMID 19252808.
  * Connolly, Kate. Car crash victim trapped in a coma for 23 years was conscious, _The Guardian_ , November 23, 2009.
  * Machado, Calixto, et al. A Cuban Perspective on Management of Persistent Vegetative State. _MEDICC Review 2012;14(1):44–48._

  * v

  * t
  * e

Disorders of consciousness

* * *

General|

  * Minimally conscious state
  * Persistent vegetative state

Related|

  * Locked-in syndrome
  * Chronic coma
  * Brain stem death

  * v

  * t
  * e

Symptoms and signs: cognition, perception, emotional state and behaviour
(R40–R46, 780.0–780.5, 781.1)

* * *

Cognition|

| Alteration of  
consciousness|

  * Confusion (Delirium)
  * Obtundation
  * Psychosis
    * Delusions
  * Somnolence
  * Stupor
    * Sopor
  * Unconsciousness
    * Coma
    * Persistent vegetative state
    * Sleep
    * Syncope

---|---  
Fainting/Syncope|

  * Carotid sinus syncope
  * Heat syncope
  * Vasovagal episode

Other|

  * Amnesia
    * Anterograde amnesia
    * Retrograde amnesia
  * Convulsion
  * Dizziness
    * Disequilibrium
    * Presyncope/Lightheadedness
    * Vertigo

Emotional state|

  * Anger
  * Anxiety
  * Depression
  * Fear
    * Paranoia
  * Hostility
  * Irritability
  * Suicidal ideation

Behavior|

  * Verbosity
  * Russell's sign

Perception/  
sensation  
disorder|

  * Hallucination (Auditory hallucination)

  * Olfaction

    * Anosmia
    * Hyposmia
    * Dysosmia
    * Parosmia
    * Phantosmia
    * Hyperosmia
  * Synesthesia

  * Taste

    * Ageusia
    * Hypogeusia
    * Dysgeusia
    * Parageusia
    * Hypergeusia
  * v

  * t
  * e

Death

* * *

In medicine|

Cell death

    
    
    Necrosis
    
    Avascular necrosis
    Coagulative necrosis
    Liquefactive necrosis
    Gangrenous necrosis
    Caseous necrosis
    Fat necrosis
    Fibrinoid necrosis
    Temporal lobe necrosis
    Programmed cell death
    
    AICD
    Anoikis
    Apoptosis
    Autophagy
    Intrinsic apoptosis
    Necroptosis
    Paraptosis
    Parthanatos
    Phenoptosis
    Pseudoapoptosis
    Pyroptosis
    Autolysis
    Autoschizis
    Eschar
    Immunogenic cell death
    Ischemic cell death
    Pyknosis
    Karyorrhexis
    Karyolysis
    Mitotic catastrophe
    Suicide gene
    

  * Abortion
  * Accidental death
  * Autopsy
  * Brain death
    * Brainstem death
  * Clinical death
    * DOA
  * Death by natural causes
  * Death rattle
  * Dysthanasia
  * End-of-life care
  * Euthanasia
  * Lazarus sign
  * Lazarus syndrome
  * Medical definition of death
  * Organ donation
  * Terminal illness
  * Unnatural death

Lists|

  * Causes of death by rate
  * Expressions related to death
  * Natural disasters
  * People by cause of death
  * Premature obituaries
  * Preventable causes of death
  * Notable deaths by year
  * Unusual deaths
  * TV actors who died during production

Mortality|

  * Birthday effect
  * Child mortality
  * Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality
  * Holiday effect
  * Immortality
    * Biological
    * Digital
  * Infant mortality
  * Karōshi
  * Maternal death
  * Maternal mortality in fiction
  * _Memento mori_
  * Micromort
  * Mortality displacement
  * Mortality rate
    * RAMR
  * Mortality salience
  * Perinatal mortality

After death|

| Body|

Stages

    
    
    Pallor mortis
    Algor mortis
    Rigor mortis
    Livor mortis
    Putrefaction
    Decomposition
    Skeletonization
    Fossilization
    

Preservation

    
    
    Cryopreservation
    
    Cryonics
    Neuropreservation
    Embalming
    Maceration
    Mummification
    Plastination
    Prosection
    Taxidermy
    

Disposal

    
    
    Burial
    
    Bed burial
    Burial at sea
    Chariot burial
    Jar burial
    Natural burial
    Premature burial
    Secondary burial
    Ship burial
    Sky burial
    Space burial
    Cannibalism
    Cremation
    Dismemberment
    Excarnation
    Promession
    Resomation
    
    Beating heart cadaver
    Body donation
    Cadaveric spasm
    Coffin birth
    Death erection
    Dissection
    Gibbeting
    Postmortem caloricity
    Post-mortem interval
    

---|---  
Other aspects|

    
    
    Afterlife
    Cemetery
    Consciousness
    Customs
    Death mask
    Eternal oblivion
    Examination
    Funeral
    Grief
    Intermediate state
    Internet
    Mourning
    Obituary
    Resurrection
    Taboo on the dead
    Vigil
    

Paranormal|

  * Ghosts
  * Near-death experience
  * Near-death studies
  * Necromancy
  * Out-of-body experience
  * Reincarnation research
  * Séance

Legal|

  * Abortion law
  * Administration
  * Capital punishment
  * Cause of death
  * Civil death
  * Coroner
  * Death-qualified jury
  * Death certificate
  * Declared death _in absentia_
  * Death row
  * Dying declaration
  * Faked death
  * Inquest
  * Legal death
  * Murder
  * Prohibition of death
  * Right to die
  * Suspicious death
  * Trust law
  * Will

Fields|

  * Forensic pathology
  * Funeral director
  * Mortuary science
  * Necrobiology
  * Post-mortem chemistry
  * Post-mortem photography
  * Taphonomy
    * Biostratinomy
  * Thanatology

Other|

  * Apparent death
  * Dark tourism
  * Darwin Awards
  * Dead pool
  * Death and culture
  * Death anniversary
  * Death anxiety
  * Death deity
    * Personification of death
    * Dying-and-rising god
    * Psychopomp
  * Death camp
  * Death drive
  * Death education
  * Death from laughter
  * Death hoax
  * Death knell
  * Death march
  * Death messenger
  * Death notification
  * Death panel
  * Death poem
  * Death pose
  * Death-positive movement
  * Death squad
  * Death threat
  * Death trajectory
  * Dignified death
  * Extinction
  * Fan death
  * Festival of the Dead
  * Fascination with death
  * Hierarchy of death
  * Homicide
  * Last rites
  * Martyr
  * Megadeath
  * Museum of Death
  * Necronym
  * Necrophilia
  * Necrophobia
  * The Order of the Good Death
  * Predation
  * Sacrifice
    * human
    * animal
  * Spiritual death
  * Suicide
    * Assisted suicide
  * Thanatosensitivity
  * Undead
  * Voodoo death

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
  * ![WikiProject](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/37/People_icon.svg/16px-People_icon.svg.png) WikiProject
  * ![Outline](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/41/Global_thinking.svg/10px-Global_thinking.svg.png) Outline

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persistent_vegetative_state&oldid=900086183"

Categories:

  * Symptoms and signs: Cognition, perception, emotional state and behaviour
  * Personhood
  * Consciousness
  * Medical mnemonics

Hidden categories:

  * Pages with citations lacking titles
  * Pages with citations having bare URLs
  * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
  * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikiquote

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * Asturianu
  * Беларуская
  * Català
  * Čeština
  * Deutsch
  * Español
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Русский
  * Simple English
  * Српски / srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ไทย
  * Українська
  * 粵語
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 3 June 2019, at 10:08 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

