
                
                                      * Shows
                
                      * This Day In History
                
                      * Schedule
                
                      * Topics
                
                      * Stories
                
                      *  _Ad Choices_
                      *  _Advertise_
                      *  _Closed Captioning_
                      *  _Copyright Policy_
                      *  _Corporate Information_
                      *  _Employment Opportunities_
                      *  _FAQ/Contact Us_
                      *  _Privacy Notice_
                      *  _Terms of Use_
                      *  _TV Parental Guidelines_
                      *  _RSS Feeds_
                      *  _Privacy Settings_
                      *           *           *           *           * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
                      * Shows
                      * This Day In History
                      * Schedule
                      * Topics
                      * Stories
                
                      *           *           *           *           * ![Logo](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU1MTMxNjMyMzU1OTI3NTg1/logo-nav.png)
                      * Shows
                      * This Day In History
                      * Schedule
                      * Topics
                      * Stories
                

#

THIS DAY IN **HISTORY**

January 22

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

Publish date:

                
                                Nov 13, 2009
                

Updated on

                
                                Feb 22, 2019
                

Year

                
                                1973
                

# Roe v. Wade

                
                                      *           *           *           *  _Roe v. Wade_ was a landmark 1973 Supreme Court decision that established a woman's legal right to an abortion.
                

The Court ruled, in a 7-2 decision, that a woman's right to choose an abortion
was protected by the privacy rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution. The legal precedent for the decision was rooted in the
1965 case of _Griswold v. Connecticut_ , which established the right to
privacy involving medical procedures.

Despite opponents' characterization of the decision, it was not the first time
that abortion became a legal procedure in the United States. In fact, for most
of the country's first 100 years, abortion as we know it today was not only
not a criminal offense, it was also not considered immoral.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

In the 1700s and early 1800s, the word "abortion" referred only to the
termination of a pregnancy after "quickening," the time when the fetus first
began to make noticeable movements. The induced ending of a pregnancy before
this point did not even have a name-but not because it was uncommon. Women in
the 1700s often took drugs to end their unwanted pregnancies.

In 1827, though, Illinois passed a law that made the use of abortion drugs
punishable by up to three years' imprisonment. Although other states followed
the Illinois example, advertising for "Female Monthly Pills," as they were
known, was still common through the middle of the 19th century.

Abortion itself only became a serious criminal offense in the period between
1860 and 1880. And the criminalization of abortion did not result from moral
outrage. The roots of the new law came from the newly established physicians'
trade organization, the American Medical Association. Doctors decided that
abortion practitioners were unwanted competition and went about eliminating
that competition. The Catholic Church joined the doctors in condemning the
practice.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

By the turn of the century, all states had laws against abortion, but for the
most part they were rarely enforced and women with money had no problem
terminating pregnancies if they wished. It wasn't until the late 1930s that
abortion laws were enforced. Subsequent crackdowns led to a reform movement
that succeeded in lifting abortion restrictions in California and New York
even before the Supreme Court decision in _Roe v. Wade_.

The fight over whether to criminalize abortion has grown increasingly fierce
in recent years, but opinion polls suggest that most Americans prefer that
women be able to have abortions in the early stages of pregnancy, free of any
government interference.

## Citation Information

### Article Title

Roe v. Wade

### Author

History.com Editors

### Website Name

HISTORY

### URL

https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/roe-v-wade

### Access Date

### Publisher

A&E Television Networks

### Last Updated

February 22, 2019

### Original Published Date

November 13, 2009

Tags

terms:

                
                                Women's History
                

By

History.com Editors

                
                                      *           *           *           * #
                

**FACT CHECK:** _We strive for accuracy and fairness. But if you see something
that doesn't look right,click here to contact us!_

#

ALSO ON THIS DAY

Art, Literature, and Film History

2010

## Conan O’Brien makes final appearance as “Tonight Show” host

On this day in 2010, comedian Conan O’Brien hosts his final episode of “The
Tonight Show,” following an announcement by NBC earlier in the month that Jay
Leno would return as the host of the long-running, late-night program. The
decision to replace O’Brien was met with protests _...read more_

Lead Story

1998

## Ted Kaczynski pleads guilty to bombings

On this day in 1998, in a Sacramento, California, courtroom, Theodore J.
Kaczynski pleads guilty to all federal charges against him, acknowledging his
responsibility for a 17-year campaign of package bombings attributed to the
“Unabomber.” Born in 1942, Kaczynski attended _...read more_

General Interest

1905

## First Russian Revolution begins

In Russia, the revolution of 1905 begins when czarist troops open fire on a
peaceful group of workers marching to the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg to
petition their grievances to Czar Nicholas II. Some 500 protestors were
massacred on “Bloody Sunday,” setting off months of _...read more_

General Interest

1980

## Sakharov arrested in Moscow

In Moscow, Andrei Dmitriyevich Sakharov, the Soviet physicist who helped build
the USSR’s first hydrogen bomb, is arrested after criticizing the Soviet
military intervention in Afghanistan. He was subsequently stripped of his
numerous scientific honors and banished to remote _...read more_

General Interest

1901

## Queen Victoria dies

The death of Queen Victoria on January 22, 1901, ends an era in which most of
her British subjects know no other monarch. Her 63-year reign, the longest in
British history, saw the growth of an empire on which the sun never set.
Victoria restored dignity to the English monarchy _...read more_

General Interest

1840

## British colonists reach New Zealand

Under the leadership of British statesman Edward G. Wakefield, the first
British colonists to New Zealand arrive at Port Nicholson on Auckland Island.
In 1642, Dutch navigator Abel Tasman became the first European to discover the
South Pacific island group that later became known _...read more_

# ![Get More

History!](https://www.history.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTU3OTM4MTkyNjk0MTI2NTQy/section_header_art_small_signup.svg)

Sign up now to learn about This Day in History straight from your inbox.

Sign Up

![](https://www.history.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_1280/MTU3OTM5NzQ3NzQwNzIzMTUw/section_header_art_medium_be10-copy.jpg)

General Interest

1973

## Supreme Court legalizes abortion

In a historic decision, the U.S. Supreme Court rules in Roe v. Wade that
women, as part of their constitutional right to privacy, can terminate a
pregnancy during its first two trimesters. Only during the last trimester,
when the fetus can survive outside the womb, would states _...read more_

Vietnam War

1964

## U.S. Joint Chiefs foresee larger U.S. commitment

The U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff inform Defense Secretary Robert McNamara that
they “are wholly in favor of executing the covert actions against North
Vietnam.” President Johnson had recently approved Oplan 34A, provocative
operations to be conducted by South Vietnamese forces _...read more_

Vietnam War

1968

## Operations Jeb Stuart and Pershing II kick off

Operating in the two northernmost military regions, the 1st Cavalry Division
(Airmobile) launches two major operations. In the first operation, conducted
by the 1st Cavalry Division in Quang Tri and Thua Thien provinces, south of
the Demilitarized Zone, “First Team” units _...read more_

Sports

1973

## Foreman beats Frazier to win heavyweight title in Jamaica

On January 22, 1973, in Kingston, Jamaica, the 24-year-old George Foreman
pulls off a stunning upset, defeating reigning champion Joe Frazier in four
minutes and 35 seconds to win the heavyweight championship of the world. At
6’3″ and 217 1/2 pounds, four inches taller and 3 1/2 _...read more_

Presidential

1973

## Lyndon Baines Johnson dies in Texas

On this day in 1973, former President Lyndon Baines Johnson dies in Johnson
City, Texas, at the age of 64. After leaving the White House in 1968, L.B.J.
returned to his beloved home state, Texas, with his wife, Lady Bird Johnson,
and immersed himself in the activity dearest to _...read more_

Westward Expansion

1879

## Chief Dull Knife makes last fight for freedom

On this day, pursuing American soldiers badly beat Cheyenne Chief Dull Knife
and his people as they make a desperate bid for freedom. In doing so, the
soldiers effectively crushed the so-called Dull Knife Outbreak. A leading
chief of the Northern Cheyenne, Dull Knife (sometimes _...read more_

Art, Literature, and Film History

1981

## Final portrait of John and Yoko is on the cover of Rolling Stone

After the shocking assassination of John Lennon, thousands of mourners
gathered spontaneously outside his and Yoko Ono’s Central Park West apartment
building, the Dakota. Tens of thousands more gathered six days later in New
York, Liverpool and other world cities to honor Yoko’s _...read more_

Art, Literature, and Film History

1788

## George Gordon, Lord Byron, is born

Romantic poet George Gordon, Lord Byron, is born this day in Aberdeen,
Scotland. Despite his later fortune and title, Byron grew up in poverty and
was burdened by a clubfoot. At age 10, he inherited his great uncle’s title
and became Lord Byron. He attended Harrow, then Trinity _...read more_

Art, Literature, and Film History

2008

## Heath Ledger dies of accidental prescription drug overdose

On this day in 2008, Hollywood mourns a talented young actor’s life cut
tragically short, after the body of 28-year-old Heath Ledger is found by his
masseuse and housekeeper on the floor of his rented apartment in the SoHo
neighborhood of New York City. Best known for his Academy _...read more_

Disaster

1973

## Plane crashes at Nigerian airport

On this day in 1973, a plane returning Muslim pilgrims from Mecca crashes in
Kano, Nigeria, killing 176 people. It was the deadliest air disaster of its
time. The Royal Jordanian Boeing 707-300 was chartered by Nigeria Airways to
take Muslims in Nigeria on a pilgrimage to Mecca _...read more_

Cold War

1982

## Reagan links arms talks with Soviets to oppression in Poland

In a revival of the diplomacy “linkages” that were made famous by Henry
Kissinger during the Nixon years, the administration of President Ronald
Reagan announces that further progress on arms talks will be linked to a
reduction of Soviet oppression in Poland. The U.S. ploy was _...read more_

Civil War

1927

## John McCausland dies

On this day in 1927, Confederate General John A. McCausland dies at age 90
inWest Virginia. He lived for over 50 years after the war and remained an
unreconstructed Rebel at the time of his death. Nicknamed “Tiger John,”
McCausland was born to Irish immigrants in 1836 in St. _...read more_

                
                                      * Ad Choices
                      * Advertise
                      * Closed Captioning
                      * Copyright Policy
                      * Corporate Information
                      * Employment Opportunities
                      * FAQ/Contact Us
                      * Privacy Notice
                      * Terms of Use
                      * TV Parental Guidelines
                      * RSS Feeds
                

(C) 2019 A&E; Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

