

Family Planning Associates Chicago

312-707-8988

                
                                      * Services
                        * Abortion Care
                          * Abortion Pill (up to 10.0 weeks)
                          * First Trimester Abortion (up to 13.6 weeks- 1 Day)
                          * Early Second Trimester Abortion (up to 15.6 weeks- 1 Day)
                          * Second Trimester Abortion (up to 23.3 weeks- 2 or 3 days)
                          * Pregnancy Calculator
                          * Registration Paperwork
                        * Urine Pregnancy Testing
                        * Ultrasound Exams
                        * Gynecological Exams
                        * Birth Control Visits
                        * STI/STD Testing
                        * Vaginal Infections
                      * Fees & Financial Assistance
                        * Free Abortion Services
                        * Financial Assistance
                        * Insurance Information
                        * Uninsured / Self Pay
                        * Financial Questions & Answers
                      * Helpful Information
                        * Locations
                          * Downtown Chicago
                          * Northwest Chicago Women's Health Clinic
                        * Parking Information
                        * Common Questions & Answers
                        * Referral Resources
                        * Meet Our Staff
                        * Patient Privacy
                        * Free Abortion Care Available
                      * Contact Us
                        * Schedule an Online Appointment
                        * Provide Visit Feedback- Let us know how we are doing
                        * Ask a Question
                        * Work or Volunteer at FPA
                      * Directions
                        * Directions to Downtown Chicago Location
                        * Directions to Northwest Chicago Location
                      * Español
                

__

Family Planning Associates Chicago

                
                                      * Services
                        * Abortion Care
                          * Abortion Pill (up to 10.0 weeks)
                          * First Trimester Abortion (up to 13.6 weeks- 1 Day)
                          * Early Second Trimester Abortion (up to 15.6 weeks- 1 Day)
                          * Second Trimester Abortion (up to 23.3 weeks- 2 or 3 days)
                          * Pregnancy Calculator
                          * Registration Paperwork
                        * Urine Pregnancy Testing
                        * Ultrasound Exams
                        * Gynecological Exams
                        * Birth Control Visits
                        * STI/STD Testing
                        * Vaginal Infections
                      * Fees & Financial Assistance
                        * Free Abortion Services
                        * Financial Assistance
                        * Insurance Information
                        * Uninsured / Self Pay
                        * Financial Questions & Answers
                      * Helpful Information
                        * Locations
                          * Downtown Chicago
                          * Northwest Chicago Women's Health Clinic
                        * Parking Information
                        * Common Questions & Answers
                        * Referral Resources
                        * Meet Our Staff
                        * Patient Privacy
                        * Free Abortion Care Available
                      * Contact Us
                        * Schedule an Online Appointment
                        * Provide Visit Feedback- Let us know how we are doing
                        * Ask a Question
                        * Work or Volunteer at FPA
                      * Directions
                        * Directions to Downtown Chicago Location
                        * Directions to Northwest Chicago Location
                      * Español
                

__

# Second Trimester Abortion

Quality Compassionate Health Care For Women

__

Schedule a Second Trimester Abortion Appointment

                
                                      * Patient's First Name:*
                
                      * Patient's Last Name:*
                
                      * Patient's Date of Birth:*
                

Month123456789101112

Day12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031

Year20202019201820172016201520142013201220112010200920082007200620052004200320022001200019991998199719961995199419931992199119901989198819871986198519841983198219811980197919781977197619751974197319721971197019691968196719661965196419631962196119601959195819571956195519541953195219511950194919481947194619451944194319421941194019391938193719361935193419331932193119301929192819271926192519241923192219211920

                
                                      * Preferred Method of Contact:*
                
                        * Phone
                        * Email
                
                      * Patient's Phone Number:*
                
                      * Email*
                
                      * What is Your Current Zip Code:*
                
                      * Please Indicate Your Method Of Payment:*
                
                        * Private Health Insurance
                        * Illinois Medicaid
                        * Uninsured/Self-Pay
                        * Out-of-state Medicaid
                
                      * Health Insurance Plan
                

AETNABLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELDCIGNAGREAT WESTHMO OF ILLINOISUNITED HEALTH
CAREHUMANAOTHER

                
                                      * Other
                
                      * Health Insurance Phone Contact Number:
                
                      * Health Insurance ID:
                
                      * Health Insurance Group:
                
                      * Health Insurance Subscribers Name & Date of Birth (when provided by a parent, spouse, or other family member):
                
                      * We will contact you by phone, text or email about your insurance coverage for the procedure you have requested. Keep in mind that you may be responsible for some payment if your insurance requires you to pay a deductible, copay or co-insurance amount. If you have an HMO insurance plan, you will need to get a written referral from your doctor. Please contact our insurance staff if you are having a hard time getting a referral for care from your physician. 
                      * If you are currently enrolled in Illinois Medicaid please just bring in your picture ID and Medicaid card and we will be able to provide abortion care for you at NO COST. You will not have to pay anything for care related to your abortion including sedation, medications, lab testing, ultrasound, or RhoGAM if you have a negative blood type. You must bring in proof of current Medicaid eligibility to the office on the day of your visit. You can also email the document(s) to FPA before your visit. The email address is: medicaid@fpachicago.com For more information look under the 'Fees' section on the main page of our website and click on the option 'Information Regarding Abortion Services for Illinois Residents'. 
                      * We have reduced fees for patients who are uninsured or have out-of-state Medicaid. You may also be eligible for financial assistance. Please let us know if you need help with your payment. 
                      * Patient's Last Normal Period:
                
                      * Choose Day*
                
                        * Monday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Tuesday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Wednesday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Thursday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Friday (2 Day Procedure, up to 18.6 weeks - ONLY)
                
                      * Choose Time
                
                        * Morning (9:00 am - 11:00 am - Monday ONLY)
                        * Early Afternoon (11:00 am - 2:00 pm)
                        * Late Afternoon (2:00 pm - 5:00 pm - Tuesday through Friday ONLY)
                
                      * Medical conditions and information:
                

Please mention any allergies, medications that you take, history of
c-sections, and/or major medical problems or conditions that have required
medical care.

                
                                      * Patient Notes:
                
                      * How did you hear about us?:
                

[Select]Neighboorhood Phone BookInternetA FriendA Family MemberInsurance
CompanyPrivate DoctorClinicAbortion HotlineYou are a Previous PatientOther

                
                                      * Terms of Service*
                
                        * Accept
                        * Decline
                
                      * Thank you for requesting an appointment with FPA. We will contact you as soon as possible to confirm your appointment date and time and to discuss your payment method. We will also be happy to answer any questions you may have about the procedure. Keep in mind that we answer many common questions on this website as well. If you have requested an appointment for tomorrow we will make every effort to accommodate your request. Our phone lines open at 7:30 AM Monday through Saturday if you require any information before coming in for your appointment.
                

This iframe contains the logic required to handle Ajax powered Gravity Forms.

### **About Second Trimester Abortion**

Second trimester abortions are performed between 14.0 to 23.3 weeks of
pregnancy and require 1 to 3 day visits. We use the dilation and evacuation
procedure, also known as a D&E. After 15 weeks, in most cases, cervical
dilators called Laminaria or Dilapan, are inserted into the cervix to
gradually dilate it overnight before a doctor performs the procedure.
Sometimes, early in the second trimester, we can use a medication to prepare
the cervix instead of dilators.

The fee includes pregnancy testing, admitting, pre-operative history and
physical, ultrasound, lab work, dilator insertion, most pre-operative
medications, the D&E procedure, RhoGAM (if required), sedation, medications
given on the day of procedure, most post-operative medications and your post-
operative care as authorized by us.

* * *

### **Getting to the office and home safely**

You may drive yourself to and from the office on the day(s) before your
surgery. On the day of surgery you must be accompanied by a trusted person in
your life such as a family member, friend, or partner. It is essential that
you have a reliable ride home from the facility. You cannot drive yourself or
leave by yourself after having a surgical procedure.

Increasingly, patients are travelling from Indiana, Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio,
Tennessee, Kentucky and Missouri to obtain abortion care with FPA. If you are
travelling to Chicago from out of the area and you need to make overnight
accommodations, we have obtained a discounted rate at a hotel just a block
away from our office. Click on the icon below for more information and to
check rates.

__

### Click Here For More Information Regarding Hotel Rates

* * *

### **Preparation For the Procedure**

When you arrive for your appointment you will be asked to complete personal
demographic and health information and consent forms. An ultrasound will be
performed to determine the length of gestation, if one has not been recently
done at another FPA facility. You will meet with an admissions staff member to
discuss the procedure, your medical history as well as pre-operative and post-
operative instructions. The admissions staff member will assist you with any
additional paperwork. The laboratory technician will draw a sample of blood to
determine your iron level and Rh factor. After you have changed into a gown
provided by the clinic your vital signs will be taken.

You will be escorted to the treatment room where the clinician, a Physician
Assistant or Nurse Practitioner, will perform a history and physical and will
insert the cervical dilators. This procedure takes approximately 5-15 minutes.
Most patients experience cramping, pressure and discomfort during the
insertion. We will provide you with pain medication. After the insertion, the
vaginal canal will be packed with sterile gauze to keep cervical dilators in
place and to prevent infection.

After your insertion, you will be escorted from the treatment room to the
discharge area. The discharge medical staff will give you post-insertion
instructions, medications, and an appointment time for your second insertion
or surgery.

If a second day of preparation for the surgery is needed, you will return the
following day and the clinician will remove the first set of dilators then
insert a second set for additional dilation. Again, this procedure will take
approximately 5-15 minutes and you will likely experience cramping and
discomfort similar to the previous day. You can take the pain medication
provided by our facility, with breakfast, before coming in for your visit to
decrease your discomfort.

* * *

### **The Day of Procedure**

#### Before You Arrive

                
                                      * **Do not eat or drink anything for eight full hours before your procedure**, most often after midnight. Please do not have anything by mouth including medications, water, gum, candy, food or drink of any kind.
                      * If you have anything the morning of your visit your surgery will be delayed for your safety.
                

#### If You Take Medications

                
                                      * In some rare instances you may be instructed by our medical staff to take your regular medications with a very small sip of water.
                      * If you take insulin for diabetes, DO NOT take insulin the morning of your surgery. Please bring your insulin with you along with a small snack.
                      * If you have an inhaler for asthma, please bring it with you, even if you rarely use it.
                      * Please bring any medications you are currently taking.
                

#### Preparing for Your Procedure

                
                                      * Plan to spend 4 to 6 hours under our care at the office. Make sure that you have prearranged for a ride to and from the office.
                      * Do not wear any jewelry, including earrings, bracelets, rings, etc. All facial piercing jewelry must be removed, you may not have any piercings in the nose or mouth.
                      * Do not bring any valuables or a large amount of cash.
                      * Please do not bring children to the office.
                

* * *

### **D &E Procedure**

When you arrive at the office, you will change into a gown that we provide and
have your vital signs taken. A medical assistant will escort you to the
procedure suite and start your IV.

In the procedure suite, a licensed CRNA will administer sedation and a
licensed medical doctor who is board certified in OB/GYN will perform the
abortion by removing the pregnancy and aspirating the uterus. The procedure
generally lasts 10-20 minutes. Patients are sedated for this procedure, which
means that they will not feel any pain or discomfort.

* * *

### **Recovery**

After the procedure, you will be taken to the recovery room where trained
medical personnel, including nurses and medical assistants will care for you
until you are ready to be discharged. Recovery time is approximately 1 to 3
hours for most patients, depending on the type of procedure performed as well
as other factors.

* * *

### **Discharge**

After you leave the recovery room, our medical staff will offer you a light
snack. Before you are discharged to your driver, you will receive post-
operative care instructions and medications to take home.

You will also be given an instruction sheet with our 24-hour emergency number.
Please call with any questions or to discuss concerns that might arise after
your visit.

* * *

### **After your Visit**

You should rest for the remainder of the day after your procedure. You are
able to go to work or school next day, unless the doctor has told you
otherwise.

### What is the difference between local anesthesia and sedation?

**Local anesthesia is a cervical block (injection of numbing medication)
performed before your surgery. While your cervix will be numbed, you will be
awake during the procedure and it is normal to feel some strong cramping and
discomfort.**

**Sedation is administered intravenously through an IV placed in your hand or
arm in most cases. If you are sedated for your procedure you will not feel or
remember any pain or discomfort.**

### Will it hurt?

**If you have chosen to have sedation, you will not feel or remember any pain
during your procedure. After the procedure you may experience mild to moderate
cramping, if needed we will give you pain medication.**

**If you have chosen to have local anesthesia with your procedure we will numb
your cervix but you will feel some cramping, pain and pressure from the
uterus. Some patients describe the pain as minimal while some patients find
the pain to be more severe. You will be offered pain medication, and in some
cases we can provide you a medication to help you feel more relaxed.**

**Once you are discharged, in most cases ibuprofen (Motrin/Advil), naproxen
(Aleve) or acetaminophen (Tylenol/Midol) will help with the cramping. If the
cramping is not helped by these over the counter medications, you should call
us immediately.**

### How long will I be under sedation?

**You will be unaware for about 5-10 minutes with a first trimester abortion,
or about 10-20 minutes with a second trimester abortion. The medications used
for sedation work very quickly and wear off very quickly as well. Most
patients are alert and oriented within 5 minutes of their procedure.**

### I am afraid I won’t wake up after having sedation. Can that happen?

**The sedation that we offer is safe, effective and short acting. You will be
asleep for 5-20 minutes depending on the procedure. There is always some
degree of risk with any surgery. Serious complications with sedation are very
rare in our facilities. Complications may occur if a patient has ingested any
food or liquid within 8 hours of surgery. Tell our staff if you have had prior
complications with anesthesia or if you have had anything to eat or drink
within 8 hours prior to your surgery, including gum and water.**

### How long will I bleed after an abortion procedure?

In most cases, the patient experiences bleeding for up to 2 to 3 weeks after
the abortion procedure. However, some patients do not experience any bleeding
and other patients have spotting or bleeding off and on. If you have any
questions about what is normal after your procedure, you can always call the
office. A 24-hour on-call service is available for after hours.

### How is the in-office abortion procedure performed?

The first trimester abortion is a simple procedure performed by aspiration
(suction). This procedure is referred to as a D&C (Dilation and Curettage).
This procedure generally takes about 3 to 5 minutes.

If you are over 13 weeks pregnant, you will first have your cervix dilated
with medication and/or sterile product made specifically for cervical dilation
(laminaria dilators). This procedure is referred to as a D&E (Dilation and
Extraction), and lasts 1 to 3 days. In some cases, a patient will require one
or two consecutive days of dilation and will return for the procedure on the
second or third day. The dilation procedure takes just a few minutes and you
will be in the clinic for a few hours on the day or days that your cervix is
being dilated. In some cases, we can administer a medication on the morning of
your procedure that will soften and dilate the cervix without the need for
insertion of dilators.

### When can I return to work?

The majority of our patients return to work or school the following day. The
admitting and medical staff will explain the DOs and DON’Ts after surgery.

### Can I have someone with me during the procedure or in the recovery room?

Your support person will not be able to join you during the medical parts of
the visit, including the exam rooms and recovery room. We must protect the
privacy of all of our patients, and for that reason we cannot allow guest in
these areas.

We encourage your support person to wait for you in our reception area. If
this is not possible, they can return for you upon completion of your
appointment.

### After an abortion, when can I have sex?

When bleeding has been light for 24 hours, you may resume intercourse,
provided you feel emotionally and physically ready to do so. You are the best
judge of your feelings. You should use contraception when you decide to resume
intercourse if you wish to avoid pregnancy. You are at risk for pregnancy
right away after having an abortion.

### Can I take a taxi or public transportation home?

Taking public transportation after surgery is not recommended. If no other
method of transportation is available, we require that an adult must accompany
you.

### Can I use tampons after my procedure?

When bleeding has been light for 24 hours, you may use a tampon.

### How effective is a surgical abortion?

**In most cases, a surgical abortion is nearly 100% effective. In less than
0.3% of cases, a pregnancy is not terminated on the first attempt. Such a
failure is most common in pregnancies of less than six weeks’ duration. A very
small percentage of surgical cases will require a re-aspiration if unusual
bleeding occurs or if there is retained pregnancy tissue.**

### How will I feel after my abortion procedure?

**Most patients feel very 'normal' when they leave the office after having an
abortion. You will probably be hungry and maybe a little more tired than
normal. We recommend that you have a full meal and then take it easy for the
rest of the day. ** _*It is normal to experience some mild to moderate
cramping. If the cramping is not helped by over the counter medications such
as Tylenol, Advil or Aleve we ask that you call our 24-hour emergency number._
* **The bleeding is usually comparable to a normal period and some patients do
not have any bleeding at all. If at any point you soak one full maxi-pad in an
hour or less you should call us immediately.**

**If you have had pregnancy symptoms such as nausea, fatigue or breast
tenderness, these symptoms will start to go away within a few days of the
procedure. If you still 'feel pregnant' after a few days, you should call us
right away.**

**You may take a shower or tub bath after your procedure. Do not douche, use
tampons, have intercourse, or place anything in the vagina for two weeks after
having a surgical abortion. Avoid any products that contain aspirin or alcohol
as they can promote heavier bleeding.**

### Why can’t I eat before having the abortion procedure?

**When sedation is provided, gag reflexes are temporarily suppressed. If food
or liquid remain in the stomach vomiting can occur, resulting in asphyxiation
(choking). This can cause serious complications and in very rare cases death.
Please inform our staff if you have had anything at all to eat or drink on the
day of your procedure.**

### Is it a doctor who performs the procedure?

**Yes. All of our doctors are licensed by the State of Illinois, are board
certified in obstetrics and gynecology and specialize in pregnancy
termination.**

### What happens to the pregnancy tissue removed during the abortion?

**The pregnancy tissue that is removed during the procedure is sent to a
pathology laboratory where it is weighed and examined, most often
microscopically. A report detailing this examination is sent to our office
within a week of the procedure. The tissue then disposed of in accordance with
the mandates of state law -most often this means it will be cremated
(incinerated).**

### How will I know that the abortion was successful?

**Our physicians at FPA are very thorough and take multiple steps to ensure
that the abortion procedure is complete. First, the physician will examine the
pregnancy** **tissue after the surgery. Second, a post-operative ultrasound
can be performed at the request of the physician. Third, the pregnancy tissue
that is removed during the procedure is sent to a pathology laboratory where
it is weighed and examined, most often microscopically. A report, detailing
this examination, is sent to our office within a week of the procedure.**
**After reviewing the pathology reports the physician decides whether a follow
up visit is needed. We will contact you if the physician requests that you
come in for an evaluation. We want to ensure that your pregnancy hormones are
falling at the appropriate rate and that you are recovering well.** **Lastly,
in some cases if you are very early in the pregnancy at the time of your
surgery, the doctor may request that you return to the clinic 2-3 days after
your abortion for a blood test to ensure that the procedure was successful.**

### Can I exercise after an abortion procedure?

**Most often you can go back to your regular activities the day after your
procedure. Strenuous exercise can sometimes increase the amount of bleeding
and cramping that you experience. If you notice an increase in your bleeding
or cramping after** **exercising you may want to decrease your activity for a
few days. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or
concerns. If at any point you fully soak a maxi-pad in one hour or less, after
your procedure, you should call us right away.**

                
                                      * The Abortion Pill (up to 10.0 weeks)
                      * First Trimester Abortion (up to 13.6 weeks)
                      * Second Trimester Abortion (up to 15.6 weeks) One-Day Procedure
                      * Second Trimester Abortion (up to 23.3 weeks) Two or Three-Day Procedure
                

__

Schedule a Second Trimester Abortion Appointment

                
                                      * Patient's First Name:*
                
                      * Patient's Last Name:*
                
                      * Patient's Date of Birth:*
                

Month123456789101112

Day12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031

Year20202019201820172016201520142013201220112010200920082007200620052004200320022001200019991998199719961995199419931992199119901989198819871986198519841983198219811980197919781977197619751974197319721971197019691968196719661965196419631962196119601959195819571956195519541953195219511950194919481947194619451944194319421941194019391938193719361935193419331932193119301929192819271926192519241923192219211920

                
                                      * Preferred Method of Contact:*
                
                        * Phone
                        * Email
                
                      * Patient's Phone Number:*
                
                      * Email*
                
                      * What is Your Current Zip Code:*
                
                      * Please Indicate Your Method Of Payment:*
                
                        * Private Health Insurance
                        * Illinois Medicaid
                        * Uninsured/Self-Pay
                        * Out-of-state Medicaid
                
                      * Health Insurance Plan
                

AETNABLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELDCIGNAGREAT WESTHMO OF ILLINOISUNITED HEALTH
CAREHUMANAOTHER

                
                                      * Other
                
                      * Health Insurance Phone Contact Number:
                
                      * Health Insurance ID:
                
                      * Health Insurance Group:
                
                      * Health Insurance Subscribers Name & Date of Birth (when provided by a parent, spouse, or other family member):
                
                      * We will contact you by phone, text or email about your insurance coverage for the procedure you have requested. Keep in mind that you may be responsible for some payment if your insurance requires you to pay a deductible, copay or co-insurance amount. If you have an HMO insurance plan, you will need to get a written referral from your doctor. Please contact our insurance staff if you are having a hard time getting a referral for care from your physician.
                      * If you are currently enrolled in Illinois Medicaid please just bring in your picture ID and Medicaid card and we will be able to provide abortion care for you at NO COST. You will not have to pay anything for care related to your abortion including sedation, medications, lab testing, ultrasound, or RhoGAM if you have a negative blood type. You must bring in proof of current Medicaid eligibility to the office on the day of your visit. You can also email the document(s) to FPA before your visit. The email address is: medicaid@fpachicago.com For more information look under the 'Fees' section on the main page of our website and click on the option 'Information Regarding Abortion Services for Illinois Residents'. 
                      * We have reduced fees for patients who are uninsured or have out-of-state Medicaid. You may also be eligible for financial assistance. Please let us know if you need help with your payment. 
                      * Patient's Last Normal Period:
                
                      * Choose Day*
                
                        * Monday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Tuesday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Wednesday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Thursday (2 or 3 Day Procedure)
                        * Friday (2 Day Procedure, up to 18.6 weeks - ONLY)
                
                      * Choose Time
                
                        * Morning (9:00 am - 11:00 am - Monday ONLY)
                        * Early Afternoon (11:00 am - 2:00 pm)
                        * Late Afternoon (2:00 pm - 5:00 pm - Tuesday through Friday ONLY)
                
                      * Medical conditions and information:
                

Please mention any allergies, medications that you take, history of
c-sections, and/or major medical problems or conditions that have required
medical care.

                
                                      * Patient Notes:
                
                      * How did you hear about us?:
                

[Select]Neighboorhood Phone BookInternetA FriendA Family MemberInsurance
CompanyPrivate DoctorClinicAbortion HotlineYou are a Previous PatientOther

                
                                      * Terms of Service*
                
                        * Accept
                        * Decline
                
                      * Thank you for requesting an appointment with FPA. We will contact you as soon as possible to confirm your appointment date and time and to discuss your payment method. We will also be happy to answer any questions you may have about the procedure. Keep in mind that we answer many common questions on this website as well. If you have requested an appointment for tomorrow we will make every effort to accommodate your request. Our phone lines open at 7:30 AM Monday through Saturday if you require any information before coming in for your appointment.
                

This iframe contains the logic required to handle Ajax powered Gravity Forms.

© 2019 Family Planning Associates Chicago.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

