

Skip to main content

![Science](/sites/all/themes/science/images/logo-science.svg)

                
                                      * Home
                      * News
                      * Journals
                      * Topics
                      * Careers
                

Search Search __

* * *

Search Search __

                
                                      * Log in
                      * My account
                      * Contact us
                

![Current Issue

Cover](https://www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/highwire/covers/sci/364/6444/-F1.medium.gif)

### Become a member

                
                                      * Renew my subscription
                      * Sign up for newsletters
                

![Science](/sites/all/themes/science/images/logo-science.svg)
![AAAS](/sites/all/themes/science/images/logo-aaas.svg)

.

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                
                      * Authors
                      * Members
                      * Librarians
                      * Advertisers
                
                      * Home
                        * Recent Videos
                        * Latest Podcasts
                        * Photo Galleries
                        * Dance Your Ph.D. Contest
                      * News
                        * Latest News
                        * ScienceInsider
                        * ScienceShots
                        * Sifter
                        * From the Magazine
                        * About News
                        * Quizzes
                      * Journals
                        * Science
                        * Science Advances
                        * Science Immunology
                        * Science Robotics
                        * Science Signaling
                        * Science Translational Medicine
                        * Science Partner Journals
                      * Topics
                        * All Topics
                        * Special Issues
                        * Custom Publishing
                      * Careers
                        * Articles
                        * Find Jobs
                        * Career Resources
                        * Forum
                        * For Employers
                        * Employer Profiles
                        * Graduate Programs
                        * Booklets
                        * Advertising Features
                      * Search  Search __
                

#### Share

![](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/article_main_large/public/images/sn-

baby.jpg?itok=VgA0zJFY)

# When Does Your Baby Become Conscious?

By Paul Gabrielsen Apr. 18, 2013 , 2:00 PM

For everyone who's looked into an infant's sparkling eyes and wondered what
goes on in its little fuzzy head, there's now an answer. New research shows
that babies display glimmers of consciousness and memory as early as 5 months
old.

For decades, neuroscientists have been searching for an unmistakable signal of
consciousness in electrical brain activity. Such a sign could determine
whether minimally conscious or anesthetized adults are aware—and when
consciousness begins in babies.

Studies on adults show a particular pattern of brain activity: When your
senses detect something, such as a moving object, the vision center of your
brain activates, even if the object goes by too fast for you to notice. But if
the object remains in your visual field for long enough, the signal travels
from the back of the brain to the prefrontal cortex, which holds the image in
your mind long enough for you to notice. Scientists see a spike in brain
activity when the senses pick something up, and another signal, the "late slow
wave," when the prefrontal cortex gets the message. The whole process takes
less than one-third of a second.

Researchers in France wondered if such a two-step pattern might be present in
infants. The team monitored infants' brain activity through caps fitted with
electrodes. More than 240 babies participated, but two-thirds were too squirmy
for the movement-sensitive caps. The remaining 80 (ages 5 months, 12 months,
or 15 months) were shown a picture of a face on a screen for a fraction of a
second.

Cognitive neuroscientist Sid Kouider of CNRS, the French national research
agency, in Paris watched for swings in electrical activity, called event-
related potentials (ERPs), in the babies' brains. In babies who were at least
1 year old, Kouider saw an ERP pattern similar to an adult's, but it was about
three times slower. The team was surprised to see that the 5-month-olds also
showed a late slow wave, although it was weaker and more drawn out than in the
older babies. Kouider speculates that the late slow wave may be present in
babies as young as 2 months.

This late slow wave may indicate conscious thought, Kouider and colleagues
report online today in _Science_. The wave, feedback from the prefrontal
cortex, suggests that the image is stored briefly in the baby's temporary
"working memory." And consciousness, Kouider says, is composed of working
memory.

The team displayed remarkable patience to gather data from infants, says
cognitive neuroscientist Lawrence Ward of the University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, in Canada, who was not involved in the study. However, the work,
although well executed, is not the last word, he says. "I expect we'll find
several different neural activity patterns to be correlated with
consciousness."

Comparing infant brain waves to adult patterns is tricky, says Charles Nelson,
a neuropsychologist at Harvard Medical School in Boston. "ERP components
change dramatically over the first few years of life," he writes in an e-mail.
"I would be reluctant to attribute the same mental operation (i.e.,
consciousness) in infants as in adults simply because of similar patterns of
brain activity."

"He's right, the ERP components are not exactly the same as in adults,"
Kouider responds, but the ERP signature he saw had the same characteristics.

Kouider next hopes to explore how these signals of consciousness connect to
learning, especially language development. "We make the assumption that babies
are learning very quickly and that they're fully unconscious of what they
learn," Kouider says. "Maybe that's not true."

Posted in:

                
                                      * Brain & Behavior
                      * Human Consciousness
                

### Paul Gabrielsen

                
                                      * __Twitter
                

## More from News

                
                                      * ![Illustration of two hands touching](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/grid_thumb_-_290x163__16_9_/public/20190529-AffectivetouchLead1280x720.jpg?itok=-_ghSsyY)
                

## ‘I will feel actual rage.’ Unusual responses to kind touches could help

explain autism traits

                
                                      * ![the evolution of an optimum image for stimulating a visual neuron in a monkey](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/grid_thumb_-_290x163__16_9_/public/monkey_16x9_1.jpg?itok=YK8Ir5bI)
                

## Artificial intelligence created these bizarre faces—and monkey neurons

love them

                
                                      * ![four girls holding hands and running towards a playground](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/grid_thumb_-_290x163__16_9_/public/girls_16x9.jpg?itok=NcJRjewh)
                

## Can manipulating a ‘social’ hormone’s activity treat autism?

## Got a tip?

How to contact the news team

## ScienceInsider

                
                                      * ![Chuck Grassley sits at table](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/AP_19036576670813-1280X720.jpg?itok=Z3XLhGcm)
                

## Powerful U.S. senator calls for vetting NIH grantees at hearing on foreign

influences

By Jeffrey MervisJun. 6, 2019

                
                                      * ![illustration](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/Preprint_Illustration-1280x720.jpg?itok=cLNWO7Wr)
                

## Medical preprint server debuts

By Jocelyn KaiserJun. 5, 2019

                
                                      * ![fetal brain cells in the corpus striatum](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/SS2252346-1280x720.jpg?itok=5Tr80zbc)
                

## Trump administration restricts fetal tissue research

By Meredith WadmanJun. 5, 2019

                
                                      * ![ Stanford University’s School of Medicine](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/1280px-Lokey_Building.jpg?itok=57saZdVs)
                

## Chronic fatigue scientist fired after conduct complaints, Stanford says

By Meredith WadmanJun. 4, 2019

                
                                      * ![a human four-cell embryo](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/embryo_16x9_0.jpg?itok=SS6sAL1U)
                

## Update: House spending panel restores U.S. ban on gene-edited babies

By Jocelyn KaiserJun. 4, 2019

More _Science_ Insider

## Sifter

                
                                      * ![plastic bottle top](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/sf-plastic.jpg?itok=DIpLnJeL)
                

## Americans eat more than 50,000 tiny pieces of plastic every year

Jun. 5, 2019

                
                                      * ![cat in box](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/stella.jpg?itok=c_9IVaOz)
                

## Have physicists found a way to save Schrödinger’s cat?

Jun. 3, 2019

                
                                      * ![mouse](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/sf-mousesmell.jpg?itok=ml6Wu_F8)
                

## A drop of stem cells restores mice’s sense of smell

May. 31, 2019

                
                                      * ![sliced watermelon](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/watermelon_16x9.jpg?itok=Vnhqg7oB)
                

## Ancient Egyptians feasted on watermelons, too, according to find in

ancient tomb

May. 22, 2019

                
                                      * ![White-throated rail](//www.sciencemag.org/sites/default/files/styles/inline_small__1_1/public/sf-flightlessbird.jpg?itok=ffKaWecz)
                

## This bird lost the ability to fly twice on the same island, thousands of

years apart

May. 14, 2019

More Sifter

## Science

### 7 June 2019

Vol 364, Issue 6444

![Magazine

Cover](/sites/default/files/styles/medium/public/highwire/covers/sci/364/6444/-F1.medium.gif?itok=lyN1Zpnt)

                
                                      * ### Anatomy/Morphology/Biomechanics
                

The mismeasure of hands?

                
                                      * ### Scientific Community
                

Bipartisan bill proposes forum on U.S. academic espionage

                
                                      * ### Scientific Community
                

Women of color face double dose of bias

                
                                      * ### Anthropology
                

DNA barcodes jump-start search for new species

                
                                      * ### Scientific Community
                

Radical open-access plan is delayed a year

                
                                      * ### Materials Science
                

Perovskite LEDs begin to shine

Table of Contents

                
                                      * About Us
                        * Journals
                        * News from Science
                        * Leadership
                        * Team Members
                        * Work at AAAS
                      * For Advertisers
                        * Advertising Kits
                        * Awards and Prizes
                        * Custom Publishing
                        * Webinars
                      * For Authors
                        * Submit
                        * Information for Authors
                        * Editorial Policies
                      * For Librarians
                        * Manage Your Institutional Subscription
                        * Information for Librarians
                        * Request a Quote
                        * FAQs
                      * Related Sites
                        * AAAS.org
                        * EurekAlert!
                        * Science in the Classroom
                        * Science Magazine Japanese
                      * Help
                        * Access and Subscriptions
                        * Order a Single Issue
                        * Reprints and Permissions
                        * Contact Us
                        * Accessibility
                      * Stay Connected
                          *  __
                          * __
                          * __
                          * __
                

![AAAS](/sites/all/themes/science/images/logo-aaas.svg)

© 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science. All rights
Reserved. AAAS is a partner of HINARI, AGORA, OARE, CHORUS, CLOCKSS, CrossRef
and COUNTER.

                
                                      * Terms of Service
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * Contact AAAS
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

