

![](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/none&t=subs%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26dcopt%3Dist%26pos%3Dldr_top&sz=728x90|970x90|970x250&tile=1&c=840805452)

![](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/none&t=subs%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dsub_top&sz=223x90&tile=2&c=840805452)

![](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/none&t=subs%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dpslug_top&sz=970x35&tile=3&c=840805452)

![The Economist](//cdn.static-

economist.com/sites/all/themes/econfinal/images/svg/logo.svg)

# Back to blog

##

Donald Trump’s abortion comments haunt him ahead of Wisconsin primary

#

Mar 31st 2016

See blog

### Readers' comments

Reader comments are listed below. Comments are currently closed and new
comments are no longer being accepted.

Sort:

                
                                      * Newest first
                      * Oldest first
                      * Readers' most recommended
                
                      * « first
                      * ‹ previous
                      * 1
                      * 2
                      * 3
                      * 4
                      * 5
                      * 6
                      * 7
                      * next ›
                      * last »
                

emmafinney. in reply to jouris Apr 2nd 2016 4:39 GMT

Something dramatic has already happened to derail Trump's nomination.

Wisconsin polls show Cruz leading trump by 10%. Since this is winner take all
state, Trump won't get a single delegate and he would need win more than 51%
of all votes in upcoming primaries. Very doubtful as he has never won a
majority in any primary.

I understand that Democrats are very gleeful about a Trump nomination but
against Hillary, it could get very interesting.

How can Hillary campaign against a man whom the Clinton foundation accepted
millions in donation and who contributed to both Clintons campaigns.

You know what Trump will say. He bought the Clintons and they were so easy to
be bought.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

55

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

shodell Apr 1st 2016 15:30 GMT

Yet another poorly thought-out hit job by the Economist. When will they, the
rest of the mainstream media and all of the other inferior candidates come to
understand that smearing him for saying socially unacceptable things only
positions themselves as part of the perceived thought police trying to shut
down debate and impose certain values on people too quickly? His supporters
don't particularly care what his policies are, they care about the fact that
he is fighting back against idea fascism. The only way he can convincingly
demonstrate this is by saying things that are outrageous. This election isn't
about economics or social policy, which are always a negotiation. It is a
culture war between the moral crusaders on the left and the freedom fighters
on the right.

The way to take the steam out of his campaign is to say this: "He is an
extremely shrewd man, with a great sense of humour and a very 'unique' look.
He raises some quite interesting points and the fact that people are
responding to him positively is a testament to this. If those issues are what
are important to people, then they need to be aired. If people want to vote
for him, then they should go ahead and do it - in fact, they'd be crazy if
they didn't. After all, it's a matter of personal choice, people are entitled
to their opinions and Donald Trump is free to be an asshole if he wants."

                
                                      * Recommend
                

52

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

jouris in reply to grammaskidney. Apr 1st 2016 23:36 GMT

It would be. If it were true.

Of course, it isn't true. But Trump's followers are as unconstrained by
trivial like facts and reality.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

45

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

NotADemOrRepub Apr 1st 2016 17:47 GMT

For all of those people who keep saying "abortion should be determined by the
state, not the federal government"... what difference is that going to make?

Women will just travel to where abortions are legal and have an abortion. This
argument doesn't hold water with major ethical decisions like segregation and
abortion. Furthermore, there would be doctors in states where abortions are
illegal who would perform abortions "underground."

If you're argument is that you don't want your state to fund abortions, the
fact is that the majority of states don't fund abortions now.

So, if you would, please state why you think abortions should be left to the
states? What difference will that make? Why should some states allow it and
some states oppose it?

Simply stating "it should be left to the states" doesn't posit any kind of
reasoning.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

44

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

jouris in reply to NotADemOrRepub Apr 1st 2016 23:32 GMT

Actually, the reasoning behind "it should be left to the states" is pretty
straightforward. They know, beyond any doubt, that they cannot get what they
want nationwide.

A substantial majority of the population simply doesn't want abortion to be
flat illegal -- and would reject any Congressional attempt to do so. But they
do think (correctly, at least for the moment) that they can make abortion
illegal (or at least impossibly difficult to obtain) in _some_ states. So it's
a matter of gaining a partial victory instead of being stuck with a total
loss.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

43

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Duckdodger Apr 1st 2016 18:37 GMT

"When people show you who they are, believe them the first time!" - Maya
Anjelou  
-  
And so from Donald Trump's biographer we have, "Thus, for those of us who have
followed Trump’s career from the start, the worldview he has trotted out to
the public is no surprise. Some people seem shocked that he embraces torture
without compunction; openly admires the suppression of freedom by Chinese and
Russian dictators; and shows little grasp of ethics, governance or
constitutionalism, as evidenced by his insistence that the U.S. openly engage
in war crimes (by killing the families of terrorists)... But, as Trump's
biographer, I can tell you these views fundamentally define the man...If you
are seeking reassurance that the man who could be the next president of the
United States possesses a coherent political philosophy or ethical foundation
other than this rather pre-Enlightenment code of behavior—that he subscribes
to the ideals of the Founders, or has studied and understood American
democracy, human rights and our Constitutional system—you won’t get it."  
-  
So this is the man Donald Trump was, is and will be, "Trump is thus a
brilliant student of the street, but not of political philosophy. He is as
manipulative and self-serving as his father. He is as authoritarian as his
NYMA drill instructors and as self-justifying as Rev. Peale. In his public
life he has demonstrated the ruthlessness and cynicism of Roy Cohn and Roger
Stone. When New York was roiled by racial fears after the infamous Central
Park Jogger assault, Trump fueled the fire with newspaper ads calling for
restoration of the death penalty. Exoneration of the accused, after their long
terms in prison, brought to expression of regret from Trump. Similarly, when
he victimized creditors in four massive corporate bankruptcies, he offered not
apologies but the argument that he was a brilliant businessman. All that
mattered, in the end, was whether things had worked profitably for him. And
they had."  
-  
How is it so many Americans cannot see the obvious when it stares them so
brazenly in the face?  
Quotes from: http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/03/2016-donald-trump-
brutal-...

                
                                      * Recommend
                

43

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

guest-oanlwje Apr 1st 2016 15:43 GMT

Like Mussolini Trump is able to charismatically whip his people into a frenzy
with ethnocentric rhetoric, instilling an appetite for nationalism, a victim
complex and an obsession with purifying the nation. As we all know, his
ideological stubbornness didn’t end well for Mussolini or his people who were
thoroughly taught a lesson...

                
                                      * Recommend
                

43

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Peter32 Apr 1st 2016 18:41 GMT

The point, I think, about Trump's original comment (he proposed “some form of
punishment” for women who have abortions if they were made illegal) is that
illegal acts usually do result in some form of punishment.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

41

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

A. Andros Apr 1st 2016 15:39 GMT

Mr. Trump made an appalling comment and all the world has -- rightfully in my
opinion -- rounded on him. A woman who secures an abortion has already been
traumatized by the experience. That is "punishment" enough.

Mr. Trump was set-up by the reporter. That's the media and that's politics.
Mr. Trump shot himself in the foot and has no one to blame but Mr. Trump.

The furor around his remark, however, suggests once again that abortion ought
not to be a national issue. And, if it, unfortunately, remains a national
issue then the SCOTUS ought to back away from Roe.

Roe is now a Gulliver, pinned down by a swarm of Lilliputians who appear in
the guise of state restrictions on access to abortion. These restrictions --
such as that of one state which requires an anesthesiologist to be present at
each abortion -- so hinder access that they nullify the Court's original
decision. And, as fast as one or another federal court strikes down these
restrictions a new one takes its place.

It is glaringly obvious that there is no national consensus on abortion. The
Court has weakened its own standing (e.g. the current "dead" nomination to
fill Scalia's seat) in trying to force its will on the country while
simultaneously keeping alive an intensely divisive issue. (It is a bit rich
that the Left accuses Mr. Trump of being divisive when its insistence on
implementing Roe so splinters national politics.)

The best "solution" to this insoluble problem is to restore jurisdiction over
abortion to the states. This would remove the issue as a national obsession
and restore the democratic process.

But, even if this happens one great fact will remain: Mr. Trump's comment will
endure as one of the cruelest observations in American 21st Century politics.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

41

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

grammaskidney. in reply to emmafinney. Apr 1st 2016 20:17 GMT

"the USA where abortion is allowed at any time during the pregnancy."

At ANY time?

Even weeks or days before birth when the baby is already fully viable?

That is just sick.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

40

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Peter32 in reply to Duckdodger Apr 1st 2016 18:39 GMT

For a start look at the competition.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

40

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Duckdodger in reply to emmafinney. Apr 1st 2016 19:03 GMT

You don't need to be smug when there is zero effort involved in being morally
superior to the hypocrisies of America on so many things, abortion, guns,
health care, education, tax policy, LBGT, etc.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

39

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

ONTIME1 Apr 1st 2016 18:30 GMT

The "D" may make the news but he has to learn that the media maggots are out
for his hide, Motor mouth Matthews is no friend of his or anyone who is not a
lefty..  
A big deal was made of a point made on a subject he is free to speak on but
can have little to no effect, birth control and the law..the left is going to
keep on allowing abortions until they are put out of biz by a Judicial ruling
by the SCOTUS......Trump needs to be more prepared for hit traps like this and
ask "How many times can a woman have a abortion and still be legally financed
by tax dollars?"......murder is a irresponsible act..

                
                                      * Recommend
                

39

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

emmafinney. Apr 1st 2016 17:29 GMT

Well up to the 1960's in Britain when abortion was illegal, women faced jail
time for having illegal abortions, perhaps the Economist being a British
magazine could enlighten its readers about how backward and brutal Britain was
just a few decades ago about abortion.  
This is sharp contrast to anti-abortion groups in the USA which are opposed to
women being punished for illegal abortion and only call for the doctors who
perform illegal abortions to face criminal charges for breaking the law if
abortion become illegal.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

39

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

great uncle clive in reply to guest-oanlwje Apr 1st 2016 16:59 GMT

Mussolini isn't a very scary comparison... For starters, he eradicated the
mafia... They were restored by the Americans... His regime unified Italy for
the first time EVER  
..  
His mistake lay in associating Italy with Hitler's larger and more aggressive
Germany... But we're not looking at that scenario with America today  
..  
A dose of Fascism is the antidote to Liberalism

                
                                      * Recommend
                

38

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Duckdodger in reply to Peter32 Apr 1st 2016 20:56 GMT

That's why they're called the "establishment" ... in the end, no matter who
you vote for, the government (or the establishment) always wins.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

37

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Peter32 in reply to Duckdodger Apr 1st 2016 20:26 GMT

Absolutely true if the establishment (be it on the left or on the right) has
its way. They are certainly trying very hard using anything they can.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

37

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

Ray Tapajna in reply to Peter32 Apr 1st 2016 19:59 GMT

Trump is firmly for the right to life from the beginning of life to the final
end. He knows there are two victims in any abortion- the mother and the child,
but let's face it there are three parties involved in an abortion and many men
even feel responsible due to their part in the so called "sexual revolution."  
However the one with the most to lose is the child. They lose their life. They
have no voice in the matter nor do they have anyone really speaking for them
in the matter. Power over life rules the process.  
You will most likely be surprised what Ghandi says about abortion and birth
control. See our study From Aristotle to Ghandi about when life begins. It is
not only based on a religious belief system.  
http://sites.google.com/site/tapsearchnews/aristotle-to-ghandi-about-abo...
and also note what Dietrich Bonhoeffer says who gave this life trying to stop
Hitler during that Holocaust.  
And as far as Trump's foreign policy is concerned, he is not a militant. He is
an old fashion Republican who believes in the practice of balance of power
before using force. He is also for balance trade which has caused wars because
nations find their interests need to be protected in a global economic arena.
http://tapsearchnews.filetap.com

                
                                      * Recommend
                

37

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

emmafinney. in reply to A. Andros Apr 1st 2016 17:37 GMT

Even now in most of Europe, abortion is only legal up to the 1st or 2nd
trimester.  
No European country has such liberal abortion laws as the USA where abortion
is allowed at any time during the pregnancy.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

37

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                

emmafinney. in reply to A. Andros Apr 1st 2016 17:35 GMT

Cruel indeed but in Britain when abortion was illegal well up to the 1960's
women faced jail time for abortion.

This is a country which now feels so smugly morally superior to the USA.

                
                                      * Recommend
                

37

                
                                      * Report
                      * Permalink
                
                      * « first
                      * ‹ previous
                      * 1
                      * 2
                      * 3
                      * 4
                      * 5
                      * 6
                      * 7
                      * next ›
                      * last »
                

Advertisement

![](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/none&t=subs%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dmpu_top&sz=300x250|350x900|350x600|300x600&tile=7&c=840805452)

Most commented

                
                                      * ![Populism can be beaten back by libraries. Really](https://www.economist.com/sites/default/files/imagecache/mostx_block/20190601_OPP504.jpg)1Open FuturePopulism can be beaten back by libraries. Really
                      * 2Can hack it: Two hackers have found how to break into hotel-room locks
                      * 3Daily chart: Spain now has the most female cabinet in Europe
                      * 4Open Future: Can think-tanks survive a post-fact world?
                      * 5Neologisms: At a loss for words? Join the Bureau of Linguistical Reality
                

Advertisement

![](//pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ad?iu=/5605/teg.fmsq/none&t=subs%3Dn%26sdn%3Dn%26pos%3Dmpu_bottom_right&sz=300x250|45x45&tile=10&c=840805452)

                
                                      * Contact us
                      * Help
                      * About us
                      * Advertise with us
                      * Editorial Staff
                      * Staff Books
                      * Careers
                      * Site index
                
                      * Copyright (C) The Economist Newspaper Limited 2019. All rights reserved.
                      * Modern Slavery Statement
                      * Accessibility
                      * Privacy policy
                      * Cookies info
                      * Terms of use
                      * **Our cookie policy has changed.** Review our cookies policy for more details and to change your cookie preference.
                

By continuing to browse this site you are agreeing to our use of cookies.

![](//sstats.economist.com/b/ss/economistcomprod/1/H.20.3--NS/0)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

