

Skip to main content

## ECL site switcher

                
                                      * Commission and its priorities
                      * Policies, information and services
                

Home - European Commission

Englishen

Search this websiteSearch

You are here:

                
                                      1. European Commission
                      2. Energy, Climate change, Environment
                      3. Climate Action
                      4. Citizens
                

Climate Action

Menu

                
                                      * Home
                      * About us
                        * What we do
                        * Who we are
                        * Our Director General
                        * Publications
                        * Climate law
                      * Climate change
                        * Causes of climate change
                        * Climate change consequences
                      * EU Action
                        * Climate strategies & targets
                        * Emissions Trading System (EU ETS)
                        * Effort Sharing: Member States' targets
                        * Innovation Fund
                        * Transport
                        * Protection of the ozone layer
                        * Fluorinated Greenhouse Gases
                        * Forests and Agriculture
                        * Adaptation to climate change
                        * EU budget & LIFE
                        * International action on climate change
                        * European Climate Change Programme
                      * Citizens
                        * EU climate action
                        * Benefits of climate action
                        * Public support for climate action
                        * Youth
                        * Quiz
                        * Climate tips
                        * EU initiatives made simple
                        * Publications
                      * News & Your Voice
                        * Latest news
                        * Latest events
                        * Public consultations
                        * Feedback mechanism
                        * RSS
                      * Contracts & Grants
                        * Financing
                        * Calls for Tenders
                        * Calls for Proposals
                        * Call for expression of interest
                

Browse section: icon

Citizens

                
                                      * EU climate action
                      * Benefits of climate action
                      * Public support for climate action
                      * Youth
                      * Quiz
                      * Climate tips ****
                        * At home
                        * At work
                        * Reuse & recycle
                        * On the move
                        * Shopping & eating
                        * Save water
                      * EU initiatives made simple
                      * Publications
                

![](https://ec.europa.eu/clima/sites/clima/files/styles/header/public/header/what_we_do2_100.jpg?itok=lFfiGfs7)

# EU climate action

#### The Paris Agreement: the world unites to fight climate change

#### EU financing climate action

#### Causes and Consequences of Climate Change

#### EU Climate Action

#### EU adaptation to climate change

#### EU funding climate action

#### The EU's 2030 goals for climate and energy

#### The EU Emissions Trading System explained

Policy

Preventing dangerous climate change is a key priority for the European Union.
Europe is working hard to cut its greenhouse gas emissions substantially while
encouraging other nations and regions to do likewise.

## Key EU targets for 2020

                
                                      * 20% cut in **greenhouse gas emissions** compared with 1990
                      * 20% of total energy consumption from **renewable energy**
                      * 20% increase in **energy efficiency**
                

## Key EU targets for 2030

                
                                      * At least 40% cut in **greenhouse gas emissions** compared with 1990
                      * At least 32% of total energy consumption from **renewable energy**
                      * At least 32.5% increase in **energy efficiency**
                

## Long-term goal

By 2050, the EU aims to cut its emissions substantially – by 80-95% compared
to 1990 levels as part of the efforts required by developed countries as a
group.

Turning Europe into a highly energy efficient and low-carbon economy will also
boost the economy, create jobs and strengthen Europe's competitiveness.

![Global Carbon Footprint ©

Hemera](https://ec.europa.eu/clima/sites/clima/files/eu/images/99648082.jpg)

## Action towards climate targets

The EU is pursuing its climate targets through a combination of financial
support and regulation.

## **Financial support**

                
                                      * At least 20% of the EU's budget for 2014 to 2020 - as much as €180 billion - should be spent on protecting the climate. This is on top of funding from individual EU countries.
                      * The EU finances low-carbon energy demonstration projects from the sale of emission certificates. This includes technologies to trap carbon dioxide from power stations and other industrial installations and store it in the ground, so-called carbon capture and storage (CCS).
                

## **Regulation**

                
                                      * The EU's emissions trading system is the key tool for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from industry at the lowest cost.
                      * EU countries are required to support renewable energy sources such as wind, solar and biomass to reach the green energy targets.
                      * EU countries have to reduce the energy use of their buildings and industries are required to improve the energy efficiency of a wide array of equipment and household appliances.
                      * Car manufacturers have to reduce CO2 emissions from new cars and vans.
                

## Adapting to climate change

The European Commission has adopted an EU Adaptation Strategy and wants all
its Member States to adopt national plans to cope with the inevitable impacts
of climate change by 2017. A number of Member States have already developed
adaptation strategies.

For example, this includes measures such as:

                
                                      * using less water
                      * adapting building regulations
                      * building flood defences
                      * developing crops that cope better in drought conditions
                

## Keep global warming below 2°C

Global warming has to be **limited to below 2°C** compared to the average
temperature in pre-industrial times to prevent the most severe impacts of
climate change and possibly catastrophic changes in the global environment.

This was agreed by almost all countries worldwide in 1992 under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

To achieve this, the world must **stop the growth in greenhouse gas emissions
by 2020** and reduce them by 60% by 2050 compared with 2010.

The latest scientific evidence suggests that, if little or no action is taken
to reduce global emissions, by the end of this century global warming is
likely to exceed the 2°C target and could be as much as 5°C.

## International action

The EU is part of the new global climate agreement agreed in 2015 and due to
be implemented from 2020.

The EU has committed to a second phase of the Kyoto Protocol running from 2013
to 2020.

As the world's leading donor of development aid, the EU also provides
substantial funding to tackle climate change.

Links

## Useful links

                
                                      * UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
                      * Kyoto Protocol
                      * EU White Paper 'Adapting to climate change: Towards a European framework for action'
                      * European Commission Climate Change Campaign website
                      * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                

Read more

                
                                      * Publications
                      * Climate law
                

Latest news

08/12/2017 Public consultation launched on EU Adaptation Strategy

13/11/2017 COP23: Cities and local governments for climate action

08/11/2017 Energy Union: Commission takes action to reinforce EU's global
leadership in clean vehicles

Read more

Latest events

17/06/2019

EU Sustainable Energy Week 2019

12/09/2018

Decarbonising road transport

11/09/2018

Carbon Pricing Delivering Climate Ambition

Read more

Latest consultations

19/10/2015

Public consultation to support the evaluation of the car labelling Directive

26/03/2015

Consultation on addressing greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture and
LULUCF in the context of the 2030 EU climate and energy framework

26/03/2015

Consultation on the preparation of a legislative proposal on the effort of
Member States to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the European
Union's greenhouse gas emission reduction

Read more

Citizens

                
                                      * EU climate action
                      * Benefits of climate action
                      * Public support for climate action
                      * Youth
                      * Quiz
                      * Climate tips ****
                        * At home
                        * At work
                        * Reuse & recycle
                        * On the move
                        * Shopping & eating
                        * Save water
                      * EU initiatives made simple
                      * Publications
                

Report a problem or give feedback on this page

I have a problem

What were you doing?

What didn't work?

I have a suggestion

I have a compliment

Send

#### Climate Action

Follow us:

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * YouTube
                      * Instagram
                
                      * Contact
                

#### European Commission

                
                                      * Commission and its priorities
                      * Policies, information and services
                

#### Follow the European Commission

                
                                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Other social media
                

#### European Union

                
                                      * EU institutions
                      * European Union
                
                      * About the Commission's new web presence
                      * Resources for partners
                      * Cookies
                      * Legal notice
                      * Contact
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

