

Skip to content

![Universe Today](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/cropped-delta_iv_heavy_streak_composite_edits.jpg)

![Universe Today](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/cropped-cleanutlogo-1.png)

Universe Today

Space and astronomy news

![Solar sunspot](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/30389898278_2636703bf9_b.jpg)

Posted on August 29, 2018September 5, 2018 by David Dickinson

# Are We Witnessing the Start of Solar Cycle 25?

![Solar sunspot](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/30389898278_2636703bf9_b-580x435.jpg)A precursor to
the start of Solar Cycle 25? The Sun in hydrogen alpha from August 25th, 2018,
showing enigmatic sunspot AR 2720. Image credit and copyright: Damien
Weatherly.

What’s up with the Sun? As we’ve said previous, what the Sun _isn’t_ doing is
the big news of 2018 in solar astronomy. Now, the Sun sent us another
curveball this past weekend, with the strange tale of growing sunspot AR 2720.

We’re currently headed towards a solar minimum, forecasted to arrive in 2019
as the Sun switches over from Solar Cycle 24 to Solar Cycle 25. The Sun goes
through 11-year cycles, during which solar activity increases and ebbs in a
somewhat predictable fashion. Tracking this activity goes all the way back to
the start of the first solar cycle in 1755. Today, simple sketching and
counting of sunspot numbers has given way to ground and space-based operations
that monitor the Sun around the clock.

As a technology dependent society, it’s important to know what the Sun is
doing. Solar flares can spell a bad day for GPS, satellites, and astronauts
currently in space. Even airline crew and passengers get a markedly higher
dose of radiation during solar storms, especially during polar-crossing,
trans-oceanic flights. And an event such as the 1859 Carrington Super-flare
would wreak havoc today.

As it comes to a close, Solar Cycle 24 is now the most scrutinized period in
solar astronomy… but it has been anything but normal. First, the transition
period from Solar Cycle 24 to Solar Cycle 25 was deep and profound, the
deepest in over a century. 2008 featured 268 spotless days, and when Cycle 24
finally arrived it was sputtering and lackluster at best, only producing a few
notable sunspots.

Now, the transition from cycle 24 to 25 is on track to top that, with 132
spotless days on the Earthward face of Sol already as of August 29th or 55% of
the time, leaving some solar astronomers to propose that if the trend
continues, Solar Cycle #25 may be missing in action all together…

Or will it?

The growth of active sunspot region AR 2720 defied the overall trend for 2018
before it rotated around the solar limb and out of view, begging the question:
has solar cycle #25 arrived? As a huge ball of gas, the Sun does not rotate
uniformly, but instead, spins on its axis once every 34 days near its poles,
and 25 days near the solar equator.

![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/43598987154_774b226c02_b-580x467.jpg)The swirling
spicules of sunspot active region 2720, perhaps a harbinger of the new solar
cycle. Image credit and copyright: Joseph Brimacombe. (note: Mr Brimacombe is
located in Australia; in this image, AR 2720 is on the bottom!)

But how do we know that a new solar cycle has arrived, and that a given
sunspot is a member?

Two factors come into play with identifying that a new solar cycle is indeed
underway: the appearance of new sunspots at relatively high solar latitudes,
and the reversal of the Sun’s magnetic field.

The first factor can be seen observationally in white light over the span of a
solar cycle, and was first identified by Richard Carrington in 1861 and later
refined by Gustav Spörer, in a law that now bears his name. Chart out the
appearance of sunspots over time by latitude, Spörer noticed, and you get a
tidy ‘butterfly graph’ depicting the 11-year solar cycle from minimum to
maximum.

![Sporer's Law](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/Sunspot_butterfly_graph-580x345.gif)An updated
‘butterfly graph’ of successive solar cycles long term, depicting Sporer’s
Law. Credit: NASA/MSFC/Solar Physics division.

The second piece of the puzzle had to wait for the arrival of 20th century
technology for astronomers to uncover it. It was known throughout the 19th
century that there was a magnetic component to the Sun, as displayed by the
electromagnetic havoc and enhanced auroral activity that solar storms could
induce on Earth. In 1908, George Ellery Hale—a pioneer in American
astronomy—used the newly installed 60-foot solar tower telescope at the Mount
Wilson Observatory to note that spicule swirls around sunspot pairs rotated in
opposite directions, much like metal fibers on a sheet of paper in the
presence of a magnetic field in high school science class.

![Solar Sketch](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Hale-

Kenword-580x302.jpg)Early faculae sketches and images by George Hale from
1892, done from Hale’s Kenwood Observatory in Chicago. Credit: Carnegie
Astronomy.

Hale used the 9-meter Littrow spectrograph attached to the solar tower
telescope to exploit what’s known as the Zeeman effect—where a sunspot
spectrum shows either a split or a broadening, evidence of its polarity—to
deduce the magnetic field of the given spot. Hale showed that the Sun actually
reverses its robust magnetic field every solar cycle, and the reversal period
of 22 years whereas the same hemisphere returns to the same cycle is known as
the Hale Cycle.

![1908 vortices](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/1908-vortices-580x240.jpg)Hale’s historic image
showing the opposing vortices around two sunspots from 1908 (left) and the
modern 150-foot solar tower at Mount Wilson today (right). Credit: Public
Domain/Davefoc/Wikimedia Commons

Likewise, sunspot pairs in the northern or southern hemisphere of the Sun show
up as reversed in opposition to each other on magnetograms, showing spatial
movement of the magnetic fields within the sunspot group, with one dark
segment (south polarity, moving inward) and one bright segment (north
polarity, moving outward). Remember that swirling action that Hale noted?
Well, looking at the magnetogram of a given sunspot, you see either the bright
spot leading or trailing the group versus solar rotation, and this flips when
the Sun’s poles reverse every solar cycle.

Horace Babcock built and installed the first true magnetogram imager on the
150-foot solar telescope on 1957, allowing him to take the first true
magnetogram TV image of the Sun, which took the device about an hour to
produce.

![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/locations_magnetsun1.jpg)Babock’s first solar ‘image’
with his TV magnetogram. Credit: NASA/Babock/Mt Wilson

Today, you can see the very latest magnetogram image of the Sun with the flick
of a smartphone, courtesy of the Solar Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and
NASA’s Space Weather App.

![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/Screenshot_20180829-110607-580x323.jpg)The strange
case of sunspot AR2720. Credit: NASA Space Weather App

Which brings us back to the curious case of sunspot active region 2720. It was
indeed showing a bright leading edge matching its southern counterpart (such
mixing isn’t uncommon around the time the solar cycle flips) a strike in the
‘for’ category, but its latitude is still pretty low, a strike against.
Another anomalous spot seen this past April also seems to have belonged to the
next solar cycle.

![magnetogram](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/ezgif.com-gif-maker-4-580x510.gif)A solar magnetogram,
showing active bright and dark regions in opposing hemispheres. Credit:
NASA/MSFC

One thing is for certain: the Sun is a fascinating subject of study, and will
continue to surprise. Keep those solar filters handy, watch those magnetograms
online, and we’ll see what AR 2720 does when it comes back ’round the solar
limb in about 12 days.

(Our thanks to astronomer Karl Battams at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory
helping us explain the process of identifying a sunspot’s solar cycle
membership!)

### Share this:

                
                                      * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to share on Pocket (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
                      * Click to print (Opens in new window)
                      * More
                      *           * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
                      * ### Like this:
                

Like Loading...

CategoriesAstronomy, History, Solar Astronomy, sun TagsAR2720, Featured, solar
cycle 24, solar cycle 25, solar magnetogram, solar minimum, sunspot cycle
sporers law

## Post navigation

Previous PostPrevious Hayabusa's Target Itokawa Formed 4.6 Billion Years Ago,
But Then it Was Smashed Up About 1.5 Billion Years Ago

Next PostNext Construction on the Orion Capsule is Done. Next it'll be Sent to
Florida for Final Assembly

![Member Log in](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/members-1.png)  
![Join our Patreon community](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/patreon.png)  
Join our 836 patrons! See no ads on this site, see our videos early, special
bonus material, and much more. Join us at patreon.com/universetoday

![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/bookcover-e1540500928777.jpg) **Get our new book!**

Search for: Search

                
                                      * Home
                      * Members
                      * Guide to Space
                      * Carnival
                      * Photos
                      * Videos
                      * Forum
                      * Contact
                      * Privacy
                

Space stories from across the internet, sent to you by email.

## Subscribe to our Email Newsletter

          * indicates required

Email Address *

First Name

Last Name

We won't use your email for any other purpose and you can unsubscribe any
time. Check out our privacy policy if you have any questions.

## Follow Us

                
                                      * Twitter
                      * Instagram
                      * YouTube
                      * Facebook
                      * RSS Feed
                      * Twitch
                

Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website,
you agree to their use.  
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy

Privacy Policy Proudly powered by WordPress

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

%d bloggers like this:

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

