

~~~~~~~~~~~~

  *     * News
  * Tech
  * Health
  * Planet Earth
  * Strange News
  * Animals
  * History
  * Culture
  * Space
  * * * *

Live Science

* * *

  * News
  * Tech
  * Health
  * Planet Earth
  * Strange News
  * Animals
  * History
  * Culture
  * Space

Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History
Culture Space __ ____

__

  *     *       *         *           *   * Live Science

  * Health

# 5 Fascinating Facts About Fetal Ultrasounds

By Tanya Lewis, Staff Writer | May 16, 2013 03:04pm ET

  *     *       *         *           *             * MORE

![5 Fascinating Facts About Fetal

Ultrasounds](https://img.purch.com/w/660/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzA0Ny84Mzcvb3JpZ2luYWwvZmV0dXMtdWx0cmFzb3VuZC5qcGc=)

A fetus at 4 months seen via ultrasound.

Credit: CDC

For most women today, it's hard to imagine going through a pregnancy without
having an ultrasound. But these iconic black-and-white images of a developing
fetus, generated by the reflection of high frequency sound waves, have only
been around since the mid-1950s.

A new book explores the history of ultrasounds, in both their technical and
social dimensions. In "Imaging and Imagining the Fetus: The Development of
Obstetric Ultrasound" (The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013), authors
Malcolm Nicolson, a history of medicine professor at the University of Glasgow
in Scotland, and engineer John Fleming look at how ultrasounds came into wide
use, and why their images lie at the crossroads of several hotly debated
issues today.

**When it was invented?**

Ultrasound was first used for clinical purposes in 1956 in Glasgow.
Obstetrician Ian Donald and engineer Tom Brown developed the first prototype
systems based on an instrument used to detect industrial flaws in ships.

They perfected its clinical use, and by the end of the 1950s, ultrasound was
routinely used in Glasgow hospitals, Nicolson said. But it didn 't really take
off in British hospitals until the 1970s, and it was well into the 1970s
before it became widely used in American hospitals, he said. [Blossoming Body:
8 Odd Changes That Happen During Pregnancy]

By the end of the 20th century, ultrasound imaging had become routine in
maternity clinics throughout the developed world. The technology has undergone
extensive development over the past 20 years, Nicolson told LiveScience, but
"has probably reached more or less the pinnacle of its acuity."

**How does it work?**

Ultrasound imaging involves bouncing "ultrasonic" sound waves -- above the
audible range of human hearing -- at body structures or tissues, and detecting
the echoes that bounce back.

Obstetric ultrasonography is used to image a human fetus inside its mother's
womb. It's used to confirm a pregnancy, to identify the sex and number of
fetuses and to detect fetal abnormalities such as microcephaly (an abnormally
small head), absence of kidneys, and spinal problems.

During a scan, ultrasound waves are aimed at a pregnant women's abdomen. Based
on the angle of the beam, and the time it takes for echoes to return, an image
of body structures inside the fetus can be generated.

Early in the use of fetal ultrasound, clinicians could only detect the baby's
head, Nicolson said. "But gradually, with developing expertise, they could
discern fine structures in the fetus," he said.

**Is it safe?**

One of the main advantages of ultrasound is that it 's noninvasive. The
procedure has been safely performed on millions of pregnant women. Concerns
about its safety have periodically surfaced, but Nicolson said he thinks these
stem more from anxiety over the role of technology in pregnancy than from
evidence of harm.

"We can be confident that at the levels currently used for clinical
investigation, ultrasound is safe. No pattern of damage has been found,"
Nicolson said.

However, at high power, ultrasound waves are able to damage human tissue.
Researchers don't know exactly at what level this occurs, Nicolson said,
adding that testing the threshold at which it becomes dangerous in humans
would be unethical.

He said that ultrasound scans should only be done for clinically justified
reasons. For example, so-called "bonding scans," images taken purely for
commemorative purposes, unnecessarily expose a fetus to the high-energy sound
waves, Nicolson said.

**What 's the emotional impact?**

Ultrasound has enjoyed an enthusiastic reception by pregnant women. In
addition to revealing the baby's health, the images themselves provide a
keepsake. "Overwhelmingly, pregnant women expect to be scanned, and are moved
and excited by seeing the fetus," Nicolson said -- especially if the baby
moves. In fact, Nicolson said, some women report not feeling pregnant until
they've seen the ultrasound image.

Seeing a developing fetus has a humanizing effect, too. Donald, the physician
who helped develop the technology, was a devout High Anglican, and knew the
images carried moral significance for women contemplating having an abortion.

**Are there social implications?**

Ultrasound images sometimes play a role in decisions to maintain or terminate
a pregnancy. Anti-abortion proponents take ultrasound images as proof that a
fetus is fully alive and therefore should not be aborted.

On the other hand, ultrasound can be used to diagnose potentially fatal or
debilitating abnormalities in the fetus, which can encourage termination of
the pregnancy.

In some East Asian countries, ultrasound is used to detect the sex of the baby
expressly so that a fetus of less desirable sex (usually female) can be
aborted, Nicolson said. He called the practice "unfortunate and worrying."

Still, anecdotal evidence suggests that if pregnant women see images of a
fetus -- especially their own -- they are less likely to terminate a
pregnancy, Nicolson said.

"The realm of human reproduction is an area that is contested, and bound to be
emotive," Nicolson said.

_Follow Tanya Lewis onTwitter and Google+. Follow us @livescience, Facebook &
Google+. Original article on Live Science. _

### You'd Also Like

  * #### Is a 'Fetal Heartbeat' Really a Heartbeat at 6 Weeks?

LiveScience __

  * #### Soot from Air Pollution Found in Placentas of City-Dwelling Women

LiveScience __

  * #### Babies Died in a Drug-Trial Tragedy. Why Were Their Mothers Given Viagra?

LiveScience __

  * #### Ultrasonic Waves Are Everywhere. Can You Hear Them?

LiveScience __

Author Bio

* * *

Tanya Lewis, Staff Writer

Tanya was a staff writer for Live Science from 2013 to 2015, covering a wide
array of topics, ranging from neuroscience to robotics to strange/cute
animals. She received a graduate certificate in science communication from the
University of California, Santa Cruz, and a bachelor of science in biomedical
engineering from Brown University. She has previously written for Science
News, Wired, The Santa Cruz Sentinel, the radio show Big Picture Science and
other places. Tanya has lived on a tropical island, witnessed volcanic
eruptions and flown in zero gravity (without losing her lunch!). To find out
what her latest project is, you can visit her website.

    
    
     **Tanya Lewis, Staff Writer** on
    

Science Newsletter: Subscribe

Submit

Follow Us

Most Popular

  1. Pregnant Women Who Eat More Fiber May Lower Child's Celiac Risk

  2. Please Do Not Feed These Tweezer-Beaked, Hopping Rats Peanut Butter!!!

  3. Can Physicists Really Save Schrödinger’s Cat?

  4. Mysterious 'Bridge' of Radio Waves Between Galaxies Seems to Be Smashing the Laws of Physics (But It’s Not)

  5. These First Americans Vanished Without a Trace — But Hints of Them Linger

HomeAbout Us

Company

  * Company Info
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Advertise with Us
  * Using Our Content
  * Licensing & Reprints
  * Terms of Use
  * Copyright Policy
  * Privacy Policy

Network

  * Top Ten Reviews
  * Tom's Guide
  * Laptop Mag
  * Tom's Hardware
  * Space.com
  * Live Science
  * AnandTech
  * Dignifyed

FOLLOW US

Subscribe SUBMIT

![Purch](https://www.livescience.com/resources/img/purch-logo.png?5dba563)

Copyright (C) All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

