

FREE In Google Play

Get

![The Weather Company](https://s.w-x.co/TheWaterChannelLogoWithPadding.png)

Show me the weather in... city, zip, or place

Recently searched

                
                                      *  _No items to display_
                

![An IBM Watson

Business](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAeAAAABYCAYAAAAtOiQ5AAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAGwJJREFUeAHtnQe4JUWVxxmRYCAIg2QGGCQsaQhmsqsMiLrAGjHDAgbYXQVkXWVhUQnKyrqKIohLWjEBSlhBFkQkuAxgQIbkMOQhgyBJmPH3f9x+X72a6r7dfUPfe9//fN953XXqnFNV/+qufPstsojJCBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAEJhiGIyAETACRqAaAgsWLFgMi43gV8C3Tpky5Y5qHqxtBIyAETACRsAIVEKAzvcV8K1wRvO5+VIlJ1Y2AkbACBgBI2AEqiFAZ7tv1vMG1ye4f1k1T9ae7Ai8uJcA8EB+Gf9rJdKYw5LNQQn5pBeB2VGAML1DIOaB7yfb+SCtl6Pz3+30SsY/iN4N8B90Jf17S9rlqpXI33yM9yatR3OdVIwgTS0tngS/pMB0H9J8qCC+4yjyoffjNR06ehz7G1s8m6veu+c69GnzRRbZKQGCOt+t4Z8l4iwyAv1FgAZkBfh5OEXPIVy+vzkajtTAZVYKsIqyP5YpLT6Xq+i3ivpdKP9dmXzk6ZTM38F59nXkpPn+EoVcrY7vKjbk4ewS+aiq8jgG+8EvqpIX605EAPxOyQH+DRM1HTICxQj08kV8G0nn+V+UOMWbRheBVSnaWTRUp8HL9bCY/4j/Jbro/8Au+ho0V1rx+Br8SzBbf9AyN0T5OSOR19uRXZmQW2QEchHI6yBzDSpEtJv97FrBl1WHF4E9yPrvafCn9qgIK+H3g93wTR53xM8m3fA14D7eSP5+Q3k3HPB8Dmr2LiBjx8Jz4cfgWfC+LO8v4GoyAqUR6MnPkHixtR+iPcElg5w8wP0KQfgp7qfy0D4ZyCb9LdjpZd6iQyC019d2H5m0NDPt6V5mUI6vk6f9gnDb2wr5uxlnG+Bfe8K1ifT+D+MdSjhYnbTuKqFXW4W8nI3xOyIHdxO+P5LlBXW+Yxq8dJ4C8gsox8yCeEcZASPQQwR6dQhLM4mw89UocQasBiQjHXKR3lmZwNcxBH7L36cjLF5J+FWRLAvO4ebeLNC6hjhHUY0FdXJUnfBNPcjBuvjUisuZdX2TNw16ynS+dZPoht3R4Kcl5NJEuVZE+cPwIfBL4ZB2JH4mPn1wKETF90agTwj0qgNWYxjSZbzk9/Cy6yTmBkGElqHdAQeAgNOeQXDsFtzez82psbwV/io2X8+J60R8NcafL+FAqyja79Vy5l7wUnCK9KwdBcfPRkq3jkynhmt3wNiO5N4vz8Z9lO0onqEfc/0NrNWpkI4hTjNhL5+GqPjeCAwjArzML4YfgkP6lMqC4BuhkHvp9WoQMIzwJfMMRkUncz+ZNCohxG/RKejzS7iYoIK/VeHr4Dz6CxGl6xvdovyl0th2QoZKBnC0FqyT+WWpqVPQ+5csUlKNwh2cU0ANoExGwAj0GYFeHMLSb+G0txjSJa1Ads3ipLdNFvB1uBFgFqWl733hvNmUOt9pPSzlZ2r61gBx0Zq2w2T2zZzMTs+RW2wEjEAPEehFBxwvMT5C/rWvKboUjhtnLUObRgQBOuFfU5TrC4qzTkFclaj4OZLtTszwNq7k5IXfo380YXNPQjbUIurmMQqgw5AxuQOOEXHYCPQBgX50wL/gxR87ncpVL//vo3LFJz2jaAeHEIGiD4F0q7FfBVz+nMBGe8FV6BMox4eTnkC2IZzq5Kv4HkTdVN10q04GsbzOkxEYWARK78eVKQGzj83QWyPSPS8Kn0N4k0C2OnZb0DlfE8hq3eJn8chwPn4X+vQeem9GT1+tWbPF+mmHDqhcJ8ZGB1dM9RG4q8B07YK4KlE6/HUavE9k9B7q91+pwzsi+UJB9F6CMLWHLr8ipTFqlBq0VOqAwU0D97jteA7MxwbaVQDD12LohzgvwM9fqvgIdfGn50uDJ13XgrXloV8V6JcCYq3GXUwaC7ULyEsT6ZRqa4oclvWBXmPtFWkvTRneBGtrcWVYv8hQnanNFF8Nnw+eXW8zSbsvdUn+J1BT6U7IRJ0AGT8MDkn/JUQfShgnwq8OFVr3h48r1LzBz9oJvxeG7oifCV+d0AtF+nzmIbAamYEg8jIUh7AysMjvf8J59IVMr90VB0WHsNYnfuOcRI5t51vx2H4sx34T5NNy4iQeykNYrTJflCjXGWXwynSwPyDhQ3v/lQk/d0e+nqrsBAN86Hn4Pqw2px09gMI3YXXQlQm7tm1NO6dlfKDTWHtF2uvBP4KfhduRML8Y7vT7BWOw4advdRnWUxPpdruTifd/ZzEymhcWknt9aCL+3WrP94EB912kq9n4lnARCZPD4POxmVqk6LhaCNxey2pho2V4trSdcdnCUYvsRd3FBwEnqBGvetbhq5iuwO/vEC4TR4xIOPXOPzysZaMeF4NPIv86d6B3fEqJsui91oBBX2jTIKyMTQm33VMhT420V6S7KHwMJRGeu8Oa7bYj4bc9rMmNBjbx6kg7+7F47Bqpy6bSVaFTL2MpsGIlCrE2snBpWSrnxno0btpX0zJ0SBtiv04o6OY9vrfF36lwlfLuiP7l2NZ6mLqZ/yH09bKCPM8tiKsStWxL+RsJI6X/iYQ8FO1GIPXMZSeFR7UDTv3k6K4QmCG7/wL5/Qi8aI186zk5Dv4f3vMqbUONpMqbNNVeke6S5PJHsAamddo9dcQa2GglokzHjeoEaqoum0q3FsgTEAsCqcNUC3XALf2fct07sNWtZs9fiWTdCh6No2zPRns/t8I3wCvAGjTkNbbrEvcB+LuwqTwC0wtUhX03KKuzM3GmVZYJWx2E96MR+AoDvrwlzQMTmXgQ2Q9b8sx/Qm04ReChTmqtRO4vT8gGXkR53kImU/X4LPLz4FvgufBS8JqwlkhfA8f0HgSq+/3iiIbCTbVXZ1DeVDv+JHLtnWtlSKzwjBZvzlX4hrQbgW/Be4bCovum6rKpdIuwqBVHQS6FQ7orzxFKS8L6B9YhddQI4Ci5L4N8m1Yi+ujHPnDWEY9lj/AUWPsd+g8xKboFYZ3RdV7xK8tJf2j2gMnrEvD9cIouqlJ4HBTtAf9D5gu9f08lhmyPTCe8Ip+Ro6+Gb4xkm6Mj8WqZXq+upJH6d4T7d5IePl+vzEekfxupmU9pQr/xPWDy8FJ4HhzTOQhSg4yx8hGnutfeZkxPItCAuy2hl2xr2hoGCnk+kDfSXpHuR+EUXYhQh6+SRNxU+OcpQ2Q7JI0iIXqN1GVT6UbF7zxIQVQJ8ZeEji/yjP6ZcEg6/LRikU1RHLapl+Je5LNhDQ6075NLxOsLXsfCKUo25LnOuhxBhoapA8772pJw3b4KNOgXdcCfznyhtwr8DBzT+ZlOeEXpy7EiYT2/4w039/smdDLR0HXAZFwDzauyAgRXrfBUImwHoQN+W1CG7PZGbkoNJtDT3q++zCZ6FNYp31KEbqqtmXDgs52jHB+NtFfkZWX4MTgktcefhqeUKIv2jY8MjVv3N3NtO3lBp5G6bCrddnhWjqcgH4FjeluRI5Q/HBsQHp/VFNmm4rBNvRRK4mG4VIOJ3otgPTQx/SyVZr9kZGbgO2DyqJnvoXCqI0S84H+r4oVNUQd8QOgP3ROUSERqYLXNME6EVcea9cV02rgSN0R+PFYIwqWep9Bf1XvS6toMGF/LwycH+c9u1SG3bWDjvGMzCB1w6qR9pcOclGMfWJ3epnEZi8Lop9qabnTAuO5/e0Waem9jOqUIg1QcDq6NnRDeOaUbytBppC6bSjcs+4vDQAf38eln7btd1Maf9mj0u8Hw8INeoBPa2FWNPoB9wNzl8NAZejpOfwQynaoMabMwMEnu9XOxMo2KGvBV4enwhOX9AKeTud87CPfi9iicfgQOR9x6vt8Nfx3OSAfylN+QdDBQ9T7otDl1ov3KMiQcpsFaVtVgeDk4pF8ReH/rUGQoH5b7NRIZvTYhyxVR9uPB84dcH85V6n9EX9sryq/nZK+omH8h/G+RrEzwSJS+Hyl+iHByJSrQa6oum0o3KHqHt1Sg1u+1fxJS3uGrCalhcFloxP3TcLyhP8EmL4BdalQq96vk2aTk6OsofFwe+Vkppd8PGWk3MQNWmTuhZzH+BbxPXYywLT0DVhrofw+O6cowfSJPjBUInxXqtHwN4gw4kfXKIq3waJsgHPjGxS8MYzsIM+BfRSXXykvl2XxhQXMiSSfV1pQZrI57zPGhIvW1vSK9XZRoROGAdTzP7W7wodWlWyJfTxF+eZEt8Y3UZVPphljUfgkDJztyry8KhVSqA8bgp6ER90vAO0WyToL3M7q9p4oD9DX6uzNhMzUhsyiNwNcQLweW28GFZwHS5rWlGoHH9DpetLUl5KrnS79tjOmLsWAEw/Mo0xrUx7rwkfD8IS/jI1H+tfqydCQbtmAT7dW2CZDazVgTJvwA+4Vn6tIoUnvy7VYQm6rLptIdh6gbHXC8/CzndTtg2Vbax5FBAd1QEFcUdUcicpmEzKI0Au9FfCodnmZa28N9mZnQAPyWdLW1EdP7WgLtRy0bRV6I3axINopBreBo9quPJegQWozDsJV5diLDGyRkwyRqor16dQKgOQlZWVFq8tKuA26qLptKdxzLjjpgXmLtse0y7u2Fm9/QoN0VyZJB9G4i4uYocmf8ajTbDdJstg6lOuBaS+N1Eh8BGx180sDsCPhiuJ9fFfsS6cW0R0uQXcP4lH4YP0r3mo1sCR8A38h7lg1MhrGMNyYyfVhCNkyivrZX1L/af/02OqQFBOaGgor3qbZzRhsfTdVlU+mOw9FRB4yXreD4cEfZ2W+WiZ9kN62rlpG2j2T9Dj6ZSLAvs7hEuqMgmkkhruOFf32vC8Og7grS+GWUzvqk/UFk8WDxcvQvjXQHOXg4mZtegf8G3bfD6nCvgUNakcDp4HJUKByi+7g8yvpbKM+34WGf3Vethrrt1RokFO/P3ss78XTVDAT6qRnwekF86rapumwq3XEMOu2ANcuJ6ZxY0CYc7wNLvZvL0G2Sd3QOApq5rlySdXBkc1hLz5fAKdJPd35K49iPpfzUrPZk0tcecEgpvTB+0O4fpHGcU4Fno3sOfAwFeS38Kfi5qFAHUSfvjmQDH6RM2m44MZFR/ZRRS+3fgt8Jr5TQsegFBF6RAOJ+MNNhqlqMv3hfVUkU7s03VZdNpRti3u0O+D6cXx0mUOL+SnQejPTezgPgGWcESp+Dz/CAzivJGjXr3zieAe9APj+fk9epyD+XE9c1MXm4AGfXtnGo/J7fRmdkoinr8/BXKdBxiULpIwqLJ+SDLtLM/u5EJrUFsg/8A1i/870PvhDWmYSNE/qTVZRaKdBy8fMd8KwEmIUdcEu/qbpsKt2xYmsPtxbxIKuipkXGzxLWyDMStw3GSx6aeWnEflVbSysMIgJHkCnNqjZKZG5/no9v0hnMScR1U6Q8ZN91TvlV/GSkwyi0vn4Vzn7WJLwbfAY8NMQzpK83abXsFHj9goy/krg3t/gIbHRGRYOvY/Exm+tkpX6sRgnbtuk0VZdNpZs9cJ3MgFPLz6vjeO8arOXJmFL+Yx2HBxABHmqNoE/KyZpmWuoAek1nksBNOYlI/uOcuJEWUzcPU8ArE4Vs+8WihE3jIsqjFbdN4UPgeCCflz+1N2qndC7hQHjRPMURl8f7v70qbql0mqrLptIV2LVnwNj2uoPUyPZgZdI0lAj8sSDXPf+5CC+Vvmp2JHn4biIfo/A72ESxSotSqw/blrYeMEXqWitvh1Pf3+H6Vngm/Ca43cxrCXSOhnfF9m/x8yT3k4meSBT2T8guS8g7Ec0va9xUXTaVbq0OmId1LQDVqLOXtC7pbAAwk3mJqJf49tr37QUJFC0XFphVjjodCy25rhFYKl+nBeHJeJvqgLXtM9REW3EPBThBTNuhtu01sH5mswn8enhDOEWK09mEz6YiR1j2aKJsfwTHXRLyvoqaqst+p1urA6Ym3pGojcuR3ZKQlxXp5Yh/FK5ZtjvgsggOlt4zBdnR4IpnfUrlwwIFPheKwr/+GcNXiPhaEHk08ueC8GS8fTxRaH2CdVmwSTXKCfXBFrXq+ApyKR4jyrcmN++ED4HjZVF9XvNU7CZTe5Oq6ylgM1DUVF32I926HbA6xpj2JcPXx8KyYR7+bdC9NNLXMvRkPSwTQTFSQS39LQZr6bDXdCIJaHajgzjz4JNgUxoB7d2PLNE+zaVw+grY2Vx/Bq8NZ6Tn8WPw/plgElxTHfCKw1Dupuqy2+lWPoTFwzuVCtoqqqS5nXS+LV8aqT4S+d2S9FaNZA4OBwJFg7u7eV760fnq+7RPAdexLcj+g3DZgzrDgXK9XKZmOQ+ATWpmnEphfkL4soRsIEWUUyt1+vlJTOvFghEP30H54jrX/wZ+ybCUu6m67Fa6lTtgKkb7A/GpwfM6rTAKpGVBjUpDUkORWu4OdXw/mAisXpCtWwviehF1HE5vg7/VC+dD6DM1yyk6NBcXMXV4p6i+Y/swvHgY6Nc97c1ZpPVglN66UXikg2CggVTqa1DhysDAY9BUXXYj3TodcGr5+dwu1VLKj5ahTcOHQNFLXKWx77jkvCiP4USnXOPRfse+h9TB9ES+q9SJ8IxpjVjQLsxMS9sCU9vp9TBeg7KQVgsDk+T+/xPlLHp3E+oTRdTry2FtM/WTmqrLjtKt1AED6ktB9C0Rqn8mfEkkqxvUDPj5yHhb0l02kjk4+Ai8qyCL/Z4Bayl6TkF+JlvUOokCV+mAH0jYp3wm1CaINpsQqhGgbVilhllmsiC7aV1vj8KTIRifu1GZ9VGWTuhQjK+ibiot6TdVl02lK4ArdcDoq/ON9wcuonErOvGqdEoRfvSRgCsiZR2OeGskc3CAEeCB3oPsbVOQxasL4hzVQwSomy1x/8ZEEr9LyPJEKd2N8a2f81Shnaooh7qkpW8V6ze8+q9OG4VxZe5lj15sd0MZ2xHTuYDy3BmV6YPgU+uTndi9Cl/7wTPgawh/mGshqS7gvtdlU+mGYFTtgHu5/Jzly8vQGRJDdOVhXgreAv422T61IOtXMdC6uCDeUT1CQA0Orr8Kx4ewbkZ2dtlkqT/tnd6R0P9cQpYUkZetiVBDXZmwXQqjn8AHwrrXP/nQcnYVei3KWtELadJ1wNSlVhxPDEHgXs/JUZGsbZA6WAYlvfuLt5R1MO+Ylrwlmnhpqi6bSndi6St8CYsML4rxLpEDLeF0fAAr8qkOOK78maS/JA/LyJ9gpZzvo/xxY6JZSx7pH97HJ44fA6vv5hmUlOtfu5XdM1WDrpetDB1SRsk63UWAutRs7wT4dQnPh7Ya4kRUrugUYuIOV//L+5/wdWyuFRHo6EMssr8S3hyOV9UQFdLpxIZt0VqEf43f3Uj7ukJLItFTx3tSQu/6hGwyiI6nkP8MLxsUdidwkvxTYKptxkJCdyoKF8LxtsLB2D9WYNxUXTaVbgEUBVEAvC0c06wCk9pRJDInTohw+MIt5Jv4tRM2eiAqE37+K+Gr9nJZlQyQ7qxE2lVFpfbzcLpcVccd6v+yIhZF+Tugiq+qupTz4wVlXa2qv6r6pH12Iv1zkX22Ah+Grv7n79Xws3CKrkeoGU8lwmZ5+PGUQ2Q/gteMHSJTfeqfISgvT8MrwXfDIelnY4WE8gbwI6FR6/5JrsJHnUGSiNsUvgSOaTaCUgeH0Ou4remGj6yA+Oq4vcKHlp1TdCvC7eDkM4L8lfCh8ANwTFcgiFdbsmyPXYlvpC6bSndC4QnEM6c4Pgz3Y/k5S0+z6k9mgdZ1V67nRjIHhwcBrV5oydBUHwGdhRB3i+bj6CBmKLpWImweohE7DqODEoa7I9ud+Ee5/hZ+Bt4QXhXO6Dv4mIdOFi59xU6d5d9joEObYRummfQX4c8Tr7biJngurE5Ah8Q2gvWd6LgzUfn3xK/yOSmJsp8CZm+n8Kq7kKYTuAR+ivjZXH8Pa0Y7rcUbcE0NXO5E/iH8FlZwU3XZVLpgUo8A/zY4pi3reSu2IpEd44QIj/2j6DxL4jselWa+8dXxiDLzVfVK2qM4A9ZsJz493xYabDwDBoQe0fP4/UDbSihQwF6zn4dr5O8+bNSAazm48gw4yxK2aifkq1MqXDLP0suuJNZxW9MNH0F+utJekafF4e/DndINOFg9y1+ZK/pN1WUj6WaYxCPBTD7hCjibIlhzgvCFz/pdE8m6FfwFjp6InK1AOHV6M1JzcMAQ0D7fFow4a20HDFhZRiU7Omy0HXWiAzO1Cfv7MdYg/NoKTv6E7kxsb69gk1TFxwVEqG2q+2ypjfkMnJrFI55cBJ7PUuL3wkfCuq9DqpOt8aUZcGlqqi6bSjcDplQHjHJq+fk8Ml+4vJAlUvWKXy0FXZSwS+UjoWZRgwjop2RaptLJyjfBW1Gff+Bqag4BdXpaPtTBE71DM6iTy7h2TPiZg5M3wMe3caa24iewGue2B6Xa+BqPxpe+761l5Z3hH8NlOg7lRYOPdbHXP+coY4P66BNYzIf/hZJqafl7sNridqST1D+At8RWg6uH2hmk4rFrpC6bSlcYFG6Qp0CyzAgYASOQQoCVslWQz4A3a121JzsXvg3+OQ1d6vfDRHWPyMNUvKlDngZrGVSsDuLmFt/C9Ubyci9XUxsEwFMnxreHt4ZXhrUSqX5DA6+MrwXPjlc08DeBmqrLptKdUHgHjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETACRsAIGAEjYASMgBEwAkbACBgBI2AEjIARMAJGwAgYASNgBIyAETAC3UDgr20d1JWzO2NHAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

US°F

°F|°C

Americas

Africa

Asia Pacific

Europe

Middle East

Toggle MenuMenu

Weather

                
                                      * Today's Forecast
                      * Hourly Forecast
                      * 10 Day Forecast
                      * Monthly Forecast
                      * National Forecast
                      * National News
                      * Get Notifications
                

Maps

                
                                      * Weather in Motion®
                      * Radar Maps
                      * Classic Weather Maps
                      * Regional Satellite
                

Severe

                
                                      * Severe Alerts
                      * Safety and Preparedness 
                      * Get Severe Alerts
                

Video & Photos

                
                                      * Top Stories
                      * Video
                      * Slideshows
                

Activities

                
                                      * Boat & Beach Forecast
                      * Gardening Forecast
                      * Ski Forecast
                

Health

                
                                      * Allergy Tracker
                      * Cold & Flu
                      * Water Scarcity
                

TV

                
                                      * Watch Live
                      * Personalities
                

Toggle MenuMenu

°F|°C

US

Back to menu

Americas

Africa

Asia Pacific

Europe

Middle East

All sections

Weather

Maps

Severe

Video & Photos

Activities

Health

TV

Next Article

Shifting, Weakening Polar Vortex Could Mean More Cold Spells Ahead for North
America, Study Says

### Weather Explainers

# The Greatest 24-Hour Snowfalls in All 50 States

#### By Chris Dolce

#### November 03 2016 04:45 PM EDT

#### weather.com

![Where Does it Snow the

Most?](https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/v/snowfalltots.jpg?v=at&w=815&h=458&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)

00:54

### Where Does it Snow the Most?

Meteorologist Doemnica Davis looks at the record snowfall in 24 hours.

### At a Glance

                
                                      * Almost every state has seen more than a foot of snow in 24 hours.
                      * Portions of the West and Northeast U.S. have seen some of the highest 24 hour totals in U.S. history.
                

Snow can pile up several feet in a day's time when conditions are ripe in many
U.S. states.

In fact, 48 of 50 states have received more than a foot of snow during a
single 24-hour period, according to data from NOAA's National Centers for
Environmental Information (NCEI). Of those 50 states, 32 of them – mostly in
the West, Midwest and Northeast – have had snowfalls of 30 inches or more in
24 hours.

During those extreme situations, snowfall rates are often an inch or more per
hour. Thundersnow also sometimes occurs, an indication of unstable air and
strong upward motion in the atmosphere, resulting in heavy snow.

![image](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/24-hour-snow-

labels.png?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/24-hour-snow-
labels.png?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/24-hour-snow-
labels.png?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0 400w,
https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/24-hour-snow-
labels.png?v=ap&w=980&h=551&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0 800w" >

This map illustrates the largest 24-hour snowfall records across the United
States, according to NOAA/NCEI.

### **States With Greatest 24-Hour Snowfall Records**

![Valdez, Alaska. \(Marc Lester/Anchorage Daily

News/MCT\)](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/deepsnowaroundworld1.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)
<img class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/deepsnowaroundworld1.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/deepsnowaroundworld1.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0
400w,
https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/deepsnowaroundworld1.jpg?v=ap&w=980&h=551&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0
800w" >

An example of the incredible snow the Valdez, Alaska, area receives. (Marc
Lester/Anchorage Daily News/MCT)

Colorado leads the pack with the most extreme 24-hour snowfall record in the
Lower 48 states.

If you were 6 feet tall and standing outside for 24 hours in Silver Lake,
Colorado, April 14-15, 1921, you would've been buried by snow from head to
toe. That location saw 6.3 feet (75.8 inches) of snow high in the Rockies at
an elevation of 10,220 feet.

One location in Alaska, however, takes the crown for all 50 states.

Tucked away in the mountains northeast of Valdez, Alaska, is Mile 47 Camp,
which was buried by 78 inches of snow in the 24 hours ending Feb. 9, 1963.
Here, winter storms in the Gulf of Alaska send moisture from the Pacific into
the mountainous terrain, making it an ideal spot for incredible snowfall
totals.

**(MORE:The World's Deepest Snow)**

Three other states have had 24-hour snowfalls exceeding 50 inches, and much
like the top two locations, mountainous terrain also played a role in
squeezing out those extreme totals.

Those states are California (67 inches in the Sierra Nevada), Washington (65
inches in the Cascades) and South Dakota (52 inches in the Black Hills).

### **Recent 24-Hour Snowfall Records Broken**

Five U.S. states have set new 24-hour snowfall records during the past 10
years.

![Snow begins to melt on cars parked at a dealership after a winter storm in

Hartford, Conn., Sunday, Feb. 10, 2013. \(AP Photo/Jessica

Hill\)](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/AP931222777291_980x551.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/AP931222777291_980x551.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/AP931222777291_980x551.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0
400w,
https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/AP931222777291_980x551.jpg?v=ap&w=980&h=551&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0
800w" >

### Hartford, Conn.

Cars buried by snow after Winter Storm Nemo near Hartford, Connecticut, on
Feb. 10, 2013. (AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

Connecticut is the most recent state to rewrite the record books when a
location near Ansonia saw 36 inches Feb. 8-9, 2013. That new benchmark for the
state was set during Winter Storm Nemo, which also hammered several other New
England states with more than a foot of snow.

About two years earlier, Oklahoma set a new 24-hour snowfall record when 27
inches piled up in Spavinaw Feb. 9-10, 2011.

A single spring blizzard in March 2009 propelled two states to new 24-hour
records. Pratt, Kansas, and Follett, Texas, made state history with 30 inches
and 25 inches of snow, respectively, in the 24 hours ending March 28, 2009.

**(MORE:Snowiest Spot in Each State)**

The fifth state to set a new record in the last decade is Nebraska, where 27
inches was measured near Dalton in the 24-hours ending Dec. 21, 2006.

### **More on 24-Hour Snowfall State Records**

Here are some other notables on 24-hour snowfall records in the U.S.

                
                                      *  **Oldest records:** The two records that have stood the longest are 36 inches in Astoria, Illinois, during the 24 hours ending Feb. 28, 1900, and 49 inches at Watertown, New York, Nov. 14-15, 1900.
                      *  **Two states with less than a foot in 24 hours:** Florida and Hawaii are the only two states with record 24-hour snowfall totals of less than one foot. No official records exist, but Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa on Hawaii's Big Island may have seen a foot or more of snow in 24 hours. Florida's record 24-hour snow was 4 inches near Milton, which oddly occurred in early March 1954.
                      *  **Unofficial higher totals in some states:** A few states have unofficial higher snowfall totals not recognized by NOAA. This includes a 55.5 inch total at Alta Guard Station in Utah Jan. 5-6, 1991 and a 54-inch total in New York 's Tug Hill plateau in January 1976. Finally, Louisiana's 24-hour total may be higher than the 13 inches NOAA has for the state. Winter storms in February 1898 and December 1929 may have beaten it out, but data from those storms is not reliable.
                

### **PHOTOS: Deepest Snow in All 50 States**

![Milton, Fla., just northeast of Pensacola, had 4 inches of snow on the

ground on March 6, 1954. It all fell in one day, making it the state's

heaviest one-day snowfall as well. Image: Snow in Ocala on Jan. 9, 2010.

\(iWitness Weather/SONBON\)](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/FL-

ocala-20100109-iw_980x551.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)
<img class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/FL-
ocala-20100109-iw_980x551.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/FL-
ocala-20100109-iw_980x551.jpg?v=at&w=485&h=273&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0
400w, https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/FL-
ocala-20100109-iw_980x551.jpg?v=ap&w=980&h=551&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0
800w" >

1 of 50

### 50. Florida: 4 inches

Milton, Fla., just northeast of Pensacola, had 4 inches of snow on the ground
on March 6, 1954. It all fell in one day, making it the state's heaviest one-
day snowfall as well. Image: Snow in Ocala on Jan. 9, 2010. (iWitness
Weather/SONBON)

The Weather Company’s primary journalistic mission is to report on breaking
weather news, the environment and the importance of science to our lives. This
story does not necessarily represent the position of our parent company, IBM.

## Most Popular

![](https://s.w-x.co/util/image/w/5dc04cc3-98f8-4ea9-8128-b9589f423123.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://s.w-x.co/util/image/w/5dc04cc3-98f8-4ea9-8128-b9589f423123.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720"
srcset="undefined" >

### Cold or Flu? 9 Ways to Tell the Difference

![](https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/fallallergypromomilenaborsgetty.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/fallallergypromomilenaborsgetty.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### Which City Is the Worst for Fall Allergies This Year?

![](https://s.w-x.co/util/image/w/924ba717-81b4-44bb-b14b-c85f931dc950.jpeg?v=at&w=1280&h=720)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://s.w-x.co/util/image/w/924ba717-81b4-44bb-b14b-c85f931dc950.jpeg?v=at&w=1280&h=720"
srcset="undefined" >

### How Winter Fashion Has Changed in 100 Years (PHOTOS)

![](https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/ec4134cd-861f-466e-a1aa-d47e095d5df2.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/ec4134cd-861f-466e-a1aa-d47e095d5df2.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### Eerie Vintage Photos of People Battling the Flu

![](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/061a3f19-07b1-4b75-8edf-75fc14373fcd.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/061a3f19-07b1-4b75-8edf-75fc14373fcd.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### Real vs. Fake Christmas Trees: Which is Better for the Environment?

![](https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/gettyimages-152076114_0.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/gettyimages-152076114_0.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### Mesmerizing Vintage Photos of U.S. Drug Stores

![](https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/eshima1.jpeg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/eshima1.jpeg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### World's Weirdest Bridges (PHOTOS)

![](https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/mahobeach3_0.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com/util/image/w/mahobeach3_0.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### World's Scariest Airport Runways (PHOTOS)

![](https://s.w-x.co/util/image/w/cellphones_0.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://s.w-x.co/util/image/w/cellphones_0.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720"
srcset="undefined" >

### The Germiest Public Places

![](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/21593aaa-a3b0-4b05-b8c7-6156d59f8551.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/21593aaa-a3b0-4b05-b8c7-6156d59f8551.jpg?v=at&w=1280&h=720&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### 25 Worst U.S. Cities for the Flu (PHOTOS)

##

On OurRadar

THE NEWSLETTER

Sign up to receive storm updates in our FREE daily newsletter.

## NBC News Headlines

![](https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/whale-

japan.jpg?v=at&w=320&h=180&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0)<img
class="styles__noscript__2rw2y"
src="https://dsx.weather.com//util/image/w/whale-
japan.jpg?v=at&w=320&h=180&api=7db9fe61-7414-47b5-9871-e17d87b8b6a0"
srcset="undefined" >

### Japan To Hunt For 333 Whales

### A Breakthrough For Car Batteries?

### Beijing Smog Reaches New Level

### More Fun for Astronauts?

![The Weather Company, an IBM Business; The Weather Channel;

Wunderground](/weather/assets/footer/twc-logo-lockup.png)

                
                                      * Feedback
                      * Careers
                      * Download Apps
                      * Press Room
                      * Advertise With Us
                      * TV
                      * Newsletters and Alerts
                
                      *  **Terms of Use**
                      *  **Privacy Policy**
                      *  **Parental Controls**
                      *  **Ad Choices**
                      *  **Ad Partners**
                      *  **Analytics Partners**
                      *  **Data Rights**
                      * ![Georgia Org](/weather/assets/footer/georgia-logo-compressor.png)
                

© Copyright TWC Product and Technology LLC 2014, 2019

Powered by the![](/weather/assets/footer/cloud_logo@2x.png)IBM Cloud

![](/weather/assets/footer/bureau_banner_desktop.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

