

~~~~~~~~~~~~

                
                                      *           * News
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Strange News
                      * Animals
                      * History
                      * Culture
                      * Space
                      * ________
                

Live Science

* * *
                
                                      * News
                      * Tech
                      * Health
                      * Planet Earth
                      * Strange News
                      * Animals
                      * History
                      * Culture
                      * Space
                

Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History
Culture Space __ ____

__

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * Live Science
                      * Planet Earth
                

# Humans Are to Blame for Earth's Rapidly Melting Glaciers

By Laura Geggel, Staff Writer | August 14, 2014 02:01pm ET

                
                                      *           *           *           *           *           * MORE
                

![Humans Are to Blame for Earth's Rapidly Melting

Glaciers](https://img.purch.com/rc/300x200/aHR0cDovL3d3dy5saXZlc2NpZW5jZS5jb20vaW1hZ2VzL2kvMDAwLzA2OS8yODYvb3JpZ2luYWwvTWVsdGluZy1HbGFjaWVyLmpwZw==)

Human influence is melting glaciers, including the Artesonraju Glacier in
Peru.

Credit: Ben Marzeion

The steady melt of glacial ice around the world is largely due to man-made
factors, such as greenhouse-gas emissions and aerosols, a new study finds.

Humans have caused roughly a quarter of the globe's glacial loss between 1851
and 2010, and about 69 percent of glacial melting between 1991 and 2010, the
study suggests.

"In a sense, we got a confirmation that by now, it is really mostly humans
that are responsible for the melting glaciers," said lead researcher Ben
Marzeion, an associate professor of meteorology and geophysics at the
University of Innsbruck in Austria. [Images of Melt: See Earth's Vanishing
Ice]

Vanishing glaciers are often associated with global warming, and other studies
have estimated past ice loss and made projections of future melt. But until
now, researchers were unsure how much glacial loss was tied to human factors.

"So far, it has been unclear how much of the observed mass losses are caused
by humans rather than natural climate variations," Regine Hock, a professor of
geophysics at the University of Alaska Fairbanks who was not involved in the
study, wrote an in email to Live Science.

The researchers used "state-of-the art modeling techniques," in their work,
Hock said.

The research team relied on 12 climate models, most of them from the latest
reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an international
group of climate-change experts convened by the United Nations. By combining
the models, along with data from the Randolph Glacier Inventory (a catalog of
nearly 200,000 glaciers), the researchers created a computer model that
included only natural contributions to glacier melt, such as volcanic
eruptions and solar variability, and another model with both human and natural
factors.

Using data from 1851 to 2010, the researchers compared the two models with
real measurements of glaciers to determine which one better represented
reality. The study did not include glaciers in Antarctica, because not enough
data on the region was available during the 159 years covered by the study.

The model with the man-made influences was a better fit, they found.

"Glaciers thin and retreat around the world as a result of rising air
temperature, but the glaciers don't care whether or not the increase in
temperature is due to natural or human causes," Hock said. "Over the last 150
years, most of the mass loss was due to natural climate variability, caused,
for example, by volcanic eruptions or changes in solar activity.

"However, during the last 20 years, almost 70 percent of the glacier mass
changes were caused by climate change due to humans," she wrote.

Interestingly, the study found that glaciers, which are slow to react to
climate change, are still recovering from the end of the Little Ice Age that
lasted from the 14th to the 19th centuries. During the Little Ice Age,
temperatures were about 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit (1 degree Celsius) colder than
they are today.

Warmer temperatures after the Little Ice Age affected the glaciers.
"Essentially, what we find is that glaciers would be melting without any human
influence," Marzeion told Live Science.

The melt, however, would not be happening as quickly as it is today if it
weren't for man-made contributions, such as aerosols from wood or coal fires,
he said. Aerosols are particles suspended in the atmosphere that absorb and
scatter the sun's radiation.

Even if climate change from both man-made and natural causes stopped today,
the glaciers would continue to melt and are projected to raise ocean levels by
2.7 inches (7 centimeters) during this century, Marzeion said.

As global temperatures continue to rise, the glaciers will continue to
disappear. The melt may provide more water for irrigation and other needs, but
it won't be sustainable because the glaciers may eventually vanish, Marzeion
said. In the meantime, people can try to reduce man-made contributions to
global warming and adapt to the changing planet, he said.

The study was published online today (Aug. 14) in the journal Science.

_Follow Laura Geggel on Twitter_ _@LauraGeggel _ _and_ _Google+_ _. Follow
Live Science_ _@livescience_ _,_ _Facebook_ _  & __Google+ __. Original
article onLive Science. _

### You'd Also Like

                
                                      * #### Glaciers in European Alps Could Disappear by 2100
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Humans Have Caused the Most Dramatic Climate Change in 3 Million Years
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### Giant Void Hidden Under Antarctica’s Ice Threatens Vast Glacier
                

LiveScience __

                
                                      * #### The Greenland Ice Sheet Is Melting at Astonishing Rate
                

LiveScience __

Science Newsletter: Subscribe

Submit

Follow Us

Most Popular

                
                                      1. Pregnant Women Who Eat More Fiber May Lower Child's Celiac Risk
                
                      2. Please Do Not Feed These Tweezer-Beaked, Hopping Rats Peanut Butter!!!
                
                      3. Can Physicists Really Save Schrödinger’s Cat?
                
                      4. Mysterious 'Bridge' of Radio Waves Between Galaxies Seems to Be Smashing the Laws of Physics (But It’s Not)
                
                      5. These First Americans Vanished Without a Trace — But Hints of Them Linger
                

HomeAbout Us

Company

                
                                      * Company Info
                      * About Us
                      * Contact Us
                      * Advertise with Us
                      * Using Our Content
                      * Licensing & Reprints
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Copyright Policy
                      * Privacy Policy
                

Network

                
                                      * Top Ten Reviews
                      * Tom's Guide
                      * Laptop Mag
                      * Tom's Hardware
                      * Space.com
                      * Live Science
                      * AnandTech
                      * Dignifyed
                

FOLLOW US

Subscribe SUBMIT

![Purch](https://www.livescience.com/resources/img/purch-logo.png?5dba563)

Copyright (C) All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

