

×

×

                
                                      * Opinion
                      * Features
                      * Speed Reads
                      * 5 THINGS TO KNOW
                      * Popular
                      * Authors
                      * Magazine
                
                      * World
                      * U.S.
                      * Politics
                      * Business
                      * Tech
                      * Science
                      * Arts
                      * Books
                      * Life
                      * Photos
                      * Video
                      * Cartoons
                      * Puzzles
                      * Newsletters
                      * Authors
                

Special reports: THE IDEA FACTORY LIFE AFTER WORK

Menu

×

                
                                      * Subscribe & save
                      * Give a gift
                      * Digital subscription
                

![Image](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

SUBSCRIBE

![](/bundles/twsite/images/speedreads-page-logo-small.png)

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=13765220&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![](/bundles/twsite/images/speedreads-page-logo-small.png)

                
                                      * ![An iceberg is seen off Ammassalik Island in Eastern Greenland.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

The ozone layer appears to be successfully repairing itself

November 7, 2018

                
                                      * ![Joe Biden.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

Joe Biden says he can 'no longer support' the Hyde Amendment

9:16 p.m.

                
                                      * ![Cars on a Los Angeles freeway.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

Automakers tell Trump deregulatory efforts could lead to instability, lower
profits

8:35 p.m.

                
                                      * ![A beach in the Dominican Republic.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

Autopsies show Americans who died at Dominican Republic sister resorts
sustained internal trauma

7:19 p.m.

                
                                      * ![The US Women's National Soccer Team.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

US women's soccer is ranked No. 1 going into the World Cup. Here's another
reason you should watch them.

5:25 p.m.

                
                                      * ![President Trump.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

U.S. reportedly considers delaying Trump's Mexico tariffs

4:11 p.m.

                
                                      * ![Jerry Nadler.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

Democrats are looking to speed up the process of enforcing their subpoenas

3:22 p.m.

                
                                      * ![President Trump.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)
                

##

GOP senators want Trump to take back his Mexico tariffs. He says they 'have no
idea what they’re talking about.'

2:55 p.m.

See More Speed Reads

It wasn't all bad

Edit

##

The ozone layer appears to be successfully repairing itself

November 7, 2018

![An iceberg is seen off Ammassalik Island in Eastern

Greenland.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

AP Photo/John McConnico, File

Here's proof that when countries work together, good things happen.

In 1985, scientists discovered a huge hole in the ozone layer above the South
Pole. The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun's ultraviolet radiation, which
can cause skin cancer and damage crops. Man-made chemicals called
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) eat at the ozone layer, and in the late 1980s, 180
countries signed the Montreal Protocol, agreeing to phase out CFCs in order to
prevent additional holes from forming.

A new United Nations report says that the ozone layer is healing itself, and
by the 2030s, the Northern Hemisphere could be fully repaired, with Antarctica
following in the 2060s. The problem is not entirely solved — some parts of the
ozone layer are not yet repaired, and scientists are concerned some
unregulated chemicals that contain chlorine could slow down the healing
process — but this is still "really good news," Paul Newman, the report's co-
chairman and chief Earth scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, told
BBC News. "If ozone-depleting substances had continued to increase, we would
have seen huge effects. We stopped that." _Catherine Garcia_

reversing course

Edit

##

Joe Biden says he can 'no longer support' the Hyde Amendment

9:16 p.m.

![Joe Biden.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

Scott Eisen/Getty Images

Former Vice President Joe Biden announced on Thursday night that he has
reversed course, and thinks the Hyde Amendment should be repealed.

"We now see so many Republican governors denying health care to millions of
the poorest and most vulnerable Americans by refusing even Medicaid
expansion," the 2020 Democratic presidential candidate said during an
appearance in Atlanta. "I can't justify leaving millions of women without
access to the care they need and the ability to exercise their
constitutionally-protected right. If I believe health care is a right, as I
do, I can no longer support an amendment that makes that right dependent on
someone's ZIP code."

The Hyde Amendment prohibits the use of federal funds to pay for abortions,
except in cases of rape, incest, or when a woman's life is in jeopardy. Biden
is Catholic, and earlier this week said again that while he believes _Roe v.
Wade_ should be upheld, he also was in favor of the Hyde Amendment. Several of
his fellow Democratic candidates made statements slamming the amendment,
including Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.).
_Catherine Garcia_

that's not good

Edit

##

Automakers tell Trump deregulatory efforts could lead to instability, lower
profits

8:35 p.m.

![Cars on a Los Angeles freeway.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

David McNew/Getty Images

Ford, General Motors, Toyota, and 14 other automakers sent President Trump a
letter on Thursday, telling him if he goes through with his plan to rollback
Obama-era pollution regulations, it could lower their profits and cause an
"extended period of litigation and instability," _The New York Times_ reports.

The Trump administration is expected to announce this summer that it is
eliminating most of Obama's auto pollution regulations, including an ambitious
plan to increase mileage standards to 54.5 miles per gallon by 2025.
California and other states have said they will sue and still enact their own
stricter rules, and in their letter, the automakers told Trump they "strongly
believe the best path to preserve good auto jobs and keep new vehicles
affordable for more Americans is a final rule supported by all parties —
including California."

The automakers do not want to have to manufacture cars for two different U.S.
markets, and also sent a letter to California Gov. Gavin Newsom (D), telling
him they would like to see something "midway" between Obama's rules and
Trump's proposal. "Our thinking is, the rule is still being finalized, there
is still time to develop a final rule that is good for consumers,
policymakers, and automakers," Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers Vice
President Gloria Bergquist told the _Times_.

Early in the Trump administration, several executives in Detroit asked Trump
to ease some of the regulations, but did not expect him to go as far as he
did, the _Times_ reports. _Catherine Garcia_

mysterious deaths

Edit

##

Autopsies show Americans who died at Dominican Republic sister resorts
sustained internal trauma

7:19 p.m.

![A beach in the Dominican Republic.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

Erika Santelices/AFP/Getty Images

Authorities in the Dominican Republic are investigating whether the mysterious
deaths of three American tourists at hotels owned by the same company are
related.

Miranda Schaup-Werner, 41, from Pennsylvania died May 25 at the Luxury Bahia
Principe Bouganville in San Pedro de Macoris. Officials said she started to
feel sick while in her room, and was dead just two hours later. Cynthia Ann
Day, 49, and Nathaniel Edwards Holmes, 63, of Maryland were staying at the
Grand Bahia Principe La Romana next door, and resort staff found their bodies
inside their room on May 30, after worried relatives called and said they
hadn't returned home.

The Dominican government released autopsy details on Thursday, revealing that
all three Americans had internal hemorrhaging, pulmonary edema, and enlarged
hearts. A U.S. State Department official told _The Washington Post_
authorities have not yet found a definitive link between the deaths.
Toxicology reports are pending, and Dominican officials said they are waiting
to see if Schaup-Werner, Day, and Holmes all ingested something that led to
their deaths. _Catherine Garcia_

a whole lot of goals going on

Edit

##

US women's soccer is ranked No. 1 going into the World Cup. Here's another
reason you should watch them.

5:25 p.m.

![The US Women's National Soccer Team.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

Mike Lawrie/Getty Images

There's just as much going on off the World Cup field as there is on it.

The FIFA Women's World Cup starts on Friday in Paris, with the home team
facing off against South Korea at 3 p.m. ET. Team USA, meanwhile, doesn't have
its first match until Tuesday, but following their fight for fair pay can keep
fans busy in the meantime.

No matter whose World Cup projections you look at, the U.S. women tend to come
out on top. They're 2015's defending champions, they're currently first in
FIFA's world rankings, and they have a chart-topping 7-4 odds to take home
this year's title. Those accolades come as no surprise seeing as America has
top-tier, longtime players including Carli Lloyd, Alex Morgan, and Megan
Rapinoe leading the way. Still, ___FiveThirtyEight_ 's rankings do suggest
France has a slightly higher chance of winning the cup, and Germany and
England could sneak in a surprise win as well.

Behind the scenes, the American women are also fighting an absurdly obvious
pay gap. Their World Cup-winning coach made less than a tenth of what the
men's team coach did in 2017, despite the men's coach being fired the year
before. That's one of the many reasons why players sued the U.S. Soccer
Federation for gender discrimination in March. And it seems the gap extends
around the globe, because whichever team wins this year's world cup will only
bring home $4 million — just a fraction of the $38 million France's men's team
received when they claimed the World Cup last year. _Kathryn Krawczyk_

Let's make a deal

Edit

##

U.S. reportedly considers delaying Trump's Mexico tariffs

4:11 p.m.

![President Trump.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

Sean Gallup/Getty Images

The U.S. and Mexico could be close to a potential deal with days left to go
until President Trump's proposed tariffs would go into effect.

_Bloomberg_ reports that the U.S. is considering delaying Trump's tariffs on
Mexico, which he threatened to put into effect starting on June 10 and "until
such time as illegal migrants coming through Mexico, and into our country,
STOP." The tariff would "gradually increase until the Illegal Immigration
problem is remedied," Trump said.

As officials from the U.S. and Mexico continue to hold talks, _Bloomberg_
reports that Mexico is "pushing for more time to negotiate" because it's
concerned an agreement won't be able to be reached before the tariffs go into
effect.

_The Washington Post_ reports, though, that officials are discussing "the
outlines of a deal" under which Mexico would deploy up to 6,000 National Guard
troops to its border with Guatemala. Officials from the two countries are also
discussing asylum rule changes to require Central Americans seek refuge in the
first foreign country they enter.

It remains unclear whether this deal, which the _Post_ stresses isn't final
and might not be accepted, will be enough for Trump to step off his threat,
but _Bloomberg_ cites a U.S. official as saying at least the initial 5 percent
tariffs going into effect is still the most likely outcome. _Brendan Morrow_

stepping it up

Edit

##

Democrats are looking to speed up the process of enforcing their subpoenas

3:22 p.m.

![Jerry Nadler.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

Stephanie Keith/Getty Images

House Democrats have introduced a resolution to hold Attorney General William
Barr and former White House counsel Don McGahn in contempt — and while they're
at it, they're looking to make enforcing subpoenas against Trump
administration officials easier.

A resolution to be voted on next week will empower committee chairs to enforce
subpoenas in court and hold officials in contempt without a full House floor
vote, with the hope being to "expedite" the process and "avoid repeated
contempt votes on the House floor," CNN reports.

This proposal would still require committee chairs to receive approval from a
bipartisan panel of House leaders, although this group is Democratically-
controlled, _Politico_reports. The resolution says that a vote taken by this
Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group to authorize litigation "is the equivalent of
a vote of the full House of Representatives," and _Politico_ writes it will
not only "speed up the House's ability" to respond to the White House but also
give Democrats "sweeping authority" to "engage directly" with the
administration in court.

This comes as the White House has repeatedly rebuffed Congress' subpoenas,
with Barr not providing Democrats with a copy of Special Counsel Robert
Mueller's full, unredacted report and McGahn not providing Congress with
testimony. It also comes as two more former White House officials have been
instructed to ignore congressional subpoenas: Hope Hicks, former White House
director of communications, and Annie Donaldson, McGahn's former chief of
staff. House Intelligence Chairman Adam Schiff (D-Calif.) argued to CNN that
as a result, this move is "regrettably very necessary." _Brendan Morrow_

i'm right you're wrong

Edit

##

GOP senators want Trump to take back his Mexico tariffs. He says they 'have no
idea what they’re talking about.'

2:55 p.m.

![President Trump.](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images

President Trump's tariffs are apparently not just a threat.

Trump on Thursday affirmed that his 5 percent tariff on Mexico will take
effect on June 10, even as the country's foreign ministers continue
discussions in Washington, D.C., to avoid them. "Something dramatic might
happen," Trump said, referring to the talks, but added that until then, "we've
told Mexico the tariffs go on."

Trump promised last week that he'd place a 5 percent tariff on Mexico's goods
until they curbed undocumented immigrants from crossing their border, saying
it would increase by 5 percent every month until October, remaining at 25
percent until the problem was solved. Mexico's foreign minister has since
arrived in Washington, and seems optimistic that Trump will change his mind.
Yet after talks started Wednesday, Vice President Mike Pence still indicated
that "we need Mexico to do more" before Trump changes his mind.

The tariff move isn't even popular among Trump's own party, with a swarm of
GOP senators saying tariffs would only hurt the American economy. But those
opponents "have no idea what they're talking about when it comes to tariffs,"
Trump said Thursday.

Trump also said "a lot of interesting things are happening" in his ongoing
talks to craft a trade deal with China. He launched new tariffs on $200
billion worth of Chinese goods about a month ago, but said Thursday "we're
getting 25 percent on $250 billion, and I can go up another at least $300
billion." _Kathryn Krawczyk_

See More Speed Reads

![Image](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

                
                                      * More about The Week
                      * Subscribe
                      * Subscriber login
                      * Give a gift
                      * Classroom subscriptions
                      * Newsletters
                      * RSS
                      * Privacy policy
                      * Subscribe
                      * Subscriber login
                      * Give a gift
                      * Classroom subscriptions
                      * Newsletters
                      * RSS
                      * Privacy policy
                
                      * Terms & conditions
                      * The Week UK
                      * Customer service
                      * Contact us
                      * Ad info
                      * Terms & conditions
                      * The Week UK
                      * Customer service
                      * Contact us
                      * Ad info
                

![Image](/bundles/twsite/images/empty-src.png)

® 2019 The Week Publications Inc., All rights reserved.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=617607501642362&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

