

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

                
                                      * Comments & replies 
                      * Public profile 
                      * Account details 
                      * Emails & marketing
                

* * *
                
                                      * Membership 
                      * Contributions 
                      * Subscriptions
                

* * *
                
                                      * Sign out
                

Search

                
                                      * switch to the  International edition 
                      * switch to the  UK edition 
                      * switch to the  US edition 
                      * switch to the  Australia edition
                

current edition: International edition

                
                                      * News 
                      * Opinion 
                      * Sport 
                      * Culture 
                      * Lifestyle
                

Show More __

                
                                      * __News
                        * World news 
                        * UK news 
                        * Science 
                        * Cities 
                        * Global development 
                        * Football 
                        * Tech 
                        * Business 
                        * Environment 
                        * Obituaries 
                      * __Opinion
                        * The Guardian view 
                        * Columnists 
                        * Cartoons 
                        * Opinion videos 
                        * Letters 
                      * __Sport
                        * Football 
                        * Cricket 
                        * Rugby union 
                        * Tennis 
                        * Cycling 
                        * F1 
                        * Golf 
                        * US sports 
                      * __Culture
                        * Books 
                        * Music 
                        * TV & radio 
                        * Art & design 
                        * Film 
                        * Games 
                        * Classical 
                        * Stage 
                      * __Lifestyle
                        * Fashion 
                        * Food 
                        * Recipes 
                        * Love & sex 
                        * Health & fitness 
                        * Home & garden 
                        * Women 
                        * Men 
                        * Family 
                        * Travel 
                        * Money
                

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

                
                                      * Make a contribution 
                      * Subscribe 
                      * __International edition
                        * switch to the  UK edition 
                        * switch to the  US edition 
                        * switch to the  Australia edition 
                      * Search jobs 
                      * Dating 
                      * Holidays 
                      * Digital Archive 
                      * Discount Codes 
                      * The Guardian app 
                      * Video 
                      * Podcasts 
                      * Pictures 
                      * Newsletters 
                      * Today's paper 
                      * Inside the Guardian 
                      * The Observer 
                      * Guardian Weekly 
                      * Crosswords 
                      * Facebook 
                      * Twitter 
                      * Search jobs 
                      * Dating 
                      * Holidays 
                      * Digital Archive 
                      * Discount Codes
                
                      * Environment 
                      * Climate change 
                      * Wildlife 
                      * Energy 
                      * Pollution
                

More

Farming

This article is more than **1 year old**

# Avoiding meat and dairy is ‘single biggest way’ to reduce your impact on

Earth

This article is more than **1 year old**

Biggest analysis to date reveals huge footprint of livestock - it provides
just 18% of calories but takes up 83% of farmland

Damian Carrington Environment editor

@dpcarrington

Thu 31 May 2018 19.00 BST Last modified on Fri 3 May 2019 11.44 BST

                
                                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share via Email
                

![Cattle at an illegal settlement in the Jamanxim National Forest, state of

Para, northern Brazil, November 29, 2009. With 1,3 million hectares, the

Jamanxim National Forest is today a microsm that replicates what happens in

the Amazon, where thousands of hectares of land are prey of illegal

woodcutters, stock breeders and gold

miners.](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/f973363bf5156a8382a55a865ff8c8befb5c83f7/112_0_3829_2297/master/3829.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=d2d439d8d2068a8aa4cbeb48df5b2045)

Cattle at an illegal settlement in the Jamanxim National Forest, state of
Para, northern Brazil, November 29, 2009. With 1,3 million hectares, the
Jamanxim National Forest is today a microsm that replicates what happens in
the Amazon, where thousands of hectares of land are prey of illegal
woodcutters, stock breeders and gold miners. Photograph: Antonio
Scorza/AFP/Getty Images

Avoiding meat and dairy products is the single biggest way to reduce your
environmental impact on the planet, according to the scientists behind the
most comprehensive analysis to date of the damage farming does to the planet.

The new research shows that without meat and dairy consumption, global
farmland use could be reduced by more than 75% – an area equivalent to the US,
China, European Union and Australia combined – and still feed the world. Loss
of wild areas to agriculture is the leading cause of the current mass
extinction of wildlife.

The new analysis shows that while meat and dairy provide just 18% of calories
and 37% of protein, it uses the vast majority – 83% – of farmland and produces
60% of agriculture’s greenhouse gas emissions. Other recent research shows 86%
of all land mammals are now livestock or humans. The scientists also found
that even the very lowest impact meat and dairy products still cause much more
environmental harm than the least sustainable vegetable and cereal growing.

Meat and dairy

The study, published in the journal Science, created a huge dataset based on
almost 40,000 farms in 119 countries and covering 40 food products that
represent 90% of all that is eaten. It assessed the full impact of these
foods, from farm to fork, on land use, climate change emissions, freshwater
use and water pollution (eutrophication) and air pollution (acidification).

“A vegan diet is probably the single biggest way to reduce your impact on
planet Earth, not just greenhouse gases, but global acidification,
eutrophication, land use and water use,” said Joseph Poore, at the University
of Oxford, UK, who led the research. “It is far bigger than cutting down on
your flights or buying an electric car,” he said, as these only cut greenhouse
gas emissions.

## Humans just 0.01% of all life but have destroyed 83% of wild mammals –

study

Read more

“Agriculture is a sector that spans all the multitude of environmental
problems,” he said. “Really it is animal products that are responsible for so
much of this. Avoiding consumption of animal products delivers far better
environmental benefits than trying to purchase sustainable meat and dairy.”

The analysis also revealed a huge variability between different ways of
producing the same food. For example, beef cattle raised on deforested land
result in 12 times more greenhouse gases and use 50 times more land than those
grazing rich natural pasture. But the comparison of beef with plant protein
such as peas is stark, with even the lowest impact beef responsible for six
times more greenhouse gases and 36 times more land.

Greenhouse gas emissions for meat, dairy and pulses

The large variability in environmental impact from different farms does
present an opportunity for reducing the harm, Poore said, without needing the
global population to become vegan. If the most harmful half of meat and dairy
production was replaced by plant-based food, this still delivers about two-
thirds of the benefits of getting rid of all meat and dairy production.

Cutting the environmental impact of farming is not easy, Poore warned: “There
are over 570m farms all of which need slightly different ways to reduce their
impact. It is an [environmental] challenge like no other sector of the
economy.” But he said at least $500bn is spent every year on agricultural
subsidies, and probably much more: “There is a lot of money there to do
something really good with.”

Labels that reveal the impact of products would be a good start, so consumers
could choose the least damaging options, he said, but subsidies for
sustainable and healthy foods and taxes on meat and dairy will probably also
be necessary.

One surprise from the work was the large impact of freshwater fish farming,
which provides two-thirds of such fish in Asia and 96% in Europe, and was
thought to be relatively environmentally friendly. “You get all these fish
depositing excreta and unconsumed feed down to the bottom of the pond, where
there is barely any oxygen, making it the perfect environment for methane
production,” a potent greenhouse gas, Poore said.

The research also found grass-fed beef, thought to be relatively low impact,
was still responsible for much higher impacts than plant-based food.
“Converting grass into [meat] is like converting coal to energy. It comes with
an immense cost in emissions,” Poore said.

The new research has received strong praise from other food experts. Prof
Gidon Eshel, at Bard College, US, said: “I was awestruck. It is really
important, sound, ambitious, revealing and beautifully done.”

He said previous work on quantifying farming’s impacts, including his own, had
taken a top-down approach using national level data, but the new work used a
bottom-up approach, with farm-by-farm data. “It is very reassuring to see they
yield essentially the same results. But the new work has very many important
details that are profoundly revealing.”

## Giving up beef will reduce carbon footprint more than cars, says expert

Read more

Prof Tim Benton, at the University of Leeds, UK, said: “This is an immensely
useful study. It brings together a huge amount of data and that makes its
conclusions much more robust. The way we produce food, consume and waste food
is unsustainable from a planetary perspective. Given the global obesity
crisis, changing diets – eating less livestock produce and more vegetables and
fruit – has the potential to make both us and the planet healthier.”

Dr Peter Alexander, at the University of Edinburgh, UK, was also impressed but
noted: “There may be environmental benefits, eg for biodiversity, from
sustainably managed grazing and increasing animal product consumption may
improve nutrition for some of the poorest globally. My personal opinion is we
should interpret these results not as the need to become vegan overnight, but
rather to moderate our [meat] consumption.”

Poore said: “The reason I started this project was to understand if there were
sustainable animal producers out there. But I have stopped consuming animal
products over the last four years of this project. These impacts are not
necessary to sustain our current way of life. The question is how much can we
reduce them and the answer is a lot.”

Topics

                
                                      * Farming
                
                      * Food (Environment) 
                      * The meat industry 
                      * Meat 
                      * Veganism 
                      * Food (global) 
                      * Greenhouse gas emissions 
                      * news
                
                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share via Email
                      * Share on LinkedIn
                      * Share on Pinterest
                      * Share on WhatsApp
                      * Share on Messenger
                
                      * Reuse this content
                

## View all comments >

Order by

                
                                      * newest
                      * oldest
                      * recommendations
                

Show 25

                
                                      * 25
                      * 50
                      * 100
                      * All
                

Threads

                
                                      * collapsed
                      * expanded
                      * unthreaded
                

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## Most popular

                
                                      * Environment 
                      * Climate change 
                      * Wildlife 
                      * Energy 
                      * Pollution
                
                      * Contact us
                      * Complaints & corrections
                      * SecureDrop
                      * Work for us
                      * Privacy policy
                      * Cookie policy
                      * Terms & conditions
                      * Help
                      * All topics
                      * All writers
                      * Digital newspaper archive
                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Advertise with us
                      * Search UK jobs
                      * Dating
                      * Discount Codes
                

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Farming%2CFood%2CThe+meat+industry%2CMeat%2CVeganism%2CEnvironment%2CFood%2CLife+and+style%2CWorld+news%2CGreenhouse+gas+emissions%2CWater)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married

