

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

                
                                      * Comments & replies 
                      * Public profile 
                      * Account details 
                      * Emails & marketing
                

* * *
                
                                      * Membership 
                      * Contributions 
                      * Subscriptions
                

* * *
                
                                      * Sign out
                

Search

                
                                      * switch to the  International edition 
                      * switch to the  UK edition 
                      * switch to the  US edition 
                      * switch to the  Australia edition
                

current edition: International edition

                
                                      * News 
                      * Opinion 
                      * Sport 
                      * Culture 
                      * Lifestyle
                

Show More __

                
                                      * __News
                        * World news 
                        * UK news 
                        * Science 
                        * Cities 
                        * Global development 
                        * Football 
                        * Tech 
                        * Business 
                        * Environment 
                        * Obituaries 
                      * __Opinion
                        * The Guardian view 
                        * Columnists 
                        * Cartoons 
                        * Opinion videos 
                        * Letters 
                      * __Sport
                        * Football 
                        * Cricket 
                        * Rugby union 
                        * Tennis 
                        * Cycling 
                        * F1 
                        * Golf 
                        * US sports 
                      * __Culture
                        * Books 
                        * Music 
                        * TV & radio 
                        * Art & design 
                        * Film 
                        * Games 
                        * Classical 
                        * Stage 
                      * __Lifestyle
                        * Fashion 
                        * Food 
                        * Recipes 
                        * Love & sex 
                        * Health & fitness 
                        * Home & garden 
                        * Women 
                        * Men 
                        * Family 
                        * Travel 
                        * Money
                

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

                
                                      * Make a contribution 
                      * Subscribe 
                      * __International edition
                        * switch to the  UK edition 
                        * switch to the  US edition 
                        * switch to the  Australia edition 
                      * Search jobs 
                      * Dating 
                      * Holidays 
                      * Digital Archive 
                      * Discount Codes 
                      * The Guardian app 
                      * Video 
                      * Podcasts 
                      * Pictures 
                      * Newsletters 
                      * Today's paper 
                      * Inside the Guardian 
                      * The Observer 
                      * Guardian Weekly 
                      * Crosswords 
                      * Facebook 
                      * Twitter 
                      * Search jobs 
                      * Dating 
                      * Holidays 
                      * Digital Archive 
                      * Discount Codes
                
                      * Environment 
                      * Climate change 
                      * Wildlife 
                      * Energy 
                      * Pollution
                

More

Food

This article is more than **9 years old**

# UN urges global move to meat and dairy-free diet

This article is more than **9 years old**

Lesser consumption of animal products is necessary to save the world from the
worst impacts of climate change, UN report says

Felicity Carus

Wed 2 Jun 2010 18.09 BST First published on Wed 2 Jun 2010 18.09 BST

                
                                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share via Email
                

![a cattle farm at Estancia Bahia, Mato Grosso in

Brazil](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-

images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2009/6/11/1244736884961/a-cattle-farm-at-

Estancia-002.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=3155532b8fc07abb776d5d176f4704b3)

An cattle ranch in Mato Grosso, Brazil. The UN says agriculture is on a par
with fossil fuel consumption because both rise rapidly with increased economic
growth. Photograph: Daniel Beltra/Greenpeace

A global shift towards a vegan diet is vital to save the world from hunger,
fuel poverty and the worst impacts of climate change, a UN report said today.

As the global population surges towards a predicted 9.1 billion people by
2050, western tastes for diets rich in meat and dairy products are
unsustainable, says the report from United Nations Environment Programme’s
(UNEP) international panel of sustainable resource management.

It says: “Impacts from agriculture are expected to increase substantially due
to population growth increasing consumption of animal products. Unlike fossil
fuels, it is difficult to look for alternatives: people have to eat. A
substantial reduction of impacts would only be possible with a substantial
worldwide diet change, away from animal products.”

Professor Edgar Hertwich, the lead author of the report, said: “Animal
products cause more damage than [producing] construction minerals such as sand
or cement, plastics or metals. Biomass and crops for animals are as damaging
as [burning] fossil fuels.”

The recommendation follows advice last year that a vegetarian diet was better
for the planet from Lord Nicholas Stern, former adviser to the Labour
government on the economics of climate change. Dr Rajendra Pachauri, chair of
the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), has also urged
people to observe one meat-free day a week to curb carbon emissions.

The panel of experts ranked products, resources, economic activities and
transport according to their environmental impacts. Agriculture was on a par
with fossil fuel consumption because both rise rapidly with increased economic
growth, they said.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest

Do you have to be a vegan to help fix climate change?

Ernst von Weizsaecker, an environmental scientist who co-chaired the panel,
said: “Rising affluence is triggering a shift in diets towards meat and dairy
products - livestock now consumes much of the world’s crops and by inference a
great deal of freshwater, fertilisers and pesticides.”

Both energy and agriculture need to be “decoupled” from economic growth
because environmental impacts rise roughly 80% with a doubling of income, the
report found.

Achim Steiner, the UN under-secretary general and executive director of the
UNEP, said: “Decoupling growth from environmental degradation is the number
one challenge facing governments in a world of rising numbers of people,
rising incomes, rising consumption demands and the persistent challenge of
poverty alleviation.”

The panel, which drew on numerous studies including the Millennium ecosystem
assessment, cites the following pressures on the environment as priorities for
governments around the world: climate change, habitat change, wasteful use of
nitrogen and phosphorus in fertilisers, over-exploitation of fisheries,
forests and other resources, invasive species, unsafe drinking water and
sanitation, lead exposure, urban air pollution and occupational exposure to
particulate matter.

Agriculture, particularly meat and dairy products, accounts for 70% of global
freshwater consumption, 38% of the total land use and 19% of the world’s
greenhouse gas emissions, says the report, which has been launched to coincide
with UN World Environment day on Saturday.

Last year the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation said that food production
would have to increase globally by 70% by 2050 to feed the world’s surging
population. The panel says that efficiency gains in agriculture will be
overwhelmed by the expected population growth.

Prof Hertwich, who is also the director of the industrial ecology programme at
the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, said that developing
countries – where much of this population growth will take place – must not
follow the western world’s pattern of increasing consumption: “Developing
countries should not follow our model. But it’s up to us to develop the
technologies in, say, renewable energy or irrigation methods.”

Topics

                
                                      * Food
                
                      * Climate change 
                      * Greenhouse gas emissions 
                      * The meat industry 
                      * Agriculture 
                      * Population 
                      * United Nations 
                      * news
                
                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share via Email
                      * Share on LinkedIn
                      * Share on Pinterest
                      * Share on WhatsApp
                      * Share on Messenger
                
                      * Reuse this content
                

## View all comments >

Order by

                
                                      * newest
                      * oldest
                      * recommendations
                

Show 25

                
                                      * 25
                      * 50
                      * 100
                      * All
                

Threads

                
                                      * collapsed
                      * expanded
                      * unthreaded
                

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## more on this story

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Environment/Pix/pictures/2014/4/24/1398352137743/Herd-of-cattle-with-calve-009.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=5a014f8f1b74e89a6aeacd2ac611673b)
                

### Halving meat and dairy consumption could slash farming emissions

Adopting a 'demitarian' diet would lead to a 25-40% reduction in nitrogen
emissions from agriculture in Europe, report shows

Published: 25 Apr 2014

Halving meat and dairy consumption could slash farming emissions

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/About/General/2009/10/27/1256608938533/Cornwall-cows-001.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=2aa5f9c345aa4ce805294dde2a41be8a)
                

### Vegetarian diet is better for the planet, says Lord Stern

Meat wastes water, creates greenhouse gases and could become as socially
unacceptable as drink-driving

Published: 26 Oct 2009

Vegetarian diet is better for the planet, says Lord Stern

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/12/20/1387526437519/Cows-008.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=cc4a6c348f4a3359e33171b6683c9d30)
                

### Tax meat to cut methane emissions, say scientists

Growing population of ruminants such as sheep and cattle is biggest human-
related source of the greenhouse gas

Published: 20 Dec 2013

Tax meat to cut methane emissions, say scientists

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Environment/Pix/columnists/2011/6/20/1308578013765/A-mixer-dumps-the-meal-pr-006.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=bba67d690a67131dbb9ca6bd78632306)
                

### Artificial meat could slice emissions, say scientists

Lab-grown meat would generate a tiny fraction of emissions associated with
conventional livestock production

Published: 20 Jun 2011

Artificial meat could slice emissions, say scientists

                
                                      *             * ###  Eat less meat to prevent climate disaster, study warns
                

Published: 13 Apr 2012

Eat less meat to prevent climate disaster, study warns

                
                                        * ###  UK-imported animal feed blamed for rainforest destruction
                

Published: 21 Jul 2010

UK-imported animal feed blamed for rainforest destruction

                
                                        * ###  Do the UN's new numbers for livestock emissions kill the argument for vegetarianism?
                

Published: 27 Sep 2013

Do the UN's new numbers for livestock emissions kill the argument for
vegetarianism?

                
                                        * ###  Eat less meat for greater food security, British population urged
                

Published: 4 Jun 2013

Eat less meat for greater food security, British population urged

More more on this story

## Most popular

                
                                      * Environment 
                      * Climate change 
                      * Wildlife 
                      * Energy 
                      * Pollution
                
                      * Contact us
                      * Complaints & corrections
                      * SecureDrop
                      * Work for us
                      * Privacy policy
                      * Cookie policy
                      * Terms & conditions
                      * Help
                      * All topics
                      * All writers
                      * Digital newspaper archive
                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Advertise with us
                      * Search UK jobs
                      * Dating
                      * Discount Codes
                

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Food%2CClimate+change%2CGreenhouse+gas+emissions%2CThe+meat+industry%2CEnvironment%2CAgriculture%2CScience%2CPopulation%2CUnited+Nations%2CWorld+news%2CKatine%2CFood%2CLife+and+style)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married *[FT]:
Financial Times

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times

