

# Last Glacial Maximum

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Not to be confused with Late Glacial Maximum.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/19/CLIMAP.jpg/300px-

CLIMAP.jpg)

A map of sea surface temperature changes and glacial extent during the last
glacial maximum according to Climate: Long range Investigation, Mapping, and
Prediction.

The **Last Glacial Maximum** ( **LGM** ) was the most recent time during the
**Last Glacial Period** when ice sheets were at their greatest extent. Vast
ice sheets covered much of North America, northern Europe, and Asia. The ice
sheets profoundly affected Earth's climate by causing drought,
desertification, and a large drop in sea levels.[1] The ice sheets reached
their maximum coverage about 26,500 years ago (26.5 ka BP). Deglaciation
commenced in the Northern Hemisphere at approximately 19 ka and in Antarctica
approximately at 14.5 ka, consistent with evidence for an abrupt rise in the
sea level at about 14.5 ka.[2][3]

The LGM is referred to in Britain as the **Dimlington Stadial** , dated by
Nick Ashton to between 31 and 16 ka.[4][ _clarification needed_ ][5] In the
archaeology of Paleolithic Europe, the LGM spans the Gravettian, Solutrean,
Magdalenian and Périgordian.

The LGM was followed by the Late Glacial.

## Contents

                
                                      * 1 Glacial climate
                      * 2 World impact
                        * 2.1 Europe
                        * 2.2 Asia
                        * 2.3 Africa and the Middle East
                        * 2.4 Australasia
                        * 2.5 North America
                        * 2.6 South America
                      * 3 See also
                      * 4 Notes
                      * 5 Further reading
                      * 6 External links
                

## Glacial climate[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3a/Evolution_of_temperature_in_the_Post-

Glacial_period_according_to_Greenland_ice_cores.jpg/440px-

Evolution_of_temperature_in_the_Post-

Glacial_period_according_to_Greenland_ice_cores.jpg)

Evolution of temperatures in the Post-Glacial period according to Greenland
ice cores.[6]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/Epica-vostok-

grip-40kyr.png/440px-Epica-vostok-grip-40kyr.png)

Temperature proxies for the last 40,000 years.

According to Blue Marble 3000 (a video by the Zurich University of Applied
Sciences), the average global temperature around 19,000 BC (about 21,000 years
ago) was 9.0 °C (48.2 °F).[7] This is about 6.0 °C (10.8°F) colder than the
2013-2017 average.

The figures given by the Intergovernmental Panel On Climate Change (IPCC)
estimate a slightly lower global temperature than the figures given by the
Zurich University of Applied Sciences. However, these figures aren't exact
figures and are open more to interpretation. According to the IPCC, average
global temperatures increased by 5.5 ± 1.5 °C (9.9 ± 2.7 °F) since the last
glacial maximum, and the rate of warming was about 10 times slower than that
of the 20th Century.[8] It appears that they are defining the present as
sometime in the 19th Century for this case, but they don't specify exact
years, or give a temperature for the present.

Berkeley Earth puts out a list of average global temperatures by year. If you
average all of the years from 1850 to 1899, the average temperature comes out
to 13.8 °C (56.9°F).[9] When subtracting 5.5 ± 1.5 °C (9.9 ± 2.7 °F) from the
1850-1899 average, the average temperature for the last glacial maximum comes
out to 8.3 ± 1.5 °C (47.0 ± 2.7 °F). This is about 6.7 ± 1.5 °C (12.1 ± 2.7
°F) colder than the 2013-2017 average. This figure is open to interpretation
because the IPCC does not specify 1850-1899 as being the present, or give any
exact set of years as being the present. It also does not state whether or not
they agree with the figures given by Berkeley Earth.

According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), permanent summer ice
covered about 8% of Earth's surface and 25% of the land area during the last
glacial maximum.[10] The USGS also states that sea level was about 125 meters
(410 feet) lower than in present times (2012).[10]

When comparing to the present, the average global temperature was 15.0 °C
(58.9 °F) for the 2013-2017 period.[9] Currently (as of 2012), about 3.1% of
Earth's surface and 10.7% of the land area is covered in year-round ice.[10]

The formation of an ice sheet or ice cap requires both prolonged cold and
precipitation (snow). Hence, despite having temperatures similar to those of
glaciated areas in North America and Europe, East Asia remained unglaciated
except at higher elevations. This difference was because the ice sheets in
Europe produced extensive anticyclones above them.

These anticyclones generated air masses that were so dry on reaching Siberia
and Manchuria that precipitation sufficient for the formation of glaciers
could never occur (except in Kamchatka where these westerly winds lifted
moisture from the Sea of Japan). The relative warmth of the Pacific Ocean due
to the shutting down of the Oyashio Current and the presence of large 'east-
west' mountain ranges were secondary factors preventing continental glaciation
in Asia.

All over the world, climates at the Last Glacial Maximum were cooler and
almost everywhere drier. In extreme cases, such as South Australia and the
Sahel, rainfall could be diminished by up to 90% from present, with florae
diminished to almost the same degree as in glaciated areas of Europe and North
America. Even in less affected regions, rainforest cover was greatly
diminished, especially in West Africa where a few _refugia_ were surrounded by
tropical grasslands.

The Amazon rainforest was split into two large blocks by extensive savanna,
and the tropical rainforests of Southeast Asia probably were similarly
affected, with deciduous forests expanding in their place except on the east
and west extremities of the Sundaland shelf. Only in Central America and the
Chocó region of Colombia did tropical rainforests remain substantially intact
– probably due to the extraordinarily heavy rainfall of these regions.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/83/Last_Glacial_Maximum_Vegetation_Map.svg/450px-

Last_Glacial_Maximum_Vegetation_Map.svg.png)

A map of vegetation patterns during the last glacial maximum.

Most of the world's deserts expanded. Exceptions were in what is now the
western United States, where changes in the jet stream brought heavy rain to
areas that are now desert and large pluvial lakes formed, the best known being
Lake Bonneville in Utah. This also occurred in Afghanistan and Iran, where a
major lake formed in the Dasht-e Kavir.

In Australia, shifting sand dunes covered half the continent, whilst the Chaco
and Pampas in South America became similarly dry. Present-day subtropical
regions also lost most of their forest cover, notably in eastern Australia,
the Atlantic Forest of Brazil, and southern China, where open woodland became
dominant due to drier conditions. In northern China – unglaciated despite its
cold climate – a mixture of grassland and tundra prevailed, and even here, the
northern limit of tree growth was at least 20° farther south than today.

In the period before the Last Glacial Maximum, many areas that became
completely barren desert were wetter than they are today, notably in southern
Australia, where Aboriginal occupation is believed to coincide with a wet
period between 40,000 and 60,000 years Before Present (BP, a formal
measurement of uncalibrated radiocarbon years, counted from 1950 CE).

## World impact[edit]

During the Last Glacial Maximum, much of the world was cold, dry, and
inhospitable, with frequent storms and a dust-laden atmosphere. The dustiness
of the atmosphere is a prominent feature in ice cores; dust levels were as
much as 20 to 25 times greater than now.[11] This was probably due to a number
of factors: reduced vegetation, stronger global winds, and less precipitation
to clear dust from the atmosphere.[11] The massive sheets of ice locked away
water, lowering the sea level, exposing continental shelves, joining land
masses together, and creating extensive coastal plains.[12] During the last
glacial maximum, 21,000 years ago, the sea level was about 125 meters (about
410 feet) lower than it is today.[13]

### Europe[edit]

Main articles: Weichselian glaciation, Würm glaciation, and Devensian
glaciation

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3d/LGM-

Mangerud-2003.jpg/500px-LGM-Mangerud-2003.jpg)

The extent of the Last Glacial Maximum in Eurasia, Mangerud _et al._ 2004 (fig
4).[14]

Northern Europe was largely covered by ice, the southern boundary of the ice
sheets passing through Germany and Poland. This ice extended northward to
cover Svalbard and Franz Josef Land and northeastward to occupy the Barents
Sea, the Kara Sea and Novaya Zemlya, ending at the Taymyr Peninsula.[14]

In northwestern Russia the Fennoscandian Ice Sheet reached its LGM extent 17
ka BP, five thousand years later than in Denmark, Germany and Western Poland.
Outside the Baltic Shield, and in Russia in particular, the LGM ice margin of
the Fennoscandian Ice Sheet was highly lobate. The main LGM lobes of Russia
followed the Dvina, Vologda and Rybinsk basins respectively. Lobes originated
as result of ice following shallow topographic depressions filled with a soft
sediment substrate.[15]

Permafrost covered Europe south of the ice sheet down to present-day Szeged in
Southern Hungary. Ice covered the whole of Iceland and almost all of the
British Isles but southern England. Britain was no more than a peninsula of
Europe, its north capped in ice, and its south a polar desert.[16]

### Asia[edit]

There were ice sheets in modern Tibet (although scientists continue to debate
the extent to which the Tibetan Plateau was covered with ice) as well as in
Baltistan and Ladakh. In Southeast Asia, many smaller mountain glaciers
formed, and permafrost covered Asia as far south as Beijing. Because of
lowered sea levels, many of today's islands were joined to the continents: the
Indonesian islands as far east as Borneo and Bali were connected to the Asian
continent in a landmass called Sundaland. Palawan was also part of Sundaland,
while the rest of the Philippine Islands formed one large island separated
from the continent only by the Sibutu Passage and the Mindoro Strait.[17]

### Africa and the Middle East[edit]

In Africa and the Middle East, many smaller mountain glaciers formed, and the
Sahara and other sandy deserts were greatly expanded in extent.[12]

The Persian Gulf averages about 35 metres in depth and the seabed between Abu
Dhabi and Qatar is even shallower, being mostly less than 15 metres deep. For
thousands of years the Ur-Shatt (a confluence of the Tigris-Euphrates Rivers)
provided fresh water to the Gulf, as it flowed through the Strait of Hormuz
into the Gulf of Oman.

Bathymetric data suggests there were two palaeo-basins in the Persian Gulf.
The central basin may have approached an area of 20,000 km2, comparable at its
fullest extent to lakes such as Lake Malawi in Africa. Between 12,000 and 9000
years ago much of the Gulf floor would have remained exposed, only being
flooded by the sea after 8,000 years ago.[18]

It is estimated that annual average temperatures in Southern Africa were 6 °C
lower than at present during the Last Glacial Maximum. This alone would
however not have been enough to create a widespread glaciation or permafrost
in the Drakensberg Mountains or the Lesotho Highlands.[19] Seasonal freezing
of the ground in the Lesotho Highlands might have reached depths of 2 meter or
more below the surface.[20] A few small glaciers did however develop during
the Last Glacial Maximum, in particular in south-facing slopes.[19] In the Hex
River Mountains, in the Western Cape, block streams and terraces found near
the summit of Matroosberg evidences past periglacial activity which likely
occurred during the Last Glacial Maximum.[21]

### Australasia[edit]

The Australian mainland, New Guinea, Tasmania and many smaller islands
comprised a single land mass. This continent is now referred to sometimes as
Sahul.

Between Sahul and Sundaland – a peninsula of South East Asia that comprised
present-day Malaysia and western and northern Indonesia – there remained an
archipelago of islands known as Wallacea. The water gaps between these
islands, Sahul and Sundaland were considerably narrower and fewer in number.

The two main islands of New Zealand, along with associated smaller islands,
were joined as one landmass. Virtually all of the Southern Alps were under
permanent ice, with glaciers extending into much of the surrounding high
country.[22]

### North America[edit]

Main article: Wisconsin Glaciation

See also: Cordilleran Ice Sheet

In North America, the ice covered essentially all of Canada and extended
roughly to the Missouri and Ohio Rivers, and eastward to Manhattan. In
addition to the large Cordilleran Ice Sheet in Canada and Montana, alpine
glaciers advanced and (in some locations) ice caps covered much of the Rocky
Mountains further south. Latitudinal gradients were so sharp that permafrost
did not reach far south of the ice sheets except at high elevations. Glaciers
forced the early human populations who had originally migrated from northeast
Siberia into refugia, reshaping their genetic variation by mutation and drift.
This phenomenon established the older haplogroups found among Native
Americans, and later migrations are responsible for northern North American
haplogroups.[23]

On the Island of Hawaii, geologists have long recognized deposits formed by
glaciers on Mauna Kea during recent ice ages. The latest work indicates that
deposits of three glacial episodes since 150,000 to 200,000 years ago are
preserved on the volcano. Glacial moraines on the volcano formed about 70,000
years ago and from about 40,000 to 13,000 years ago. If glacial deposits were
formed on Mauna Loa, they have long since been buried by younger lava
flows.[24]

### South America[edit]

Further information: Llanquihue glaciation

During the Last Glacial Maximum valley glaciers in the southern Andes (38–43°
S) merged and descended from the Andes occupying lacustrine and marine basins
where they spread out forming large piedmont glacier lobes. Glaciers extended
about 7 km west of the modern Llanquihue Lake but not more than 2 to 3 km
south of it. Nahuel Huapi Lake in Argentina was also glaciated by the same
time.[25] Over most Chiloé glacier advance peaked in 26,000 yrs BP forming a
long north-south moraine system along the eastern coast of Chiloé Island
(41.5–43° S). By that time the glaciation at the latitude of Chiloé was of ice
sheet type contrasting to the valley glaciation found further north in
Chile.[26]

Despite glacier advances much of the area west of Llanquihue Lake was still
ice-free during the Last Glacial Maximum.[27][28][27] During the coldest
period of the Last Glacial Maximum vegetation at this location was dominated
by Alpine herbs in wide open surfaces. The global warming that followed caused
a slow change in vegetation towards a sparsely distributed vegetation
dominated by _Nothofagus_ species.[27][28] Within this parkland vegetation
Magellanic moorland alternated with _Nothofagus_ forest, and as warming
progressed even warm-climate trees begun to grow in the area. It is estimated
that the tree line was depressed about 1000 m relative to present day
elevations during the coldest period, but it rose gradually until 19,300 yr
BP. At that time a cold reversal caused a replacement of much of the arboreal
vegetation with Magellanic moorland and Alpine species.[28]

Little is known about the extent of glaciers during Last Glacial Maximum north
of the Chilean Lake District. To the north, in the dry Andes of Central and
the Last Glacial Maximum is associated with increased humidity and the
verified advance of at least some mountain glaciers.[29]

In the Southern Hemisphere, the Patagonian Ice Sheet covered the whole
southern third of Chile and adjacent areas of Argentina. On the western side
of the Andes the ice sheet reached sea level as far north as in the 41 degrees
south at Chacao Channel.[ _citation needed_ ] The western coast of Patagonia
was largely glaciated, but some authors have pointed out the possible
existence of ice-free refugia for some plant species. On the eastern side of
the Andes, glacier lobes occupied the depressions of Seno Skyring, Seno Otway,
Inútil Bay, and Beagle Channel. On the Straits of Magellan, ice reached as far
as Segunda Angostura.[30]

## See also[edit]

                
                                      * Climate: Long range Investigation, Mapping, and Prediction
                      * Glacial period
                      * Ice age
                      * Last glacial period
                      * Penultimate glacial period
                      * Sea level rise
                      * Timeline of glaciation
                

## Notes[edit]

                
                                      1. **^** Mithen, Steven (2004). _After the Ice: a global human history, 20.000–5.000 BC_. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-674-01570-8.
                      2. **^** Clark, Peter U.; Dyke, Arthur S.; Shakun, Jeremy D.; Carlson, Anders E.; Clark, Jorie; Wohlfarth, Barbara; Mitrovica, Jerry X.; Hostetler, Steven W. & McCabe, A. Marshall (2009). "The Last Glacial Maximum". _Science_. **325** (5941): 710–4. Bibcode:2009Sci...325..710C. doi:10.1126/science.1172873. PMID 19661421. "The onset of Northern Hemisphere deglaciation 19 to 20 ka was induced by an increase in northern summer insolation, providing the source for an abrupt rise in sea level. The onset of deglaciation of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet occurred between 14 and 15 BP, consistent with evidence that this was the primary source for an abrupt rise in sea level ~14.5 bp."
                      3. **^** "Prehistoric Archaeology on the Continental Shelf: A Global Review - Google Książki".
                      4. **^** Ashton, Nick (2017). _Early Humans_. William Collins. p. 241. ISBN 978-0-00-815035-8.
                      5. **^** "Radiocarbon dates from the site at Dimlington led Rose (1985) to designate this area as the UK type site for the Late Devensian Chronozone or 'Dimlington' Stadial." Boston, Clare M. (2007) _An examination of the Geochemical properties of late devensian glacigenic sediments in Eastern England, Durham theses', Durham E-Theses Online:etheses.dur.ac.uk/2609_
                      6. **^** Zalloua, Pierre A.; Matisoo-Smith, Elizabeth (6 January 2017). "Mapping Post-Glacial expansions: The Peopling of Southwest Asia". _Scientific Reports_. **7** : 40338. doi:10.1038/srep40338. ISSN 2045-2322.
                      7. **^** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C3Jwnp-Z3yE Zurich University of Applied Sciences - Blue Marble 3000 (animation)
                      8. **^** Intergovernmental Panel On Climate Change - Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis - Executive Summary https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch6s6-es.html
                      9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berkeley Earth - Land and Ocean Summary http://berkeleyearth.lbl.gov/auto/Global/Land_and_Ocean_summary.txt
                      10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ USGS - Glacier and Landscape Change in Response to Changing Climate - Glaciers and Sea Level https://www2.usgs.gov/climate_landuse/glaciers/glaciers_sea_level.asp
                      11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cowen, Robert C. "Dust Plays a Huge Role in Climate Change" _Christian Science Monitor_ 3 April 2008 ("Dust plays huge role in climate change". _Christian Science Monitor_. 2008-04-03. Archived from the original on 2013-09-28. Retrieved  2012-09-21.), and Claquin et al., "Radiative Forcing of Climate by Ice-Age Atmospheric Dust", Climate Dynamics (2003) 20: 193–202. (www.rem.sfu.ca/COPElab/Claquinetal2003_CD_glacialdustRF.pdf)
                      12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mithen 2004
                      13. **^** "Glaciers and Sea Level". _U.S. Geological Survey_. U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Department of the Interior. 30 May 2012. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017. Retrieved  4 January 2017.
                      14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mangerud, Jan; Jakobsson, Martin; Alexanderson, Helena; Astakhov, Valery; Clarke, Garry K.C; Henriksen, Mona; Hjort, Christian; Krinner, Gerhard; Lunkka, Juha-Pekka; Möller, Per; Murray, Andrew; Nikolskaya, Olga; Saarnisto, Matti; Svendsen, John Inge (2004). "Ice-dammed lakes and rerouting of the drainage of northern Eurasia during the Last Glaciation" (PDF). _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **23** (11–13): 1313–32. Bibcode:2004QSRv...23.1313M. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2003.12.009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-07-13.
                      15. **^** Stroeven, Arjen P.; Hättestrand, Clas; Kleman, Johan; Heyman, Jakob; Fabel, Derek; Fredin, Ola; Goodfellow, Bradley W.; Harbor, Jonathan M.; Jansen, John D.; Olsen, Lars; Caffee, Marc W.; Fink, David; Lundqvist, Jan; Rosqvist, Gunhild C.; Strömberg, Bo; Jansson, Krister N. (2016). "Deglaciation of Fennoscandia". _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **147** : 91–121. Bibcode:2016QSRv..147...91S. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2015.09.016.
                      16. **^** "Internet Archaeology 11: Ray & Adams 4.5 Europe". _intarch.ac.uk_. Archived from the original on 2016-10-13. Retrieved  2018-02-05.
                      17. **^** Sathiamurthy, E.; Voris, H.K. (2006). "Pleistocene Sea Level Maps for the Sunda Shelf". Chicago IL: The Field Museum. Archived from the original on 2009-03-17.
                      18. **^** http://www.qatararchaeology.com/?page_id=39#!marine-geophysics/clwj Archived 2014-12-20 at the Wayback Machine
                      19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mills, S.C.; Barrows, T.T.; Telfer, M.W.; Fifield, L.K. (2017). "The cold climate geomorphology of the Eastern Cape Drakensberg: A reevaluation of past climatic conditions during the last glacial cycle in Southern Africa". _Geomorphology_. **278** : 184–194. Bibcode:2017Geomo.278..184M. doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2016.11.011.
                      20. **^** Sumner, P (2003). "A contemporary winter ground thermal profile in the Lesotho Highlands and implications for active and relict soil frost phenomena". _Earth Surface Processes and Landforms_. **28** (13): 1451–1458. Bibcode:2003ESPL...28.1451S. doi:10.1002/esp.1003.
                      21. **^** Boelhouwers, Jan (1999). "Relict periglacial slope deposits in the Hex River Mountains, South Africa: observations and palaeoenvironmental implications". _Geomorphology_. **30** (3): 245–258. Bibcode:1999Geomo..30..245B. doi:10.1016/s0169-555x(99)00033-1.
                      22. **^** Kirkpatrick, R. (21999). _Bateman contemporary atlas of New Zealand._ Auckland:David Bateman Ltd. Plate 6. ISBN 1-86953-408-5
                      23. **^** Perego UA, Angerhofer N, Pala M, et al. (September 2010). "The initial peopling of the Americas: a growing number of founding mitochondrial genomes from Beringia". _Genome Res_. **20** (9): 1174–9. doi:10.1101/gr.109231.110. PMC 2928495. PMID 20587512.
                      24. **^** "Mauna Kea Hawai'i's Tallest Volcano". USGS. Archived from the original on 2009-05-08.
                      25. **^** Heusser, C.J. (2004). _Ice Age Southern Andes_. pp. 25–29.
                      26. **^** García, Juan L. (2012). "Late Pleistocene ice fluctuations and glacial geomorphology of the Archipiélago de Chiloé, southern Chile". _Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography_. **94** (4): 459–479. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0459.2012.00471.x.
                      27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Lowell, T.V.; Heusser, C.J.; Andersen, B.J.; Moreno, P.I.; Hauser, A.; Heusser, L.E.; Schlüchter, C.; Marchant, D.R.; Denton, G.H. (1995). "Interhemispheric Correlation of Late Pleistocene Glacial Events". _Science_. **269** (5230): 1541–1549. Bibcode:1995Sci...269.1541L. doi:10.1126/science.269.5230.1541. PMID 17789444.
                      28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Moreno, Patricio I.; Denton, Geoge H.; Moreno, Hugo; Lowell, Thomas V.; Putnam, Aaron E.; Kaplan, Michael R. (2015). "Radiocarbon chronology of the last glacial maximum and its termination in northwestern Patagonia" (PDF). _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **122** : 233–249. Bibcode:2015QSRv..122..233M. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2015.05.027.
                      29. **^** Harrison, Stephan (2004). "The Pleistocene glaciations of Chile". In Ehlers, J.; Gibbard, P.L. (eds.). _Quaternary Glaciations - Extent and Chronology: Part III: South America, Asia, Africa, Australasia, Antarctica_. pp. 91–97.
                      30. **^** Rabassa, Jorge; Coronato, Andrea; Bujalesky, Gustavo; Salemme, Mónica; Roig, Claudio; Meglioli, Andrés; Heusser, Calvin; Gordillo, Sandra; Roig, Fidel; Borromei, Ana; Quattrocchio, Mirta (June 2000). "Quaternary of Tierra del Fuego, Southernmost South America: an updated review". _Quaternary International_. 68–71 (1): 217–240. Bibcode:2000QuInt..68..217R. doi:10.1016/S1040-6182(00)00046-X.
                

## Further reading[edit]

                
                                      * Developments in Quaternary Science Series 
                        * Gillespie, Alan R.; Porter, Stephen C.; Atwater, Brian F. (2003). _The Quaternary Period in the United States_. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-51471-4.
                        * Ehlers, Jürgen; Gibbard, Philip L. (2004). _Quaternary Glaciations Extent and Chronology. 1. Europe_. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-51462-2.
                        * Ehlers, Jürgen; Gibbard, Philip L. (2004). _Quaternary Glaciations: Extent and Chronology. 2. North America_. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-51592-6.
                        * Ehlers, Jürgen; Gibbard, Philip L. (2004). _Quaternary Glaciations: Extent and Chronology. 3. South America, Asia, Africa, Australia, Antarctica_. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-51593-3.
                      * Šibrava, Vladimír (1986). Šibrava, V.; Bowen, D.Q; Richmond, G.M. (eds.). "Quaternary Glaciations in the Northern Hemisphere". _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **5** : 1–514. Bibcode:1986QSRv....5....1S. doi:10.1016/0277-3791(86)90167-8.
                

## External links[edit]

                
                                      * Adams, J.M. (1997). "Global land environments since the last interglacial". _Atlas of Palaeovegetation: Preliminary land ecosystem maps of the world since the Last Glacial Maximum_. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, TN. Archived from the original on 2008-01-16.
                      * "Map and GIS database of glacial landforms and features related to the last British Ice Sheet". _BRITICE_. Department of Geology, University of Sheffield. 2004.
                      * Dyke, A.S.; Moore, A.; Robertson, L. (2003). "Deglaciation of North America". _Geological Survey of Canada Open File, 1574_. (32 digital maps at 1:7 000 000 scale with accompanying digital chronological database and one poster (two sheets) with full map series.)
                      * Manley, W.; Kuaffman, D. "Alaska PaleoGlacier Atlas: A Geospatial Compilation of Pleistocene Glacier Extents". _INSTAAR_. University of Colorado.
                      * Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project (PMIP) PMIP Web Site and 'Publications : Last Glacial Maximum.
                      * Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project Phase II (PMIP2) _PMIP2 Home page_ and PMIP 2 Publications.
                      * Osipov, Eduard Y.; Khlystov, Oleg M. "Glaciers and meltwater flux to Lake Baikal during the Last Glacial Maximum".
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Continental glaciations

* * *

General|

                
                                      * Canadian Shield
                      * Glacial history of Minnesota
                      * Lake Agassiz
                      * Lake Chicago
                      * Lake Tight
                      * Last Glacial Maximum
                      * Laurentide Ice Sheet
                      * List of prehistoric lakes
                      * Post-glacial rebound
                      * Proglacial lake
                      * Teays River
                      * Timeline of glaciation
                

Landforms|

| Erosional|

                
                                      * Fjord
                      * Glacial striae
                      * Ribbon lake
                      * Rôche moutonnée
                      * Tunnel valley
                      * U-shaped valley
                

---|---  
Depositional|

                
                                      * Drumlin
                      * Drumlin field
                      * Erratic block
                      * Moraine
                      * Pulju moraine
                      * Rogen moraine
                      * Terminal moraine
                      * Till plain
                      * Veiki moraine
                

| Glacifluvial|

                
                                      * Diluvium
                      * Esker
                      * Giant current ripples
                      * Kame
                      * Kame delta
                      * Kettle hole
                      * Outwash fan
                      * Sandur
                

---|--- 

North America|

| Canada|

                
                                      * Arrowhead Provincial Park, Ontario
                      * Big Rock (glacial erratic), Alberta
                      * Cypress Hills (Canada), Saskatchewan
                      * Eramosa River, Ontario
                      * Eskers Provincial Park, British Columbia
                      * Foothills Erratics Train, Alberta
                      * Lion's Head Provincial Park, Ontario
                      * Origin of the Oak Ridges Moraine, Ontario
                      * Ovayok Territorial Park, Nunavut
                

---|---  
United  
States|

                
                                      * Chippewa Moraine State Recreation Area, Wisconsin
                      * Coteau des Prairies, South Dakota
                      * Devil's Lake State Park, Wisconsin
                      * Glacial Lake Wisconsin, Wisconsin
                      * Glacial Lakes State Park, Minnesota
                      * Horicon Marsh State Wildlife Area, Wisconsin
                      * Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail, Idaho, Oregon & Washington
                      * Ice Age National Scientific Reserve, Wisconsin
                      * Ice Age Trail, Wisconsin
                      * Interstate State Park, Minnesota & Wisconsin
                      * Kelleys Island, Ohio
                      * Kettle Moraine State Forest, Wisconsin
                      * Lake Bonneville, Utah
                      * Lake Lahontan, Nevada
                      * Lake Missoula, Montana
                      * Mill Bluff State Park, Wisconsin
                      * Oneida Lake, New York
                      * Two Creeks Buried Forest State Natural Area, Wisconsin
                      * Withrow Moraine and Jameson Lake Drumlin Field, Washington
                      * Yosemite National Park, California
                

Eurasia and  
Antarctica|

                
                                      * Antarctica
                      * Hardangerfjord
                      * Killary Harbour
                      * Lambert Glacier
                      * Monte Rosa
                      * Ross Ice Shelf
                      * Svalbard
                

Time periods|

                
                                      * Quaternary glaciation
                      * Illinoian Stage
                      * Interglacial
                      * Interstadial
                      * Penultimate Glacial Period
                      * Last Glacial Period
                      * Last Glacial Maximum
                      * Oldest Dryas
                      * Older Dryas
                      * Pleistocene
                      * Pre-Illinoian Stage
                      * Quaternary glaciation
                      * Sangamonian Stage
                      * Wisconsin glaciation
                      * Younger Dryas
                      * 8.2 kiloyear event
                      * Little Ice Age
                
                      * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
                
                      * v
                      * t
                      * e
                

Ice ages

* * *

Quaternary /  
Late Cenozoic|

| Quaternary|

                
                                      * Antarctica
                      * Greenland
                      * Last glacial period
                      * 1st: Würm, Wisconsin, Weichselian, Devensian/Midlandian, Pinedale/Fraser, Merida, Llanquihue
                      * 2nd: Riss, Illinoian, Saale, Wolstonian, Santa María
                      * 3rd–6th: Mindel, Pre-Illinoian, Elster, Anglian, Rio Llico
                      * 7th–8th: Günz, Pre-Illinoian, Elbe or Menapian, Beestonian, Caracol (2.5 to 0 Mya)
                

---|---  
Pliocene  
Miocene  
Oligocene|

                
                                      * Antarctic (34 to 2.5 Mya)
                

![Maximum Quaternary northern-hemisphere

glaciation](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/26/Iceage_north-

glacial_hg.png/60px-Iceage_north-glacial_hg.png)

Carboniferous–Permian|

                
                                      * late Paleozoic icehouse (360 Mya to 260 Mya)
                

Ordovician–Silurian|

                
                                      * Andean-Saharan (460 Mya to 430 Mya)
                

Ediacaran|

                
                                      * Gaskiers (579.88 to 579.63 Mya)
                      * Baykonurian (547 to 541.5 Mya)
                

Cryogenian|

                
                                      * Sturtian (717 to 660 Mya); Marinoan (650 to 635 Mya)
                

Paleoproterozoic|

                
                                      * Huronian (2.4 to 2.1 Gya)
                

Mesoarchean|

                
                                      * Pongola (2.9 to 2.78 Gya)
                

Related topics|

                
                                      * Greenhouse and icehouse Earth
                      * Great Oxygenation Event
                      * Snowball Earth
                      * Interglacial
                      * Milankovitch cycles
                      * Stadial
                

**Timeline of glaciation**

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Last_Glacial_Maximum&oldid=900470663"

Categories:

                
                                      * Last Glacial Maximum
                      * Historical eras
                

Hidden categories:

                
                                      * Webarchive template wayback links
                      * CS1: long volume value
                      * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2018
                      * All articles with unsourced statements
                      * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017
                

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                
                                      * Not logged in
                      * Talk
                      * Contributions
                      * Create account
                      * Log in
                

### Namespaces

                
                                      * Article
                      * Talk
                

### Variants

### Views

                
                                      * Read
                      * Edit
                      * View history
                

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                
                                      * Main page
                      * Contents
                      * Featured content
                      * Current events
                      * Random article
                      * Donate to Wikipedia
                      * Wikipedia store
                

### Interaction

                
                                      * Help
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Community portal
                      * Recent changes
                      * Contact page
                

### Tools

                
                                      * What links here
                      * Related changes
                      * Upload file
                      * Special pages
                      * Permanent link
                      * Page information
                      * Wikidata item
                      * Cite this page
                

### In other projects

                
                                      * Wikimedia Commons
                

### Print/export

                
                                      * Create a book
                      * Download as PDF
                      * Printable version
                

### Languages

                
                                      * العربية
                      * Беларуская
                      * Català
                      * Cymraeg
                      * Deutsch
                      * Español
                      * Esperanto
                      * فارسی
                      * Bahasa Indonesia
                      * Italiano
                      * Bahasa Melayu
                      * Nederlands
                      * Norsk
                      * Norsk nynorsk
                      * Português
                      * Русский
                      * Suomi
                      * Türkçe
                      * Українська
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * 中文
                

Edit links

                
                                      * This page was last edited on 5 June 2019, at 22:20 (UTC).
                      * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                      * Privacy policy
                      * About Wikipedia
                      * Disclaimers
                      * Contact Wikipedia
                      * Developers
                      * Cookie statement
                      * Mobile view
                      * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                      * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

