

# ![Time for change](/sites/timeforchange.org/files/sands_css_logo.jpg) Time

for change

                
                                      * Meaning of life
                      * Climate change
                      * Nuclear energy
                      * Site map
                      * Search
                
                      * Book about «personal growth»
                      * Current Issues
                      * Content by category
                        * Meaning of life
                        * Global warming
                        * Nuclear power
                      * Recent activity
                      * Discussion forums
                      * Downloads
                      * Pictures
                      * Services
                      * About us
                      * Register
                      * Site map
                      * create content
                

**Book: «ABC of Awareness»** ![Book about personality development, personal

growth](/sites/timeforchange.org/files/pictures/book-personal-development-

growth.jpg)

* * *

**Personal and spiritual growth**

* * *
                
                                      * Purpose of spirituality
                      * The benefits of modesty
                      * The more the better?
                      * Children develop their parents
                      * Perceptive reality
                      * The human needs
                      * Higher consciousness
                      * About the meaning of life
                

* * *

**Global warming, climate change**

* * *
                
                                      * Definition of global warming
                      * Cause and effects of global warming
                      * Responsibility and global warming
                      * Energy consumption
                      * Reduce the energy demand
                      * Carbon footprint
                      * CO2 emissions by country
                
                      * Reason for climate change
                      * Global warming news
                

* * *

**Nuclear energy, atomic power**

* * *
                
                                      * Nuclear power pros and cons
                      * Nuclear power: a solution to global warming?
                      * Cons of nuclear energy
                      * Nuclear energy usage per capita
                      * Nuclear energy / nuclear weapons
                

Login

Home › Spirituality › earth

## CO2 - the major cause of global warming

Global warming is caused by the emission of greenhouse gases . 72% of the
totally emitted greenhouse gases is carbon dioxide (CO2), 18% Methane and 9%
Nitrous oxide (NOx). Carbon dioxide emissions therefore are the most important
cause of global warming. CO2 is inevitably created by burning fuels like e.g.
oil, natural gas, diesel, organic-diesel, petrol, organic-petrol, ethanol. The
emissions of CO2 have been dramatically increased within the last 50 years and
are still increasing by almost 3% each year, see graph below:

![Word-wide CO2 emission are steadily

increasing](/sites/timeforchange.org/files/pictures/CO2-emissions-world-by-

year.jpg)

Graph 1: CO2-emissions world-wide by year (data from wri.org)

![World-wide CO2 emissions and

concentrations](/sites/timeforchange.org/files/pictures/CO2-emissions-

concentrations.jpg)

Graph 2: CO2 emissions world-wide by year and CO2 concentration in the
atmosphere by year

The carbon dioxide is released to the atmosphere where it remains for 100 to
200 years. This leads to an increasing concentration of carbon dioxide in our
atmosphere (see above on the right hand side), which in turn causes the
average temperature on Earth to raise (see graph below).

![Increase of world

temperature](/sites/timeforchange.org/files/pictures/temperature-increase-by-

year.jpg)

Chart 3: Increase of global average temperature for the last 20 years (source:
wri.org)

Recent investigations have shown that inconceivable catastrophic changes in
the environment will take place if the global temperatures increase by more
than 2° C (3.6° F). A warming of 2° C (3.6° F) corresponds to a carbon dioxide
(CO2) concentration of about 450 ppm (parts per million) in the atmosphere.

As of beginning of 2007, the CO2 concentration is already at 380 ppm and it
raises on average 2 - 3 ppm each year, so that the critical value will be
reached in approximately 20 to 30 years from now. See here for some graphs
about the increasing concentration of greenhouse gases and the greenhouse gas
emissions by sector.

## Mitigation goals for the main cause of global warming: carbon dioxide

emissions

As a result of the above mentioned findings, there seems to be a consensus
among the leading developed countries that the temperature increase caused by
global warming must not exceed 2° C (3.6° F). For example the European Union
(EU) has committed itself to this threshold already in 2005.

To reach this target **the annual global CO2 emissions have to be reduced from
about 28 Gigatons in 2006 to 20 Gigatons of CO2 by the year 2050** and to 10
Gigatons of CO2 by the year 2100 according to IPCC. At the first glance, this
does not look like a major reduction. However one should keep in mind that the
world population will grow from 6.4 billion people in 2007 to about 9.5
billion people in 2050. At the same time more and more developing countries
will progress their industrialisation and as a result they will want to copy
our western life style causing high CO2 emissions.

The world-wide average CO2 emissions by capita was about 4 tons per year in
2005. For North America it was about 20 tons and for Europe about 10 tons per
year per capita. **By 2050, the world-wide average CO2 emission per capita
needs to be reduced to 2 tons per year**. In the following years, the
emissions will need again to be cut by half. Download and use our Excel
calculator to simulate cause and effects of global warming . Based on an
average carbon footprint, you can test _ways to mitigate global warming_
yourself. Alternatively, you can have a look at some simulation results how
global warming can be stopped below 2 C.

Have a look at the CO2 emissions per capita by country to see how far away
from this goal value of 2 tons per year our western life style is.

In a fair world, there is absolutely no justification for the western world to
pollute the Earth more than others. So we should aim to reduce our carbon
footprint to 2 tons per capita per year until 2050. This means people in
industrialised nations will have to cut down their carbon dioxide emissions to
values reaching 10% to 20% of the current values.

The above mentioned goal can only be reached if our life style becomes a
sustainable one. The first and most efficient measure is a reduction of our
energy consumption. In addition, it is inevitable to make thoughts about the
true meaning of life and change our personal behaviour accordingly.

                
                                      * earth
                      * Issues
                      * Global warming
                      * Carbon dioxide
                
                      * Add new comment
                      * ![Email this page](/sites/all/modules/forward/forward.gif)Email this page
                      * ![Printer-friendly version](/sites/all/modules/print/icons/print_icon.gif)Printer-friendly version
                

## Comments

2 December, 2007 - 21:47 — juerg

### The author of most pages

Like most of the articles on this website, it has been written by Juerg Rohrer
from timeforchange.org.

This page about the main cause of global warming was last updated in July
2007.

                
                                      * reply
                

15 December, 2009 - 12:48 — juerg

### CO2 and temperatur increase data set

Of course you can get it. Please contact me via Email. Juerg

See Who we are

                
                                      * reply
                

10 December, 2007 - 20:08 — juerg

### Water vapor is the most important NATURAL greenhouse gas

Water vapor is indeed the most important _naturally occurring_ greenhouse gas.
The major natural greenhouse gases are water vapor, which causes about 36-70%
of the greenhouse effect on Earth (not including clouds); carbon dioxide CO2,
which causes 9-26%; methane, which causes 4-9%, and ozone, which causes 3-7%.
It is not possible to state that a certain gas causes a certain percentage of
the greenhouse effect, because the influences of the various gases are not
additive. Other greenhouse gases include, but are not limited to, nitrous
oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and
chlorofluorocarbons.

But **the fact that water vapor is the most important gas in creating the
natural greenhouse effect does not mean man-made greenhouse gases have no
effect!**

Since we cannot influence the naturally occurring greenhouse gases, we
normally concentrate on the man-made greenhouse gases (many times without
specifically mentioning). Sometimes they are called "emitted greenhouse
gases". I understand that this can be confusing.

### Cause and effect of global warming

Increasing amounts of man-made greenhouse gases lead to an increase in the
surface temperature on Earth. This temperature increase causes other effects,
one of them being the increase of the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere.
Although human activities do not directly add significant amounts of water
vapor to the atmosphere, warmer air can contain more water vapor. Because
water vapor is a greenhouse gas (as you mentioned), global warming will be
further enhanced by the increased amounts of water vapor. This is called a
positive feedback.

In other words:

                
                                      1. The current global warming is caused by man-made greenhouse gases (mainly CO2, NOx and Methane). 
                      2. Global warming leads to a higher temperature on Earth.
                      3. Due to the higher temperature, the air does contain more water vapor.
                      4. This additional water vapor (a greenhouse gas) does again increase the effect of global warming (a positive feedback or secondary effect).
                

Juerg

                
                                      * reply
                

13 December, 2007 - 18:08 — juerg

### The cause for the current global warming is a different one

The Earth has indeed already had warming periods for several times, as you
mentioned. However there is not just one single way to initiate a global
warming period. _Who is saying that all global warming periods have been
caused by the same effect?_

So earlier warming periods may easily have been caused by different effects
than the current one. In fact, most of the earlier global warming periods have
been caused by a change in the sun's radiation. In that particular case it is
normal that the CO2 concentration lags behind the warming because it is a
secondary effect and not the cause.

The current global warming however is caused by man-made emissions of
greenhouse gases. It is meanwhile well proven not to be a natural cycle.

You can fracture your leg with skiing, but you can also fracture your leg if
you fall down the stairs. If you fractured your leg already two times with
skiing, this is no proof that in the third case it was caused by skiing as
well. Maybe you have had a car accident or anything else.

It is similar with the cause of global warming: **The cause for earlier
warming periods can be (and indeed are) different from the current one.**

                
                                      * reply
                

23 May, 2008 - 17:17 — juerg

### CO2 is causing global warming

Compared to the water vapor which is already in the atmosphere, the additional
water vapor generated by hydrogen-powered cars would have very little
influence.

**T** **he problem with hydrogen-powered cars is the _generation_ of
hydrogen.** At the time being, there is no very efficient and clean technology
available for the creation of such amounts of hydrogen.

We can turn it as we want: we will have to reduce our energy requirements in
the developed world. We are definitely consuming too many resources. Our
current lifestyle is very far away from being a sustainable one.

                
                                      * reply
                

6 December, 2008 - 16:45 — juerg

### Global warming / climate change / major causes

You need to look at the yearly average temperature. Just to take one month and
then draw conclusions is not appropriate. All in all, the wheather is getting
more extreme, so we will have much wormer and much colder days, weeks and
months in a year. We will have periodes with extremely high precipitations and
periodes with aridity. The same is true for storms, tornados, etc.

What you see in the graph above is the yearly average temperature of the world
(not just in the place where you are living). And this yearly average
temperature of the world has been increasing.

                
                                      * reply
                

29 September, 2009 - 16:09 — juerg

### Burning fuels creates more CO2 than water vapor

You are WRONG when you say

"We are releasing more water vapor than CO2".

For example, let's look at burning diesel fuel. Burning fuel is called an
**oxidation process**. To make it simple, we assume C 12H26 as chemical
formula for diesel fuel. Then the following chemical reaction takes place:

2 C12H22 + 37 O2 → 26 H2O + 24 CO2

This means: for each kg of diesel fuel burnt, 1.38 kg water vapor and 3.106 kg
CO2 is produced. So the oxidation of diesel fuel creates more than two times
as much carbon dioxide (CO2) as water vapor. The relation for other fossil
fuels is similar (but not exactly the same).

                
                                      * reply
                

11 December, 2009 - 23:03 — juerg

### Greenhouse effect CO2 and water vapor

I am certainly not denying the effect of water for the (natural) greenhouse
effect. However, if you took 12'000 molecules of air, you would normally find
just 3 molecules of CO2 but 600 molecules of water. So if you add 26 more
water molecules to 600, the relative change is quite little compared to adding
24 carbon dioxide molecules to the existing 3 CO2 molecules.

However, it is not just the number of molecules as you seem to suggest: the
strength of greenhouse effect of the different contributors also needs to be
taken into account. With increasing height, the concentration of water vapor
drops significantly, where the concentration of other greenhouse gases like
CO2 or Methane remain more or less constant with increasing height above
ground. Because it is colder up there, greenhouse gases are much more
effective with increasing height above ground.

Water vapor and clouds account for about 65 to 85% of the natural greenhouse
effect (natural means without human acitivities). **The remaining 15 to 35% of
the _natural_ greenhouse effect are caused by very small concentrations of the
other greenhouse gases (CO2, NOx, Methane, etc.)**. This explains why
relatively small quantities of CO2 and other non-water greenhouse gases can
have a major effect on the climate.

Human beings have been increasing the amount of non-water vapor greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere (mainly due to burning fossile fuels, cattle breeding,
etc.). This causes the temperature to rise. In addition, an increased
temperature causes more water to water to evaporate into the atmosphere, which
does in turn increase the warming effect.

See also the comment about water vapor and natural greenhouse gases.

                
                                      * reply
                

11 June, 2009 - 09:16 — juerg

### Carbon Monoxide

It's CO

Regards Juerg

                
                                      * reply
                

30 November, 2009 - 17:59 — juerg

### Carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide

The air is a mixture of different compounds, usually about 21% oxygen (O2) and
about 78% nitrogen (N2). We have this mixture although nitrogen is lighter
than oxygen. So the same question can be asked for nitrogen and oxygen in the
air.

The anwser is: Air is a so-called meta-stable gas mixture, the concentrations
remain constant up to a height of about 100 kilometers. The air is constantly
agitated (e.g. by winds) which helps to keep it well mixed and to lower
existing differences in concentration.

**Emission of CO:**

A modern vehicle should not emit much CO because CO is a sign of a bad
(incomplete) burning process. Usually because oxygen was missing. The catalyst
in the vehicle should convert CO into CO2.

CO is dangerous for human beings and for plants. Just mixing it with oxygen is
not enough to transform it into CO2, it needs further activation (catalyst,
sun light, etc.)

                
                                      * reply
                

23 July, 2011 - 17:41 — juerg

### ppm = parts per million

ppm means "parts per million", i.e. 10'000 ppm = 1%

Juerg

                
                                      * reply
                

30 November, 2009 - 12:52 — juerg

### Greenhouse effect

Have a look at the following articles:

                
                                      * Greenhouse effect and for 
                      * more details about the greenhouse effect.
                

Juerg

                
                                      * reply
                
                      * 1
                      * 2
                      * next ›
                      * last »
                

## Related or similar information

                
                                      * Cause and effect for global warming
                      * Definition for global warming - what is global warming?
                      * Global warming - it's about you
                      * Are cows the cause of global warming?
                      * CO2 concentration causing global temperature increase
                      * Radiation wavelength and greenhouse effect
                      * CO2 emissions for shipping of goods
                      * Ocean acidification - another effect of global warming
                

**For whom enough is too little - nothing is ever enough.**

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

