

![Union of Concerned Scientists](../pixif/union-of-concerned-scientists.jpg)

                
                                      * Global Warming Causes
                      * Global Warming Glossary
                      * About Climate Hot Map
                

![Climate Hot Map](../pixif/climate-hot-map.gif)

Global Warming Effects Around the World

Tweet

                
                                      * Hot Spots
                      * Hot Map
                      * Impacts
                      * Solutions
                      * ![](../pixif/button-act-lo.gif)![](../pixif/button-donate-lo.gif)
                

## Ocean Temperature

### Warmer oceans put coastal communities at risk, increase infrastructure

costs, endanger polar creatures and threaten coral reefs and fisheries.
Perhaps most alarmingly, rising ocean temperatures accelerate the overall
warming trend.

![Scuba diving in coral reef](../hotspot-images/elliott-key-fl-usa.jpg)  
See how rising ocean temperature has killed off coral reefs in the Florida
Keys--and find other hot spots threatened by higher air temperature on the
Climate Hot Map.

![Take action on global warming now!](../pixif/button-take-action-now-

samewin.gif)

For details on the wide-ranging--and dangerous--effects of warmer oceans, see
the pages on Sea Level, Sea Ice, Ocean Chemistry and Salt Water Species.

Not only are ocean surface waters getting warmer, but so is water 1,500 feet
below the surface. These increases in temperature lie well outside the bounds
of natural variation.

In fact, the ocean has absorbed so much heat--about 20 times as much as the
atmosphere over the past half-century--that some models suggest that it is
likely to warm the air another degree Fahrenheit (0.55Â° Celsius) worldwide
over the coming decades.

Although ocean temperatures are more difficult to measure than land
temperatures, scientists can use several methods to create an extensive ocean
record.

                
                                      * Dropped from ships or airplanes, probes gauging the ocean's conductivity, temperature, and density provide nearly continuous surface-to-bottom measurements at specific times. However, these probes rarely reoccupy an exact location.
                      * Remote vehicles can measure the temperature of deep ocean waters, and periodically surface to transfer the information to satellites.
                      * Moorings on the ocean bottom can measure temperatures at fixed distances above the bottom, until a ship retrieves the instruments--typically after a few months or years.
                      * The most common measurements, however, are taken at the sea surface. Scientists combine these measurements with land surface measurements to calculate the global average temperature.
                      * Scientists also know that ocean temperatures are rising because warm-water species are moving into areas that were formerly too cold, while cool-water and cold-water species are likewise on the move.
                

See references.

Impacts of Global Warming

![](../pixif/impact-category-people.jpg)

Health

Food

Water use

Costs

![](../pixif/impact-category-freshwater.jpg)

Extreme wet

Extreme dry

Land ice

![](../pixif/impact-category-oceans.jpg)

Sea level

Sea ice

Ocean chemistry

![](../pixif/impact-category-ecosystems.jpg)

Lakes and rivers

Land

Salt water

![](../pixif/impact-category-temperature.jpg)

Air

Ocean

Water

Ground

**Union of Concerned Scientists**

National Headquarters  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge, MA 02138-3780

(C) 2011 Union of Concerned Scientists

Global Warming Effects | Global Warming Solutions | Stop Global Warming  
Contact Us | Privacy Statement | About Union of Concerned Scientists

Site design by  
![Mixit Productions website design](../pixif/logo2mixit.jpg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

