

## Share

×

### Short URL

### Embed

### Social Media

* * *

## Download

×

__SVG __PNG __CSV

![](/static/img/nav/x.png)

                
                                      * Home
                      * Countries
                      * Products
                      * Visualizations
                      * Rankings
                
                        * Countries
                        * Products
                
                      * Publications
                      * About
                
                        * Data
                        * Methodology
                        * The Site
                        * Permissions
                        * FAQs
                
                      * API
                

![](/static/img/nav/menu.png) ![The Observatory of Economic

Complexity](/static/img/home/logo-sm.png)

                
                                      * Countries
                      * Products
                      * Visualizations
                      * Rankings
                
                        * Countries
                        * Products
                
                      * Publications
                      * About
                
                        * Data
                        * Methodology
                        * The Site
                        * Permissions
                        * FAQs
                
                      * API
                

![](/static/img/nav/search.png)

![](/static/img/headers/country/aschn.jpg)

![](/static/img/icons/country/country_aschn.png)

# China

### 0.69

Econ Complexity 33rd of 126

1980

2017

### $2.41T

Exports 1st of 221

1980

2017

### $1.54T

Imports 2nd of 221

1980

2017

### $16.8k

GDP Per Capita 82nd of 214

1990

2017

__Photo by Mike Behnken

* * *

![share](/static/img/profile/share.png)

Looking for commercial partners in China? List your company on Macro Market.

Importer Exporter

                
                                      * Visualizations
                      * Exports
                      * Imports
                      * Trade Balance
                      * Destinations
                      * Origins
                      * Product Space
                      * Complexity and Income Inequality
                      * Economic Complexity Ranking
                

Looking for commercial partners in China? List your company on Macro Market.

Importer Exporter

China is the largest export economy in the world and the 33rd most complex
economy according to the Economic Complexity Index (ECI). In 2017, China
exported $2.41T and imported $1.54T, resulting in a positive trade balance of
$873B. In 2017 the GDP of China was $12.2T and its GDP per capita was $16.8k.

The top exports of China are Broadcasting Equipment ($231B), Computers
($146B), Office Machine Parts ($90.8B), Integrated Circuits ($80.1B) and
Telephones ($62B), using the 1992 revision of the HS (Harmonized System)
classification. Its top imports are Integrated Circuits ($207B), Crude
Petroleum ($144B), Iron Ore ($59B), Cars ($46.8B) and Gold ($40.3B).

The top export destinations of China are the United States ($476B), Hong Kong
($255B), Japan ($157B), Germany ($109B) and South Korea ($98.1B). The top
import origins are Other Asia ($151B), South Korea ($149B), Japan ($136B), the
United States ($133B) and Germany ($95B).

China borders Afghanistan, Bhutan, Hong Kong, India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Laos, Macau, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, North Korea, Tajikistan, Vietnam and
Russia by land and Brunei, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, the
Philippines and Taiwan by sea.

## Exports

In 2017 China exported $2.41T, making it the largest exporter in the world.
During the last five years the exports of China have increased at an
annualized rate of 2.5%, from $2.12T in 2012 to $2.41T in 2017. The most
recent exports are led by Broadcasting Equipment which represent 9.6% of the
total exports of China, followed by Computers, which account for 6.08%.

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

## Imports

In 2017 China imported $1.54T, making it the 2nd largest importer in the
world. During the last five years the imports of China have increased at an
annualized rate of 1.3%, from $1.42T in 2012 to $1.54T in 2017. The most
recent imports are led by Integrated Circuits which represent 13.5% of the
total imports of China, followed by Crude Petroleum, which account for 9.4%.

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

## Trade Balance

As of 2017 China had a positive trade balance of $873B in net exports. As
compared to their trade balance in 1995 when they still had a positive trade
balance of $79.8B in net exports.

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

## Destinations

The top export destinations of China are the United States ($476B), Hong Kong
($255B), Japan ($157B), Germany ($109B) and South Korea ($98.1B).

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

## Origins

The top import origins of China are Other Asia ($151B), South Korea ($149B),
Japan ($136B), the United States ($133B) and Germany ($95B).

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

# Economic Complexity of China

## Product Space

The product space is a network connecting products that are likely to be co-
exported and can be used to predict the evolution of a country’s export
structure.

The economy of China has an Economic Complexity Index (ECI) of 0.691 making it
the 33rd most complex country. China exports 540 products with revealed
comparative advantage (meaning that its share of global exports is larger than
what would be expected from the size of its export economy and from the size
of a product’s global market).

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

## Complexity and Income Inequality

In this version of the product space products are colored according to their
Product Gini Index, or PGI. The PGI of a product is the level of income
inequality that we expect for the countries that export a product. For more
information see: Linking Economic Complexity, Institutions and Income
Inequality and The structural constraints of income inequality in Latin
America.

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

## Economic Complexity Ranking

In this version of the product space products are colored according to their
Product Gini Index, or PGI. The PGI of a product is the level of income
inequality that we expect for the countries that export a product. For more
information see: Linking Economic Complexity, Institutions and Income
Inequality and The structural constraints of income inequality in Latin
America.

Explore on Visualizations page **Data Sources**

* * *

# More on China from our other sites

# ![](http://pantheon.media.mit.edu/pantheon_logo.png)

## Globally Famous People of China

This treemap shows the cultural exports of China, as proxied by the production
of globally famous historical characters

Explore on Pantheon __

## Globally Famous People of China by City

This treemap shows the cultural exports of China by city, as proxied by the
production of globally famous historical characters.

Explore on Pantheon __

__

# Cocos (Keeling) Islands

![](/static/img/icons/country/country_ascck.png)

![](/static/img/icons/country/country_ascxr.png)

# Christmas Island

__

![](/static/img/nav/collective-learning-mit-media-lab.png) __Donate

                
                                      * Deutsch
                      * English
                      * Español
                      * Français
                      * Italiano
                      * Nederlands
                      * Português
                      * Pyccĸий
                      * Tiếng Việt
                      * Tϋrkçe
                      * ελληνικά
                      * Монгол
                      * עברית
                      * العربية
                      * हिन्दी
                      * 日本語
                      * 简化中国
                      * 한국어
                

The Observatory of Economic Complexity by Alexander Simoes is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License. Permissions
beyond the scope of this license may be available here. ![Creative Commons

License](//i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/80x15.png)

![](/static/img/nav/x.png)

[ esc ]

No Filter Countries Products Visualizations

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

