

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

                
                                      * Our Work
                        * Clean Energy
                        * Clean Vehicles
                        * Food & Agriculture
                        * Global Warming
                        * Nuclear Power
                        * Nuclear Weapons
                        * Center for Science and Democracy
                      * About
                        * Accomplishments & History
                        * Leadership & Experts
                        * Funding & Financials
                        * Ways to Give
                        * News Center
                        * Jobs at UCS
                        * Contact Us
                        * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
                      * Take Action
                        * Science Network
                      * Subscribe
                      * Donate
                        * Renew Your Membership
                        * Become a Member
                        * Give Monthly
                        * Make a Planned Gift
                        * More Ways to Give
                        * Gifts in Honor or Memory
                        * Gift Memberships
                      * Science Network Leaders
                

**search**

## You are here

                
                                      1. Global Warming
                      2. » Global Warming Science
                

# Is There a Connection Between the Ozone Hole and Global Warming?

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2017/04/Hovering_on_the_Horizon_-

_NASA_Earth_Observatory.jpg?itok=XBkc9iEd)

The Moon hovering over Earth's atmosphere.  
Image: NASA Earth Observatory

### Human activities cause ozone depletion and global warming

Ozone (O3) depletion does not cause global warming, but both of these
environmental problems have a common cause: **human activities that release
pollutants into the atmosphere altering it.**

Global warming is caused primarily by putting too much carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere when coal, oil, and natural gas are burned to generate electricity
or to run our cars.

Carbon dioxide spreads around the planet like a blanket, and is one of the
main gases responsible for the absorption of infrared radiation (felt as
heat), which comprises the bulk of solar energy.

Ozone depletion occurs when chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and halons—gases
formerly found in aerosol spray cans and refrigerants—are released into the
atmosphere (see details below).

Ozone sits in the upper atmosphere and absorbs ultraviolet radiaton, another
type of solar energy that's harmful to humans, animals and plants. CFCs and
halons cause chemical reactions that break down ozone molecules, reducing
ozone's ultraviolet radiation-absorbing capacity.

### How ozone works

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/04/OzoneFig3.gif)

How ozone is distributed in the atmosphere.  
Image: NOAA

The sun emits electromagnetic radiation at different wavelengths, meaning
energy at different intensities. The atmosphere acts like a multi-layer shield
that protects Earth from dangerous solar radiation.

Ozone is found in two different parts of our atmosphere. Ground level or “bad”
ozone is a human health irritant and component of smog. It is found in the
lower atmosphere (troposphere) and has nothing to do with the "ozone hole."

High level or “good” ozone occurs in the stratosphere and accounts for the
vast majority of atmospheric ozone.

The stratospheric ozone layer absorbs ultraviolet (UV) radiation, preventing
dangerous UV rays from hitting Earth's surface and harming living organisms.
UV rays cannot be seen or felt, but they are very powerful and change the
chemical structure of molecules.

UV radiation plays a small role in global warming because its quantity is not
enough to cause the excess heat trapped in the atmosphere. UV radiation
represents a small percentage of the energy from the sun, and is not highly
absorbed or scattered in the atmosphere—especially when compared with other
wavelengths, like infrared. But, ozone depletion is also concerning because it
directly impacts the health of humans, and other living organisms.

### The ozone hole

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2017/04/ozone_1979-2008.jpg?itok=IUxyCg83)

The ozone hole.  
Image: NASA's Earth Observatory

The term ‘ozone hole’ refers to the depletion of the protective ozone layer in
the upper atmosphere (stratosphere) over Earth's polar regions. People,
plants, and animals living under the ozone hole are harmed by the solar
radiation now reaching the Earth's surface—where it causes health problems,
from eye damage to skin cancer.

Stratospheric ozone is constantly produced by the action of the sun's
ultraviolet radiation on oxygen molecules (known as photochemical reactions).
Although ozone is created primarily at tropical latitudes, large-scale air
circulation patterns in the lower stratosphere move ozone toward the poles,
where its concentration builds up.

In addition to this global motion, strong winter polar vortices are also
important to concentrating ozone at the poles. During the continuously dark
polar winter, the air inside the polar vortices becomes extremely cold, a
necessary condition for polar stratospheric cloud formation.

Polar stratospheric clouds create the conditions for drastic ozone
destruction, providing a surface for chlorine to change into ozone-destroying
form. They generally last until the sun comes up in the spring.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2017/04/Nacreous_clouds_Antarctica.jpg?itok=HOLxvXSs)

Nacreous Clouds over the NASA Radome, McMurdo Station, Antarctica  
Image: NASA

In the 1980s, scientists discovered that the ozone layer was thinning in the
lower stratosphere, with particularly dramatic ozone loss—known as the "ozone
hole"—in the Antarctic spring (September and October).

Scientists also discovered that the thinning in the ozone layer was caused by
increasing concentrations of ozone-depleting chemicals – chlorofluorocarbons
or CFCs (compounds with chlorine and/or fluorine attached to carbon) and to a
lesser extent halons (similar compounds with bromine or iodine). These
chemicals can remain in the atmosphere for decades to over a century.

At the poles, CFCs attach to ice particles in clouds. When the sun comes out
again in the polar spring, the ice particles melt, releasing the ozone-
depleting molecules from the ice particle surfaces.

Once released, these ozone-destroying molecules do their dirty work, breaking
apart the molecular bonds in UV radiation-absorbing ozone.

### The Montreal Protocol

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/04/09-16-2015Ozone_Layer.jpg)

Anniversary poster of the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone
Layer (1985), the first international cooperation effort to protect the ozone
layer.  
Image: United Nations Environmental Program.

CFCs were commonly found in refrigerants, solvents, propellants, and foam-
blowing agents before the Montreal Protocol was agreed on in the 1980s– an
international commitment to phase out ozone-depleting chemicals that was
universally ratified by all countries that participate in the UN.

The Montreal Protocol set an important precedent but more needs to be done. It
appears unlikely that the decrease in ozone-depleting substances alone will
lead to the recovery of the stratospheric ozone layer to its pre-1980
concentration levels because of the competing and uncertain effects of further
climate change.

In a worrying development, after an extremely cold winter in early 2011, for
the first time the ozone reduction in the Arctic was comparable to that in the
Antarctic.

Stratospheric ozone also has natural processes that remove it from the
atmosphere. Tiny sulfate particles (aerosols) blasted into the stratosphere by
the volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 caused measurable decreases in
ozone for several years following the eruptions.

### Does global warming have an impact on the stratospheric ozone layer?

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/04/temperature_stratosphere.jpg)

IPCC AR 5 Figure 2.24: Temperature change in both the lower stratosphere and
the lower troposphere go in opposite directions--a telling sign of excess
carbon dioxide in the troposphere.

Since the 1960s, there has been a trend of increasing warming of the lower
atmosphere and a cooling of the upper atmosphere. This warming-cooling dynamic
creates conditions that lead to ozone loss.

Observations show that as greenhouse gases increase and result in heating in
the lower atmosphere (troposphere), a cooling is occurring in the upper
atmosphere (stratosphere). Largely because heat from Earth's surface that
normally would convey through the troposphere and stratosphere, and eventually
escape to space, is now being trapped (or confined to the troposphere).

The increasing temperatures at the Earth's surface and decreasing temperatures
in higher parts of the atmosphere can be partly explained using the blanket
analogy.

Carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases rise into the atmosphere and
spread around the globe, like a blanket wrapping Earth. This blanket warms the
surface of the Earth and protects it from the cold air above it.

The increased concentrations of heat-trapping gases make the blanket
uncomfortably thicker. Wrapped now in a thicker blanket, Earth’s surface warms
up, heats the blanket itself, and traps more heat in the lower atmosphere.

The blanket also prevents heat from moving from the lower atmosphere to the
stratosphere, cooling down the stratosphere as a result.

In other words, heat-trapping gases contribute to creating the cooling
conditions in the atmosphere that lead to ozone depletion. Greenhouse gases
absorb heat at relatively low altitudes and warm the surface--but they have
the opposite effect in higher altitudes because they prevent heat from rising.

In a cooler stratosphere, ozone loss creates a cooling effect that results in
further ozone depletion. UV radiation releases heat into the stratosphere when
it reacts with ozone. With less ozone there is less heat released, amplifying
the cooling in the lower stratosphere, and enhancing the formation of ozone-
depleting polar stratospheric clouds, especially near the South Pole.

Last revised date: July 27, 2017

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

                
                                      * $25
                      * $50
                      * $100
                      * $250
                      * $1000
                      * Other
                

Donate

                
                                      * $25
                      * $50
                      * $100
                      * $250
                      * $1000
                      * Other
                

Donate

## Share

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

## From our blogs

                
                                      * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
                      * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
                      * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019
                

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Infographic

## SEA LEVEL RISE AND GLOBAL WARMING

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/11/gw-impacts-sea-

level-rise-infographic-sidebar-graphic-308px.jpg)

Sea level is rising—at an accelerating rate—especially along the U.S. East
Coast and Gulf of Mexico.

## WESTERN WILDFIRES AND CLIMATE CHANGE

![Western Wildfires and Climate

Change](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

western-wildfires-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=1BlISsgQ)

Rising temperatures are increasing wildfire risk throughout the Western U.S.

## EXTREME WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGE

![Extreme Weather and Climate Change

Infographic](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

extreme-weather-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=Ig86J4OV)

Strong scientific evidence links climate change with increasing heat waves,
coastal flooding, and other extreme weather events.

## Take Action

                
                                      * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)
                

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                
                      * About Us
                        * UCS Leadership & Experts
                        * Funding & Financials
                        * History & Accomplishments
                        * Jobs & Internships
                        * News
                      * Issues
                        * Clean Energy
                        * Clean Vehicles
                        * Food & Agriculture
                        * Global Warming
                        * Nuclear Power
                        * Nuclear Weapons
                      * Our Podcast
                        * Got Science?
                      * Publications
                      * Reports & Analysis
                      * Center for Science and Democracy
                      * Action Center
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * State Disclosures
                      * Our Blogs
                        * The Equation
                        * All Things Nuclear
                      * Site Map
                      * Contact Us
                      * UCS Store
                
                      * Ways to Give
                        * Donate
                        * Give Monthly
                        * Planned Gifts
                      * How to Help
                        * Become a Member
                        * Take Action
                        * Subscribe
                
                      * A **Normal Font Size**
                      * A **Larger Font Size**
                      * A **Largest Font Size**
                

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

