

![Circle of Blue](https://www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/Circle-of-Blue-Water-Speaks-600x139.png)

                
                                      * Water Podcasts
                      * WaterNews
                
                        * WaterNews
                          * The Daily Stream
                          * Federal Water Tap
                          * Weekly Water Newsletter
                        * Current
                          * After Paradise Burned
                          * Water Scarcity in India
                          * Michigan's Groundwater Emergency
                          * Groundwater
                          * Water Pricing
                          * Water Affordability
                          * Delhi Waits For Water
                          * Legionnaires'
                
                      * Features
                
                        * Special Features
                          * Septic Infrastructure in the U.S.
                          * Flint Water Crisis
                          * Cape Town
                          * Unearthing Water Risks of The Global Mining Industry
                        *               * Water and Financial Risks
                          * Stranded Assets
                          * Lake Mead
                          * California Drought
                          * Global WaterViews on QlikView
                          * Himalayas
                          * Hidden Waters, Dragons in the Deep
                
                      * Zeropolis
                        * Big Cities, Little Water
                      * HotSpots H2O
                      * Choke Point
                
                        * The World at a Choke Point
                          * Choke Point: Tamil Nadu
                          * Choke Point: South Africa
                          * Choke Point: China
                          * Choke Point: India
                          * Choke Point: Australia
                          * Choke Point: Tehuacán Valley
                        * Choke Point: U.S.
                          * Choke Point: Index
                            * California Central Valley
                            * Great Lakes Algae
                            * Ogallala Aquifer
                            * Water Data
                
                      * Convenings
                      * About
                
                        * About Circle of Blue
                          * Team Members
                          * Board of Directors
                          * Internships
                          * Ethics and Sponsorship
                          * Contact Us
                
                      * Donate
                      * Search
                      * **Menu**
                

**WaterNews**

![](https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/12/Himalayas-Melting-290.jpg?resize=290%2C215&ssl=1)

# Melting Glaciers Cause Potential Flooding Problems

December 11, 2009/0 Comments/in Asia, Climate Change, South Asia /by Brett
Walton

![Himalayas Melting Glaciers Causing

Floods](https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/12/Himalayas-Melting-290.jpg?resize=290%2C215)![Himalayas

Melting Glaciers Causing Floods](https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/12/Himalayas-Melting-290.jpg?resize=290%2C215) _The WWF
and UNEP, among others, are helping people adapt to climate change by reducing
the risk of devastating glacial floods._

The emerald lakes that form at the snouts of glaciers are a beautiful sight,
but rapidly melting glaciers can cause these lakes to breach their walls,
inundating villages downstream. To reduce the threat, the Worldwide Fund for
Nature (WWF) and the United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP) monitor and
drain some of these lakes.

A partnership led by the WWF widened the outlet channel from Thorthormi Lake
in Bhutan to lower the lake level by 86 cm this year, according to a WWF news
release. The goal is to lower the water level five meters by 2012.

“The story of Thorthormi Lake is shaping up to be a story of successful
adaptation to climate change,” said Tariq Aziz, Leader of WWF’s Living
Himalayas Initiative in the press release. “However, it is also a story of the
risks that climate change is building for communities and the costs and
complexities of successful adaptation work.”

Glaciers constantly deposit rocks and sediment, which form ridges of loose
material called moraines. A glacier with a stable position will build a
terminal moraine at its bottom. When the glacier recedes, the terminal moraine
holds back the lakes that develop from the melting ice. If the lakes grow too
large they can breach the moraine, and flood valleys below.

That is what happened to Thorthormi Lake in 1994 -- resulting in a flood that
killed more than 20 people and destroyed crops, roads and hydroelectric power
stations, according to the WWF. Since 2001 the lake, located 14,612 ft above
sea level, has tripled in size, while its surrounding moraine dam has halved
in height from erosion.

More than 100 new glacial lakes have formed in Bhutan since the last inventory
was taken in 2001 by the International Center for Integrated Mountain
Development.

Glacial lake outburst floods, or GLOFs as they are commonly referred to, are
the target of a monitoring project run by the UNEP throughout the Himalayas
and Hindu Kush range of Central Asia.

The project aims to assess the growth of glacial lakes from satellite data and
install early warning systems to alert villagers to dangerous fluctuations in
the water level.

The remoteness of these regions and the short research season make monitoring
difficult and expensive – reasons to include funds for adaptation in any
climate change treaty, according to the leader of WWF’s climate campaign.

“The speed of the changes, the dimensions of the new risks being faced by
communities and the difficulties of securing lives and livelihoods against
these threats makes sobering reading,” said Kim Carstensen in the WWF news
release. “This gives some perspective to the calls for substantial funding for
climate change adaptation in the developing world.”

Source: WWF, UNEP

Read the WWF report The Cost of Climate Change: The Story of Thorthormi
Glacial Lake in Bhutan

![Himalayas photos](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/06/Himalaya_Go_To_Main_Page_B2.jpg?w=500)![Himalayas

photos](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/06/Himalaya_Go_To_Main_Page_B2.jpg?w=500)

![](https://i1.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/brett-

walton-720-720-590x590.jpg?resize=590%2C590&ssl=1)![](https://i1.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/09/brett-

walton-720-720-590x590.jpg?resize=590%2C590&ssl=1)

Brett Walton

Brett writes about agriculture, energy, infrastructure, and the politics and
economics of water in the United States. He also writes the Federal Water Tap,
Circle of Blue’s weekly digest of U.S. government water news. He is the winner
of two Society of Environmental Journalists reporting awards, one of the top
honors in American environmental journalism: first place for explanatory
reporting for a series on septic system pollution in the United States(2016)
and third place for beat reporting in a small market (2014). Brett lives in
Seattle, where he hikes the mountains and bakes pies. Contact Brett Walton

### _Related_

**Tags:** Bhutan, climate change, Flooding, Floods, Glaciers, global warming,
Himalayan Glaciers, Himalayas, himalayas-flooding, himalayas-stories, Hindu
Kush, International Center for Integrated Mountain Development, mudslides,
Solutions, U.S. Infrastructure, UNEP, WWF

https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/Himalayas-
Melting-290.jpg?fit=290%2C215&ssl;=1 215 290 Brett Walton
https://www.circleofblue.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Circle-of-Blue-Water-
Speaks-600x139.png Brett Walton2009-12-11 18:35:102010-06-28 22:53:35Melting
Glaciers Cause Potential Flooding Problems

##### You might also like

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/05/worm_290.jpg?resize=180%2C180&ssl=1) **The Stream,
November 16: Air Pollution Worsens Droughts and Floods**

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/05/worm_290.jpg?resize=180%2C180&ssl=1) **Well levels
rise as residents turn to municipal supply**

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/05/worm_290.jpg?resize=180%2C180&ssl=1) **Cities Abolish
Bottled Water in Canada**

![](https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/03/2008-12-Australia-Murray-Darling-JCGanter-

IMG_1343.jpg?resize=180%2C180&ssl=1) **Media Alert: What Can California Learn
from Australia's Biggest Dry?**

![Wild rice on the Bad River Reservation in northern Wisconsin is in the

floating leaf stage by early June, with a single shoot lying on the water’s

surface. This is considered one of the most critical—and and dangerous—stages

in the rice’s life cycle. The plants are just beginning to change

physiologically from exchanging gases with the water column to exchanging

gases with the air. Therefore, they are very susceptible to heavy rains and

flooding events that can either rip out the young plants by the roots, or

drown them. June 6, 2011.](https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2011/08/wildrice01-590x250.jpg?resize=180%2C180&ssl=1) **Where
Food Grows on Water: Environmental and Human Threats to Wisconsin’s Wild
Rice**

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2010/05/worm_290.jpg?resize=180%2C180&ssl=1) **Sudan's Fight
Against the Guinea Worm**

0 replies

### Leave a Reply

Want to join the discussion?  
Feel free to contribute!

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

### Categories

Categories Select Category Africa Asia Australia California China Europe
Federal Water Tap Great Lakes Groundwater HotSpots H2O In the Circle India
Latin America Middle East North America Pacific South Africa South America
South Asia The Stream United States Water & Climate California Drought Climate
Change Drought Stress/Conflict Migration Water & Energy Fracking Hydropower
Mining Oil Water & Food Agriculture Food Security Water Management Cities
Conservation / Environmental Restoration Infrastructure Water Pricing Water
Risk Water News Water Policy & Politics Conflict & Cooperation Water Law Water
Rights/Access Water Quality Algae Blooms Drinking Water Pollution
Sanitation/Health Water Spotlight WEF

### Recent Posts

                
                                      * The Stream, June 6, 2019: Plastic Makes Up Majority of Trash in English, Welsh Canals
                      * Two Hurricanes, Two Floods: North Carolina Town Fights To Stay Alive
                      * Aging Sewer System Imperils North Carolina Town’s Finances
                      * The Rural Dilemma: Q&A With Al Leonard, Fair Bluff Town Manager
                      * Photo Gallery: Scenes from Fair Bluff
                

## Subscribe: Weekly Waternews

          * indicates required

Email Address *

First Name *

Last Name *

Company | Organization

**Please also subscribe me to the daily Stream**

                
                                      * Daily Stream
                

**Please also subscribe me to the Federal Water Tap**

                
                                      * Federal Water Tap
                

© 2019 Circle of Blue – all rights reserved  
Terms of Service | Privacy Policy

![](https://widgets.guidestar.org/gximage2?o=9757851&l=v4)![](https://widgets.guidestar.org/gximage2?o=9757851&l=v4)|
Donate to Circle of Blue  
---|--- 

EPA Greenhouse Gas Ruling Could Lead To Stricter Emissions Standards
![](https://i0.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/EPA-

Emissions-290.jpg?resize=290%2C192&ssl=1)
![](https://i2.wp.com/www.circleofblue.org/wp-

content/uploads/2009/12/Demonstrations-590.jpg?resize=300%2C201&ssl=1) Big
Copenhagen Demonstration – Noisy, Colorful, Insistent – Pushes For Climate...

Scroll to top

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

