

Skip to content

# Plan B

Search

                
                                      * Home
                      * Plan B Cases
                        * Plan B v UK
                        * Plan B v Heathrow Expansion
                      * About
                        * About
                        * Context
                        * What is Plan B?
                        * Who we are
                      * News
                      * Resources
                      * Legal Action
                        * Legal Action
                        * 1. Types of Legal Action
                        * 2a. C​ountries' legal obligations to each other
                        * 2b. Challenging your government's actions on climate change
                        * 2c. Liability of 'Carbon Majors'
                        * 2d. Investor and financier liability
                        * 3a. Blueprint: emissions, finance and damages
                        * 3b. Causation
                        * 4. Access to justice
                      * Why
                      * Get involved
                      * Contact
                

# Plan B combines mobilisation and litigation to hold power to account for

climate breakdown, fighting for the future for all people, all animals and all
life on earth.

We're taking the UK Government to court over its reckless plans to expand
Heathrow Airport. Join us!

#### Case information

Following the Government's commitment to reviewing its climate targets the
courts have refused us a full hearing on this case. There will be a full trial
of Heathrow expansion, starting 11 March 2019, also involving the London
Mayor, Friends of the Earth and others.

View case info & documents

#### Contribute to funding the case

People all over the world are now heading to court to hold governments and
corporates to account for Climate Change. As part of this global movement Plan
B is challenging the UK Government's plans to increase aviation, the most
polluting form of transport.

Help fund the case

#### Get involved

Plan B is supporting the emergence of a networked, international movement of
legal action to prevent catastrophic climate change. ​If you would like to
work in co-operation with Plan B or to volunteer your skills or time in some
other way please get in touch.

How to get involved

## Plan B in the news

12 May 2019

## Government tells Plan B it may review Heathrow plans

A senior civil servant at the Department of Transport has written to Plan B to
say the Government may now review plans to expand Heathrow Airport. Following
Parliament's recognition...

Filed in: Cases, News, Plan B in the news

10 May 2019

## Jury finds climate protestors NOT GUILTY

On 9 May, at Southwark Crown Court, a jury found two Extinction Rebellion
activists, Roger Hallam and David Durant not guilty of causing criminal
damage. Roger and David admitted...

Filed in: News, Plan B in the news

8 May 2019

## Plan B file appeal on Heathrow judgement

Today Plan B filed an appeal against the Heathrow judgement. You can read our
skeleton argument here: Court of Appeal, Skeleton Argument

Filed in: Cases, News, Plan B in the news, Uncategorized

# Plan B

Facebook | Twitter | Instagram  
(C) 2019 All Rights Reserved

                
                                      * Home
                      * Plan B Cases
                        * Plan B v UK
                        * Plan B v Heathrow Expansion
                      * About
                        * About
                        * Context
                        * What is Plan B?
                        * Who we are
                      * News
                      * Resources
                      * Legal Action
                        * Legal Action
                        * 1. Types of Legal Action
                        * 2a. C​ountries' legal obligations to each other
                        * 2b. Challenging your government's actions on climate change
                        * 2c. Liability of 'Carbon Majors'
                        * 2d. Investor and financier liability
                        * 3a. Blueprint: emissions, finance and damages
                        * 3b. Causation
                        * 4. Access to justice
                      * Why
                      * Get involved
                      * Contact
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

