

Link to home ![hero profile](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-logo-peach.png)

  * Recipes
    * Most Popular
    * Recipe Finder
    * Slimming World recipes
    * Chocolate cake recipe
    * Low calorie family meals
    * Healthy family meals
    * Cheap family meals
    * Family favourites
    * Slow cooker recipes
    * Casserole recipes
    * Cottage pie recipe
    * Soup recipes
    * Stir-fry recipes
    * Curry recipes
    * Salad recipes
    * Main Ingredient
    * Chicken recipes
    * Fish recipes
    * Pork recipes
    * Mince recipes
    * Pasta recipes
    * Egg recipes
    * Vegetable recipes
    * Chocolate recipes
    * Fruit recipes
    * Course
    * Breakfast recipes
    * Lunch recipes
    * Dinner recipes
    * Dessert recipes
    * Starter recipes
    * Snack ideas
    * Drink recipes
    * Cuisine
    * Indian recipes
    * Chinese recipes
    * Mexican recipes
    * Italian recipes
    * American recipes
    * Spanish recipes
    * Greek recipes
    * Thai recipes
    * Japanese recipes
    * Cakes and Baking
    * Cake recipes
    * Birthday cake recipes
    * Cheesecake recipes
    * Fairy cake recipes
    * Biscuit recipes
    * Muffin recipes
    * Bread recipes
    * Cheap, Quick and Easy
    * Cheap family meals
    * Easy tray bake recipes
    * Recipes to make in bulk and freeze
    * One pot dinner recipes
    * Cheap and easy brunch ideas
    * Jacket potato fillings
    * Packed lunch ideas
    * Special Occasions
    * Roast dinner recipes
    * Dinner party recipes
    * Birthday cakes
    * Afternoon tea ideas
    * Party food ideas
    * Cocktails
    * Quick and easy canapes
    * BBQ ideas
    * Picnic foods
    * Dietary
    * Vegetarian recipes
    * Vegan recipes
    * Vegan food list
    * Gluten-free recipes
    * Dairy-free recipes
    * Low fat recipes
    * High protein foods
    * Low carb recipes
  * Food
    * News and features
    * Latest food news
    * Best recipe boxes
    * How to avoid palm oil products
    * What is organic food?
    * Save money and reduce waste
    * Cooking Basics
    * Cups to grams converter
    * Seasonal food calendar
    * 50 recipes everyone should know
    * What's wrong with my cake?
    * How Tos
    * How to roast pork
    * How to make scrambled eggs
    * How to make an omelette
    * How to make sausage rolls
    * How to make sourdough pizza
    * Best and Worst
    * Best and worst breads
    * Best and worst chocolate bars
    * Best and worst cereals
    * Best and worst yogurts
    * Healthiest takeaways
  * Family
    * Most Popular
    * 41 ways to entertain your kids
    * Ovulation calculator
    * Early signs of pregnancy
    * Am I having a boy or girl?
    * Baby food meal planner
    * Pregnancy
    * Conception & Fertility
    * Pregnancy week by week
    * Baby names
    * Labour and birth
    * Babies
    * Breastfeeding
    * Baby sleep guide
    * Why is my baby crying?
    * When do babies crawl?
    * Potty training guide
    * Baby weaning guide
    * Children
    * Child development stages: Ages 0-16 years
    * Common childhood illnesses
    * Child height calculator
    * Parenting styles
    * Things to do
    * Craft
    * Days out
    * Kids party ideas
    * Cheap family holidays
  * Wellbeing
    * Family Health
    * Best and worst sun creams
    * Hay fever symptoms
    * Childhood illnesses
    * Natural cough remedies
    * Natural headache cures
    * Diet plans
    * 22 low syn Slimming World foods
    * The 5:2 diet
    * 16:8 diet plan
    * Mediterranean diet
    * Cambridge diet
    * Dukan diet
    * Celebrity diets
    * Weight loss and exercise
    * Easy exercise ideas
    * Kilos to stone converter
    * How to lose weight fast
    * When to eat to lose weight
    * Intermittent fasting
    * Beauty
    * How to get rid of dark circles
    * How to get rid of liver spots
    * Best cheap perfumes
    * 11 uses for Sudocrem
    * Relationships
    * What is tantric sex?
    * Long distance relationships
    * Signs he could be cheating
    * Co-parenting
    * Home
    * Cheap candles
    * Mrs Hinch's cleaning tips
    * How often you should wash bedding
  * Win
  * Follow
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Pinterest
    * Instagram
  * More 

Search Menu

Search

Type to search Press enter or click on the search icon

  * Home
  * Family

# What is ovulation? Everything you need to know about ovulation

GoodtoKnow October 1, 2018 9:30 am

  *     *       *   *     *       * 

![What is ovulation?](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

  * Conception & Fertility

Want to know more about ovulation? Our ovulation guide tells you exactly how
to work out when you're ovulating, what triggers ovulation as well as when you
should have sex to increase your chances of conception.

If you’re trying to get pregnant, understanding ovulation and the impact it
has on your fertility is important – but can also be really confusing!

Here, we separate the facts from the fiction on everything from the early
signs of ovulation to questions about eggs and sperm, and share plenty of sex
tips for conception too.

## What happens when you ovulate?

![](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

Every month your body prepares itself for a pregnancy, so each month you
release an egg from your ovum. This usually happens mid-cycle, about 14 days
into your cycle, but cycles do vary from person to person. The release of eggs
usually alternates, with one of your ovaries releasing an egg one month and
the other the next, and the egg then travels down your fallopian tube to the
womb. If the egg isn't fertilised by a sperm it's then shed with your womb
lining during your period.

## How long does your cycle last?

Every woman is different. The average cycle is 28 days, but many healthy,
fertile women will have a cycle slightly shorter or longer than this, so won't
necessarily ovulate on day 14. If yours isn't spot on 28 days, don't worry -
it doesn't mean there's a problem with your fertility. When you ovulate
depends on the due date of your next period and not the previous one - for
instance, if your cycle regularly lasts 31 days, you should ovulate on day 17.
So if you have sex on your prime fertile days, between days 14 and 17, you
have a good chance of falling pregnant. Confused? Our ovulation calculator can
help.

## What triggers ovulation?

It's all down to hormones. You produce Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH)
during the first part of your cycle, which triggers your body to start the
process of maturing eggs for ovulation. High levels of oestrogen produced at
this time trigger a release of LH, Luteinizing Hormone, causing the mature egg
to burst from the follicle. That is ovulation. Normally, only one egg will be
large enough to burst through the follicle during ovulation but occasionally
two will, which is how non-identical twins are conceived.

## How can you tell if you’re ovulating?

If you learn to 'read' your body and get to know your cycle you should be able
to tell when you're ovulating. The key is to look out for changes in your
cervical secretions. After your period you can feel quite dry for a day or so
and then get a sticky, whitish type of secretion. Then, when you start to
ovulate the secretion from your vagina will change to a clear, sticky, mucus-
like discharge. It's wettish and stretchy, like raw egg white, and normally
quite noticeable, so start looking out for it. This is a sure sign you're
ovulating.

## Sharethrough (Mobile)

  * 

## Do ovulation prediction kits and temperature charts make a difference?

They can be a useful guide to tell you when you're ovulating, but can also be
inaccurate on timing. Ovulation kits work by testing your urine for a hormone
surge which occurs just before ovulation, but the time you get the result, the
window of opportunity may have passed. Something called basal body temperature
(BBT) measurements can also be used, but these rely on the fact that your body
temperature increases a very small amount after ovulation - again, you may
have already ovulated by the time you get this information, so it's too late
to conceive. Learning to read your body and pinpointing the fertile time in
your cycle is cheaper and often more effective.

![](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

## How long do the sperm and egg live?

An egg lives for about 12-24 hours after you ovulate, and sperm can live for
five to seven days. Ideally, you need a lot of sperm on stand-by to 'pounce'
on that egg when it's released, so have sex in the days leading up to when you
ovulate and a day after. You only release the one egg, but a single
ejaculation from your partner will supply millions of sperm, so keep the
supply up by having lots of sex.

## Can you only conceive if you have sex on the day you ovulate?

No, that's a myth. Because sperm can live for up to a week after ejaculation,
they may still be in your fallopian tube when you ovulate, and so able to
fertilise an egg. Research shows that even if you have sex six days prior to
ovulation you stand a good chance of conceiving. If you wait to have sex only
on the day you ovulate, you may miss your chance of pregnancy altogether.

## When should you have sex?

![](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

Recommendations from the Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists are
that you should avoid timed intercourse and instead have sex several times a
week around the time of ovulation.

This is thought to be the best way to have a good chance of pregnancy, so
don't get hung up about having sex on the day you ovulate, and don't assume
you are ovulating on the 14th day of your cycle.

Just have lots of sex in that week around ovulation, and make sure you keep it
about having fun rather than obsessing over making a baby - our sex tips might
help.

## What should I do after sex to boost my chances?

As fertility expert Zita West, says, 'There's no need for extreme measures
such as putting your legs up in the air or doing handstands!'

Many women invest in a fertility pillow because they think it will help the
sperm get to the right place but there is little evidence to suggest these
work.

To increase your fertility chances Zita recommends is lying still for 20-30
minutes after you've had sex to allow the sperm time to make their way up to
the womb and fallopian tubes.

If you do get up and feel some of the seminal fluid leave you, don't panic.
This doesn't mean that you won't have been successful - even if you lose up to
half the sperm released, there should still be more than enough for you to
conceive.

## Can ovulation be painful?

Some women get a sharp pain in their lower abdomen, called mittelschmerz, as
the ripe egg is released by the ovary. Rarely women may lose a small amount of
blood when they ovulate too but a huge amount of pain shouldn't be felt. If
you are bleeding between periods or experiencing a lot of discomfort, you
should consult your doctor straight away.

## Why can it be so difficult to get pregnant?

![](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

Humans just aren't very fertile as a species. You only have a one in three
chance of conceiving every month - and that's just when you're a healthy
twenty-something. As you get into your thirties those chances become less with
fertility typically dropping in women from the age of 35.

### Video of the Week

However, remember that 1 in 7 couples doesn't get pregnant within a year of
trying - but half of these will get pregnant in the next year, without
fertility treatment. The worst thing you can do is get stressed and dwell on
the question 'why can't I get pregnant?'.

If you try and worry less and enjoy the process more you might find it happens
quicker and easier than you thought possible!

## Latest Stories

  * ![](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png) Credit: RexFeatures 

### Princess Eugenie’s new official title has finally been revealed

  * ![](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

### Cadbury launches four delicious new treats - including chocolate-covered

Oreos!

  *     * ![things to do in Marrakech](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png) Credit: Getty 

### Six of the best things to do in Marrakech

  * Contact Us 
  * Terms & Conditions 
  * Privacy Policy 
  * Cookie Information 
  * Advertising Info 
  * Privacy Settings 

(C) Copyright TI Media Limited. All rights reserved. ![IPSO

Regulated](https://keyassets-p2.timeincuk.net/wp/prod/wp-

content/uploads/sites/53/2018/04/gtk-placeholder.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

