
                
                                      * About
                      * Press
                      * Watch
                      * Explore
                
                        * The Journey
                        * The Experts
                        * The Crisis
                        * The Solutions
                        * The Deniers
                        * The Encyclical
                        * The Painting
                        * The Music
                
                      * Take Action
                

Share

                
                                      *           *           *           * Share The Film
                
                        *             *             *           * About
                      * Press
                      * Watch
                      * Explore
                      * Take Action
                

![How is our climate

changing?](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/41e20f15-be40-4906-aafc-27d442d7bac2/hero-

NASA-goddard-scientist.jpg?auto=compress%2Cformat)

# How is our climate changing?

A scientist examines data at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center

Share this post

                
                                      *           *           * Record-breaking heat, prolonged drought, wildfires, extreme weather and flooding, sea level rise, even ocean dead zones… all of these trends were predicted by climate scientists decades ago and they have now become a reality. We are living in what many experts now call the “Anthropocene” — a new geologic epoch in which human activity is the primary driver of changes on Planet Earth, including the greatest change of all — global warming. Here are the 9 most important facts you need to know about our changing climate.
                

# The world is getting hotter

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/0b17d36d-72c4-4e4d-a700-92952a505ae6/Temp32.gif?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Global surface temperatures are on the rise. This is measured by “anomalies,”
or difference between measured temperatures vs. the 20th century average for
combined land and sea surface temperatures (pictured above courtesy of
**NASA** ). 9 of the 10 hottest summers ever recorded have occurred since
2002. Just last year, Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology had to add a new color
( **neon purple** ) to their forecast charts (54-56 degrees C) due to
continued record heat. These temperature extremes are a result of just
**0.85°C** in global temperature rise. Most experts believe we have locked in
at least 1.5 degrees in temperature from the carbon pollution we have already
emitted, and we are fast approaching the dangerous climate threshold of a
**2°C rise** in temperature rise. **Read More »**

# The ice is melting.

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/0dcd6ae3-ff32-46cf-

be18-841dcad33d4b/sea-ice-PIK-Potsdam21.jpg?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Arctic Sea has been decreasing dramatically in the past three decades. Between
1900 and 1980, the extent of Arctic ice measured in September held constant at
approximately 8.5 million square kilometers. Since then it has dropped far
faster than even the most extreme scientific projections — falling below 5
million kilometers. The same phenomenon is being documented for nearly all of
160,000 **mountain glaciers** , like Mt. Kilimanjaro which has **decreased
80%** in the past century and will likely disappear within the next decade.
**Read More »**

# Less ice means more heat.

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/2ebe8429-7098-479c-a1d2-28a150eabf8c/sea-

ice-melting-quote2.jpg?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Ice not only regulates global temperatures, it also reflects sunlight back out
to space. So the more ice that melts, the more the dark surfaces of the ocean
and ground are exposed. These darker surfaces absorb heat instead of
reflecting it, creating a vicious cycle that puts even more heat into the
oceans and increases the global warming effect. In just the **past 5 years** ,
the rate of ice volume loss has accelerated dramatically — doubling in
Greenland and tripling in West Antarctica. **Read More »**

# The seas are rising.

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/ccc10fed-3523-4ae9-9b82-17f194c13c2f/MNN-

sea-level-1993-2016-nasa.jpg?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Oceans have absorbed **more than 93%** of the increased heat from global
warming . The heat content of the oceans has multiplied 5-fold since 1980,
causing “thermal expansion,” which accounts for roughly half of total sea
level rise. The other half is due to melting glaciers and polar ice. This
combination has already produced 19 cm of sea level rise since the year 1900.
And it’s increasing quickly – **3 times faster** in the past two decades than
the century average. Current models predict between 8-48 cm (7-19 inches) of
sea level rise by 2050 (relative to 2000 levels) and more than double that by
the end of the century. This will place coastal communities around the world
at risk of extreme flooding. **Read More »**

# Oceans are acidifying.

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/c7ac9b69-614c-426e-9c28-387437e82b84/Corals-

dead-alive1.jpg?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Oceans absorb more than 1/4 of all the CO2 pollution emitted each year, and
this is changing the very chemistry of the oceans. Ocean acidity has increased
30% since 1700, and will likely double by the end of the century, a rate of
change **10x greater** than anything seen in the last 50M years. This is
wreaking havoc on the calcifiers (animals that need calcium to make shells)
and corals, which provide the spawning ground for approximately 25% of all
marine species ( **PDF** ). More acidic oceans threaten the very foundation of
the marine food chain and the fisheries that feed more than 3 billion people.
**Read More »**

# Jet streams are changing.

The arctic is warming twice as fast as the mid-latitudes, and some experts
believe this could be affecting the Polar Jet Stream – the undulating river of
air in our atmosphere that drives weather patterns in the northern hemisphere.
When the jet stream swings north it pulls warm air up from the tropics, and
when it swings south it pulls down cold air from the Arctic. The jet stream
flows west to east but it can get “trapped,” causing unusual phenomena like
the “polar vortex” which recently built up a large and prolonged zone of
arctic air in the Midwestern U.S. In just the past decade, the number of
**trapped waves has doubled** , leading to more frequent and more extreme
weather fronts. **Read More »**

# Hurricanes are intensifying

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/d9093803-c48a-47e3-8260-9f689c74d507/SSTHurricane-11.jpg?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Scientists studying the Atlantic Ocean now know there is a **strong
correlation** between the surface temperature of the ocean during the summer
and the intensity of tropical storms. The warmer the oceans, the more energy
storms have as they form in the Atlantic. This could account in part for the
**dramatic increase** in major hurricanes (greater than Category 3) over the
past 20 years. Based on records from the **Hurricane Database** (HURDAT) in
the period from 1900-1980 major hurricanes occurred an average of 2 per year,
but in the period since 1980 the average has tripled to more than 6 per year.
**Read More »**

# Rivers are flooding.

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/07fac436-24e1-4d01-ae12-1554ac7cf5e5/Prep1.gif?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Warmer air can hold more water vapor, and when all that water vapor condenses
in the atmosphere, it creates more intense but less frequent downpours of
rain, making **wet areas wetter**. A similar phenomenon is triggered by
naturally occurring El Nino events, but **unlike El Nino** which pushes storms
towards the tropics, global warming pushes storms towards higher latitudes.
This could explain why in the past decade there has been a **70% increase** of
heavy downpours in U.S. Northeast region. Because water vapor itself acts like
a greenhouse gas, a vicious cycle is created — more moisture means more heat
which creates even more moisture. The visualization above by NOAA shows how
this pattern will result in intensifying precipitation (darker blue) through
the year 2100. **Read More »**

# Water is vanishing.

![](https://images.takeshape.io/852126ce-462c-40d9-ae71-1a2c96e82d8f/dev/4ebae5a5-5b4f-402d-9938-c291e8010f72/Drought-31.gif?auto=compress%2Cformat)

Many of the world’s great rivers are fed by glaciers and mountain snowpack.
Increased temperatures means **less snow and ice** and increased evaporation.
This is particularly worrisome for arid regions like the American southwest,
northern Africa, and western China, which rely on glacier and snow melt to
fill their rivers, replenishing water supplies. A new report indicates the
record-breaking drought in California and northern Mexico may be the warm-up
act for a “ **megadrought** ” lasting more than 30 years. The Sierra snowpack
(typically providing **1/3 of the State’s water** supply) is at its **lowest
levels** in recorded history, and the Colorado River is at its lowest flow
rate in **1200 years** , threatening the water supply for 40 million people.
Lake Oroville shows just how quickly our water can disappear. **Read More »**

Share this post

                
                                      *           *           * ![Credits](/assets/images/credit-block.svg)
                

Copyright ©2018 all rights reserved.

                
                                      * About
                      * Screenings
                      * Press
                      * Explore
                      * Contact
                      * Terms
                      * Privacy
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

