

# Watts Up With That?

## The world's most viewed site on global warming and climate change

# Menu

Skip to content

                
                                      * Home
                      * About
                        * About
                        * Awards
                        * Contact
                        * Compose story
                        * FAQs
                        * My Blog Spawn
                        * Policy
                        * Privacy Policy
                        * Publications and Projects
                      * Climate FAIL Files
                        * Al Gore and Bill Nye FAIL at doing a simple CO2 experiment
                        * List of excuses for 'The Pause' in global warming
                        * The Gore-a-thon on WUWT
                      * Climategate
                      * Reference Pages
                        * Atmosphere Page
                          * CO2 Page
                          * Atmospheric Oscillation Page
                        * Climatic Phenomena
                          * ENSO Page
                          * ENSO Forecast Page
                          * Polar Vortex Page
                          * Northern Polar Vortex Page
                          * Southern Polar Vortex Page
                        * "Extreme Weather" Page
                          * Tornado Page
                          * Tropical Cyclone Page
                        * Geomagnetism Page
                        * Global Temperature – Climate
                          * Global Climate Page
                          * Global Temperature Page
                        * Glossary
                        * Ocean Page
                          * Oceanic Oscillation Page
                        * Paleoclimate Page
                        * Sea Ice Page
                          * Beaufort Sea Ice Page
                          * Great Lakes Ice Page
                          * Northern Regional Sea Ice Page
                        * Research
                          * Potential Climatic Variables Page
                          * The Spencer-Braswell & Dessler papers
                        * Solar Page
                        * US Weather – Climate
                          * US Climate Page
                          * US Weather Page
                      * Submit story
                      * Tips and Notes
                      * Test
                

# One of the longest running climate prediction blunders has disappeared from

the Internet

Anthony Watts / November 12, 2015

Readers of WUWT and millions of climate skeptics have read this article
before, and in fact it is likely one of the most cited articles ever that
illustrates the chutzpah and sheer hubris on display from a climate scientist
who was so certain he could predict the future with certainty. Dr. David Viner
of the Climatic Research Unit who famously said:

From the Independent’s most cited article: Snowfalls are now just a thing of
the past by Charles Onians:

> However, the warming is so far manifesting itself more in winters which are
less cold than in much hotter summers. According to Dr David Viner, a senior
research scientist at the climatic research unit (CRU) of the University of
East Anglia,within a few years winter snowfall will become “a very rare and
exciting event”.

>

> “Children just aren’t going to know what snow is,” he said.

It seems however, that after over 15 years, the Independent has removed that
article, and the URL now comes up like this:

![snowfall-thing-of-the-

past-404](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfall-thing-

of-the-past-404.png)![snowfall-thing-of-the-

past-404](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfall-thing-

of-the-past-404.png)

Here is what it originally looked like:![snowfall-thing-of-the-

past](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfall-thing-of-

the-past.png)![snowfall-thing-of-the-

past](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfall-thing-of-

the-past.png)

Fortunately, I have preserved the entire article as a PDF for posterity:

Snowfalls are now just a thing of the past - The Independent (PDF)

One wonders about the timing, whether it is related to the upcoming COP21
climate confab in Paris, or if it was simply some blunder, oversight, or
archive purge on the part of The Independent.

Note: ~~I owe a hat tip to a WUWT reader, whose email/comment seems to be lost
in the firehose of communications I get daily. If you are reading, leave a
note in comments and I 'll correct this. ~~ The reader was Cole Pritchard, who
sent the info to my phone via IM, Thanks Cole.

* * *

**Update:** It gets curiouser, searching on The Independent website using
their search engine for the phrase "Snowfalls are now just a thing of the
past" yields only one result for that exact string - a story lambasting the
original article that contained the phrase.

![snowfalls-search-the-

independent](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfalls-

search-the-independent.png)![snowfalls-search-the-

independent](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfalls-

search-the-independent.png)

Published in the year 2000, I thought maybe the story was just too old, and
the Independent simply removed the story to save archive space, or maybe this
had to do with some site redesign and the URL simply got broken. Yet when I
remove the quote marks to search for the phrase in general, and not exactly,
other stories back as far as 1994 about global warming and snow appear:

![snowfalls-search-other-

articles](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfalls-

search-other-articles.png)![snowfalls-search-other-

articles](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2015/11/snowfalls-

search-other-articles.png)

It seems clear now that the removal was deliberate.

Advertisements

### Share this:

                
                                      * Print
                      * Email
                      * Twitter
                      * Facebook
                      * Pinterest
                      * LinkedIn
                      * Reddit
                      * ### Like this:
                

Like Loading...

November 12, 2015 in snowfall.

### Related posts

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/gfs_6hr_snow_acc_mc_19-550x413-50x50.png)

### NoHype Weather -April Snowstorms: The Rule, Not the Exception

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/ca-snowpack-totals-50x50.jpg)

### NOAA: 'Incredible' amounts of snow in California's snowpack

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/sierra_tmo_2019042-50x50.jpg)

### Recent storms give California's Sierra Nevada snowpack a huge boost

# Post navigation

<- A Tale Of Two Convergences

Congress Passes Space Mining Act: There are No Limits to Growth ->

## 193 thoughts on "One of the longest running climate prediction blunders

has disappeared from the Internet"

                
                                      1. Stewart Harding says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 3:48 pm

Probably after NASA photographs of the icecaps showed once again, that it's
just not happening.

                
                                        * mickyhcorbett75 says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:46 am

I have a slight OT question about the sea ice. Having seen the spread of the
last couple of years for Arctic Ice was the 1979 to 1985 period anomalously
high? Are we looking at the wrong end of the telescope?

                
                                          * Gail Combs says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:59 am

Yes.  
Read the 1974 CIA report: “A Study of Climatological Research as it Pertains
to Intelligence Problems”  
That time period was cold enough that governments were concerned about the
food supply and the implications

> …  
>  … Since 1972 the grain crisis has intensified…. **Since 1969 the storage of
grain has decreased from 600 million metric tons to less than 100 million
metric tons - a 30 day supply… many governments have gone to great lengths to
hide their agricultural predicaments from other countries as well as from
their own people…**  
>  pg 9  
>  The archaeologists and climatotologists document a rather grim history…
**There is considerable evidence that these empires may not have been undone
by barbarian invaders but by climatic change** …. has tied several of these
declines to specific global cool periods, major and minor, that affected
global atmospheric circulation and brought wave upon wave of drought to
formerly rich agricultural lands.  
>  Refugees from these collapsing civilizations were often able to migrate to
better lands… This would be of little comfort however,… The world is too
densely populated and politically divided to accommodate mass migration….  
>  **The Wisconsin analysis questions whether a return to these climate
conditions could support a population that has grown from 1.1 billion in 1850
to 3.75 billion in 1970. The Wisconsin group predicted that the climate could
not support the world 's population since technology offers no immediate
solution. Further world grain reserves currently amount to less than one
month; thus any delay in supplies implies mass starvation.** They also
contended that new crop strains could not be developed over night… Moreover
**they observed that agriculture would become even more energy dependent in a
world of declining resources.**

                
                                          * Scottish Sceptic says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:23 am

We may already be in a cooling phase. When doing the work for my article
Proof: recent temperature trends are not abnormal there was no evidence for
any abnormality in the climate except on a 50-60 year time-scale. This could
still be random variation, or it could be a cycle. Since then I've seen a
couple of indications of a 60 year cycle in data and a strong relationship
between AMO and glaciers (again on a 60 year cycle). If true, then the peak of
the cycle should have occurred around 2010 and if so, we may see a sharp
cooling trend after the El Nino ends (next year).  
However, added to that is the sunspot cycle. I'm convinced there's a
connection, but not convinced by some of the wilder claims about the extent of
the connection. However, that would suggest cooling as well. Rising CO2, now
looks like a very insignificant part of climate and I'm beginning to think
changes in forestry and land use are a greater impact even than CO2. These
however suggest warming. So, I wouldn't bet my house on cooling, but if anyone
wanted to bet a Mid winter swim in the Forth in Scotland - I might go for it.

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 8:25 am

Well HOORAY! **So** good to see you post, Gail Combs. Just good to know "our"
Gail is still out there, still wielding that flashing, bright, sword for
truth.  
Well, well. That made my day. #(:))

                
                                          * Gloateus Maximus says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 10:43 am

Yes.  
The start year, 1979, was close to the greatest extent of the past century, if
not the highest. Might possibly have been higher in 1915-19, but by 1922 the
Arctic was melting noticeably.

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 11:30 am

http://ocean.dmi.dk/arctic/plots/icecover/icecover_current_new.png  
Found on the WUWT Sea Ice Page: http://wattsupwiththat.com/reference-
pages/sea-ice-page/  
In case anyone reading this might find this bit of sea ice basics helpful:

> Sea ice variations have recently attracted much public interest. Part of the
reason for this is the high albedo (c. 80%) of sea ice, which reflects much of
the incoming solar short-wave radiation during the summer time. If not
reflected, this radiation may instead be consumed by warming ocean water,
thereby initiating a positive feedback, leading to more warming. This simple
analysis however ignores that evaporation will increase from the ocean when
the total sea ice cover are reduced in size. Increased evaporation usually
results in an increased cloud cover and increased reflectance of incoming
solar radiation, which tend to counteract the above process. The decrease or
increase of sea ice has no effect on the global sea level.

Professor Ole Humlum  
(here: http://climate4you.com/ (if this link goes to Home and not to Sea Ice
page, click on Sea Ice on left menu, then click on "Arctic Sea Ice Area and
Thickness" -- Latest update to site: November 11, 2015)

                
                                          * Eamon Butler says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:19 pm

Great to hear from you Gail Combs.

                
                                          * Rational Db8 says:
                

November 16, 2015 at 11:55 am

Note to Anthony & Moderators & everyone else - the "wayback machine" (or "web
archive") can also be used to resurrect pages and even see when they were
modified. The Independent snow prediction article is here, for example:
http://web.archive.org/web/20150723090103/http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/snowfalls-
are-now-just-a-thing-of-the-past-724017.html It's a very handy way to prove
beyond doubt not only that a page existed, but exactly what it's content was
at what time frame.  
The site shows every single day the page was crawled and archived over years -
just click on the "capture" timeline for the year you're interested in, and a
calendar will pop up showing every time it was captured during that year… then
click on whichever day you want and the page as it was on that day will come
up.

                
                                        * george e. smith says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 11:12 am

The ability to predict the future for certain, brings with it the necessary
information to circumvent the possibility of that future event happening.  
Ergo it cannot be possible to predict the future for certain.  
g

                
                                          * D.J. Hawkins says:
                

November 16, 2015 at 11:29 am

"A" does not imply "B". Consider an ELE-level asteroid detected on a collision
course with Earth a year out. We know exactly what's going to happen and can't
do anything about it.

                
                                      2. jimmaine says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 3:53 pm

NOthing to see here…move along, move along.

                
                                        * Goldrider says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 9:49 am

No more snow? Tell it to the folks in Boston!

                
                                          * Anthony S says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 8:54 pm

Gotta love the fact that you can see the snowpile in Boston on the latest
Google imagery update which was done in June.  
https://www.google.com/maps/@42.346354,-71.0315357,236m/data=!3m1!1e3

                
                                      3. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 3:55 pm

I have the wayback machine address somewhere, saved on a previous post.  
I'll be back in a minute with the wayback archive.  
And yes, deleting the article was completely pathetic behaviour.  
The commissar vanishes, once again!!!

                
                                        * Sparky says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:06 pm

http://web.archive.org/web/20100209052939/http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/snowfalls-
are-now-just-a-thing-of-the-past-724017.html

                
                                          * Manfred says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:44 pm

Encore the Wayback Machine! Gives 'New Age' meaning to 'by the sins of your
fathers' you will be judged'.

                
                                      4. hawaiianbear says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 3:57 pm

Aw, c'mon youse guys. You know I wuz jes' a'spookin'. Git offa my back!

                
                                      5. tomo says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 3:58 pm

No doubt Tom Bawden is involved … the berk just pushed this garbage out about
££££ billions ££££ in "subsidies for fossil fuels".  
The sooner Boris Berezofsky tires of his increasingly stupid and unhinged dead
tree Chihuahua and has it put down the better.

                
                                        * jl says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:18 pm

Adding to what you said, and it's a pet peeve of mine-is that fossil fuel
companies (and thousands of other companies) by and large receive tax breaks,
not subsidies- though they receive some. They're two different things, though
the media constantly uses the same term for both. A subsidy, by definition, is
the government giving money to an individual or company so as to become
viable. A tax break let's you keep more of what was already yours- nobody is
"giving" anything to anybody. Solar and wind receive "subsides", which is
money from the government. Fossil fuel (and you and I) receive mostly tax
breaks.

                
                                          * NW sage says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:25 pm

I'm afraid you don't understand - the government's position is that ALL money
is theirs by definition. ANY part they let you keep is therefore a subsidy!!
This applies to more than just companies.

                
                                          * Wayne Delbeke says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:54 pm

JL as a farmer I represent(sic) that. Much of what is called "subsidies" is
depreciation allowances. In years past, you may have heard of "sinking funds"
which were intended to allow a person to replace equipment as it wore out.
People who use "equipment" to earn income are allowed to depreciate the
equipment at rates given by government mandate on the basis that it has a
declining value because of time and use. Oil companies are also allowed to
depreciate their reservoirs as they are used up and their "assets" decline.
That isn't a subsidy. If you were doing a "cash" business, you would subtract
the whole of your asset purchases in the year of purchase offsetting your
Income, perhaps making it negative. But government doesn't like that so they
set rules for depreciation along with Generally Accepted Accounting Practices
(GAAP) though Tax rules and GAAP rules do not always go together resulting in
two sets of income statements, one for Tax, and one for GAAP. Not usually an
issue for individuals or small companies but corporations must be aware of the
rules and differences.  
With resource industries it can be a bit more complicated than the above, but
that is the general idea.  
The media and small activists generally don't get it (or pretend they don't)
though the people running big greens most certainly do.

                
                                          * usurbrain says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:05 pm

You are ignoring that the value they declare the property for becomes a base
that the city, county, state etc. can tax them for. Kind of hard to declare
that it is not worth that much when they use that for its value for there tax
write off. Thus YOU pay les city, county, state property taxes.  
Further, regardless of what the taxes are - YOU, the CONSUMER always pay the
taxes. PERIOD. you may think they pay the taxes BUT YOU are giving them the
money to pay the taxes. Why do so many people have trouble understanding that
extremely simple fact.

                
                                          * George Tetley says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:35 am

You think yo have problems !! Here in Germany having worked until 65 years and
paid taxes all my life, I find now I must pay taxes at a higher rate on my
government pension,

                
                                          * Reality Observer says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 5:56 am

Those tax breaks are also the _same_ as those for any other primary resource
extraction business. Whether it 's "evil oil" or "good germanium" they are the
same thing.  
When you go the route of these people - well, just how much is the government
"subsidizing" GE by letting them take depreciation for their wind turbine
manufacturing equipment? Or the wind farms depreciating those turbines once
they are installed? Let's eliminate those "subsidies" too, eh?

                
                                          * MarkW says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:07 am

Reminds me of the way people used to whine about tax loop holes.  
Turns out that the definition of a loop hole was "a tax deduction that I don't
qualify for".

                
                                          * Richard Bjr says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:50 am

Wonderful, illuminating thread of comments starting with jl's first at 5:18.
As my youngest might have said fifteen years ago, WUWT readers ROCK!

                
                                          * Gregg C. says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 7:35 am

NW sage is correct. In government circles 'tax expenditures' is a phrase for
all the money that individuals keep after taxes. The going-in position is ALL
of the money is theirs to start with.

                
                                      6. Sparky says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:05 pm

If you have the URL then web.archive.org can help you out. The internet is
forever. This friendly site has captured a copy of this page 107 times between
30 Dec 2009 and 5 Nov 2015. You can see them here:
http://web.archive.org/web/20100209052939/http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/snowfalls-
are-now-just-a-thing-of-the-past-724017.html

                
                                        * Don K says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:46 pm

I found a copy without much trouble at the https://archive.org/: Regretably
link-rot is a pretty common phenomenon. A lot of it appears to be
unintentional. And, worse, some sites aren't archived by the internet archive
site because of the robots.txt file or other issues. See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Link_rot Overall, dead-links are so common that
it's had to ascribe any given broken link to malice.

                
                                          * climatereason says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:19 am

LInk rot is, as you say, common. I have written some 15 climate articles and
none of the earlier ones still have 100% of their links remaining. I suspect
this is such an occurrence or just a housekeeping matter.  
The original story did get a little distorted in the telling and sceptics and
alarmists alike have had their own take on the matter.  
Desmogblog gave their version of events here, quoting a delingpole article
into the bargain.  
Worth reading  
http://www.desmogblog.com/2013/04/04/climate-science-denier-james-delingpole-
calls-alarmists-face-court-death-penalty-powers  
However, there is a wider story here which is that regular snowfall is not a
common occurrence in lowland Britain, although more common in the North of the
country and East Anglia (where CRU is located) The image of snowy winters is
largely an artefact of folk memories of the harsh conditions of the
intermittent little ice age. Charles Dickens' formative years were in such a
cold period and some years ago I wrote a tongue in cheek article that
highlighted the actual lack of snow-especially around Christmas. It is here
and was entitled  
"Has Charles Dickens shaped our perception of climate change?  
Charles Dickens. Victorian winters. A Christmas Carol. Ice fairs on the Frozen
Thames. Cold Cold Cold Cold Cold. Dickens has irrevocably moulded the climate
views of generations of Anglo Saxon peoples as TV, Films and plays all promote
his image of icy winters in that era. Is this view of Dickens winters correct?
We take a look at his life through the prism of climate.  
https://noconsensus.wordpress.com/2010/01/06/bah-humbug/

* * *

So Did David Viner say something that seems to have been distorted in time?
Yes, probably. Has snow been such a frequent occurrence in lowland Britain,
that its demise is worthy of especial note. No. Other than during periodic
harsh spells, snow events come and go and were especially lacking in modern
times during the 1930's and 1940's  
tonyb

                
                                          * rah says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:37 am

David Viner didn't qualify his statement at all. He didn't say a thing about
the children of "lowland Britain" not knowing what snow was. He said
……….."within a few years winter snowfall will become “a very rare and exciting
event. …….Children just aren’t going to know what snow is,”………  
And even the children of "lowland Britiain" have seen snow according to the
met.  
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/learning/snow/snow-in-the-uk

                
                                          * climatereason says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:46 am

rah  
Of course most children have seen snow. My point was that it is not and has
never been a frequent occurrence in Britain other than during the extreme
periods of the LIA.  
tonyb

                
                                      7. WalterF says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:05 pm

“Children just aren’t going to know what a snowjob is,”

                
                                        * Gunga Din says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:15 pm

😎  
(But, unfortunately, if their parents don't teach them how to reason, they may
not recognize one. Education seems to be geared more and more toward having
the kids welcome them.)

                
                                      8. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:07 pm

Here's the wayback machine address. I happened to notice the absence earlier
in the year.  
The page had become a shrine for people to comment on the idiocy of failed
predictions about the weather.  
People would flock to it every time that they experienced heavy snow:  
http://web.archive.org/web/20150114205355/http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/snowfalls-
are-now-just-a-thing-of-the-past-724017.html  
Failed predictions are rapidly vanishing from internet servers.  
Soon failed predictions will be a thing of the past.  
Children just aren't going to know what failed predictions are.

                
                                        * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:09 pm

Ha ha - dontcha just love wayback machine. BUSTED!!!!

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:12 pm

Way -- to -- go, Indefatigable Frog! #(:))  
And, Anthony!

                
                                        * confusedphoton says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:01 pm

"Failed predictions are rapidly vanishing from internet servers"  
If failed predictions vanish, there will not be any climate "science" left on
the internet!  
Climate "scientists" will be a thing of the past.

                
                                          * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:46 pm

And then what would we do?  
I mean, I'm not joking.  
What would we all do…  
for laughs?

                
                                          * emsnews says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:06 pm

1984 all over again.

                
                                      9. Felflames says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:07 pm

It is basically impossible to "disappear " something from the internet.  
Once you put it out there , it will be there forever.  
And will usually come back to bite you at a most inconvenient time.  
Oh and Streisand Effect

                
                                        * Billy Liar says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:26 pm

Individuals, in European Law, have the 'right to be forgotten'. This is
implemented by search engines failing to return results from pages the
individual wishes to be removed. The content remains but you have to know the
URL to find it.  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Right_to_be_forgotten  
This is not what has happened in this case but many people have used this
right.

                
                                          * Roy Denio says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:34 pm

The Right to be Forgotten law is well post this issue, so would not be
affected by it.

                
                                          * Sandy In Limousin says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:46 am

You can have any information no matter how old "forgotten" as far as I
understand the ruling.

                
                                          * rockyspears says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:21 am

"Forgotten" is perhaps not the best word; Lost or Not Found are a better
description. You cannot (I don't think) have stuff removed from the web, just
that search engines are not allowed to provide links to it.

                
                                          * rah says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:47 am

Perhaps Hitlers family should demand that "right"? Why not call it what it is.
A tool for revisionism history.

                
                                      10. Gunga Din says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:10 pm

A blunder is no longer a blunder after it's been properly ~~adjusted~~ erased.  
(I hope TheWayBackMachine has been backed up!)

                
                                        * Peter Sable says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:43 pm

_(I hope TheWayBackMachine has been backed up!)_  
The content owner can demand that the WayBack machine delete its copies. I 've
seen this done before.  
We need a "Real" Wayback machine where you cannot delete embarrassing
predictions. Perhaps Anthony should add a whole page with cached links.  
Peter

                
                                      11. JimS says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:15 pm

URL's are like temperature data, they can be adjusted. Part of the adjustment
process is elimination of data.

                
                                      12. Karl W. Braun says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:21 pm

Bear in mind that items archived in the Wayback Machine can indeed be deleted
if requested by the owner.

                
                                        * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:26 pm

It's too late. This already looks like stage-managing of the "official
reality", in the Soviet style.  
The best policy would have been to leave the page, as a symbol of an age of
monstrous delusions.  
Now, it looks like they tried to make it go away.  
Independent - my arse!!!!

                
                                        * noaaprogrammer says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:48 pm

"Bear in mind that items archived in the Wayback Machine can indeed be deleted
if requested by the owner." So should Hillary have archived her files on the
Wayback Machine? 🙂

                
                                      13. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:22 pm

Here's a topical satirical page on the subject of the disappearing of
inconvenient and politically embarrassing science:  
http://thepeoplescube.com/peoples-blog/nasa-announces-manned-mission-to-
mercury-t17146.html

                
                                      14. Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:24 pm

Thus, the Envirostalinist-sympathetic Independent, places itself, once again,
in the classiest of company.  
Here's how two of the Windmill and Solar Profiteers' Top 10 Most Admired
People did it:  
"… extreme regimes" and erasing history

(youtube)

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:35 pm

Not to be overlooked are ##'s 9 and 10 on the list, Nixon and Trudeau.  
May 11, 1973 (from Nixon tapes)

"We politicians gotta stick together."  
Congratulations, Independent! YOU are part of the elite!

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:54 pm

And then, there's **NOAA and NASA (GISS)**  
Data Tampering

John Coleman, KUSI News  
(youtube)

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:57 pm

Specifically: **NCDC** (National Climate Data Center) -- from Coleman report
above.

                
                                      15. J. Philip Peterson says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:26 pm

Trying to find that Modis satellite photo of all of Brittan covered in snow.
Who has that?

                
                                        * Anthony Watts says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:32 pm

I do:  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2010/01/08/all-of-england-covered-by-snow/

                
                                          * J. Philip Peterson says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:48 pm

Thanks Anthony - this prediction was 10 years before this Modis photo was
taken. Has he retracted his prediction/projection? (NO).

                
                                      16. PaulH says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:33 pm

Funny, I thought companies with a web presence want to drive more visitors to
their web site.  
/snark

                
                                      17. ristvan says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:35 pm

This stuff has been going on for some time. For US centric readers, look at
the (now erased except on Wayback) climate difference by state between the
previous NOAA (2013) Drd964x and the 'new, improved' 2014 nClimDiv. The
archived before and afters for three states -- California, Michigan, and Maine
-- plus the aggregate statistics are provided as just one small part of this
issue in essay When Data Isn't in my newest ebook. There is much more
referenced evidence in that essay globally, all equally damning. Sulina? de
Bilt? Rutherglen? BEST station 166900 (ok, that one only in footnote 24 to
make a separate methodological error point to Mosher and friends, so you all
can skip it at your peril -- since tracking footnotes is not blog fun).

                
                                        * John H. Harmon says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:39 pm

Maybe Congress will fix the NOAA data games.  
This is political hardball, not science.

                
                                        * Max Totten says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 11:58 am

Found similar in EPA study where it showed no change in heating and cooling
days in last 100+ years. Data remained in the report but shrunk to where it
couldn't be read. When I tried to print the specific pages ie asked for page
54 that was the only page that could not be printed. EPA thought that historic
data would support their warming crap and when I found it I printed it Quickly
before they could delete it. Instead of deleting they buried it in a report
where I couldn't print a new copy. Still may be available at Dept of Energy
Information but not from EPA.  
Max

                
                                      18. commieBob says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:38 pm

From the disappeared article:

> … the 19th century poet laureate Robert Bridges, who wrote … "stealthily and
perpetually settling and loosely lying". …

Stealthily and loosely lying indeed.

                
                                      19. BLACK PEARL says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:41 pm

Maybe they need to be reminded with a few hundred emails of that pdf of what
they've lost / miss placed 🙂

                
                                      20. Dermot O'Logical says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 4:49 pm

OK - some reviewing of Google cached documents found a sitemap archive here:  
http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:7Y32nLOU_10J:www.independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/sitemap/sitemap_200003.xml.gz+&cd=13&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=fr  
It is seemingly a list of articles published March 2000 (which matches
filename "sitemap" "2000" "03".xml) with urls of each.  
_Every_ link (twenty or so) I 've tried in that list is reporting 404 Not
Found, so I think it's less Conspiracy, more like C*ck Up, given that older
articles still exist.

                
                                      21. lee says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:06 pm

Perhaps an email titled "Have you lost this", please call xxxxxx

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:20 pm

lol

                
                                      22. Rico L says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:06 pm

I am waiting for the NOAA / NASA publication that declares water is now
freezing at +2degC due to climate change, so there is still snow and ice, but
it is warmer snow and ice!

                
                                        * czechlist says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:24 pm

"Snow" is CO2 molecules which identify as H2O molecules and truly believe they
freeze at a higher temperature.  
Gotta get with the times !!

                
                                        * rishrac says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:11 am

Rotten ice. Tsk. Tsk. Just not like the old ice.

                
                                      23. RD says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:07 pm

Well done holding the crapweasels to account!

                
                                      24. Dermot O'Logical says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:12 pm

Mods - sorry if this is a repost - original appears to have gone awry.  
I have found on Google cache a collection of sitemap.xml files, broken down by
year and month e.g. for March 2003:  
http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:7Y32nLOU_10J:www.independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/sitemap/sitemap_200003.xml.gz+&cd=13&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=fr  
It appears to list urls of all the articles, including the Snowfall article in
question. _Every_ link I have tried from that list is coming up "Not found".  
Furthermore, more sitemaps can be found with this query:  
site:www.independent.co.uk sitemap 1999  
Now, trying August 1999 - file 199908 - all these come up, but all datestamps
on the pages themselves are October 23 2011, so I reckon there's some
archiving/republication happened there.  
Anyways, it's all of March 2000 that's missing at the moment, and January
2003, and November 2005.  
So, more a bulk purge, perhaps reformatting old articles?

                
                                        * Dermot O'Logical says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:13 pm

Edit - e.g. for March 2000 (not March 2003)

                
                                      25. Cole Pritchard says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:20 pm

Hi Anthony,  
It was I who sent you the message via facebook. Could you credit it to our
page, "Climate Change Lies?"  
https://www.facebook.com/ClimateChangeLIES/  
Regards,  
Cole

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:50 pm

Thank you, Cole Pritchard, for bringing this to all our attention (and for
Anthony for publishing based on your tip!).

                
                                        * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:40 pm

Here it is on a WUWT thread:  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2015/10/18/global-warming-blamed-for-mystery-
kidney-disease/#comment-2052017  
It's like deja vu, all over again.  
But, frankly we just cannot mention this enough.  
Let's keep bringing it up.  
The alarmist community clearly have severe memory loss and need to be
constantly reminded that they keep getting everything wrong!!! 🙂

                
                                        * Anthony Watts says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:16 am

Updated the story, thanks Cole.

                
                                        * RD says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 9:43 am

Thanks Cole for putting up the good fight. No doubt your page will be censored
and/or disappeared by Facebook, I fear.

                
                                      26. TonyL says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:21 pm

Really, everybody. It seems hardly likely they are attempting to cover up a
blunder after 15 years.  
Some routine IT housekeeping seems more likely.

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:59 pm

Oh, I don't think so, Miss Mellie (although your generous spirit is
admirable).  
I think the Enviroprofiteers (wind and solar industry, mostly) are just
desperate to rehabilitate their "expert" witness' credibility, here.  
After all, you can't have your  
"principal advisor for climate change" **known for being one of the biggest
ignoramuses in The United Kingdom…  
** Mott MacDonald has appointed Dr David Viner as principal advisor for
climate change. An internationally recognised expert, David brings with him 20
years of experience working in the area of climate change. …  
Mott MacDonald’s environment manager Ian Allison said: “We are delighted to
welcome David to Mott MacDonald. **Sustainability and climate change are
important drivers for our business** … ." { <- lol, indeed:  
"Harnessing wind energy through developing onshore and offshore wind farms is
a major area where we have a particularly strong track record." Source:
https://www.mottmac.com/industry/industrial-infrastructure . }  
Source: https://www.mottmac.com/article/614/mott-macdonald-appoints-dr-david-
viner-as-pri

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:27 pm

Just follow the money (Viner, "expert," still hustling for Mott MacDonald as
of December, 2014):  
"Dr David Viner from Mott MacDonald says that the hydropower industry cannot
ignore climate change. In order for hydropower schemes to be climate resilient
over their entire planned lifetime, he says that climate change needs to be at
the forefront of design, feasibility, construction, operation and
maintenance."  
Source: http://www.waterpowermagazine.com/opinion/opinionmaking-hydropower-
resilient-to-climate-change-4462635/

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:41 pm

And here, on August 12, 2015,  
is David Viner in a more subtle role using Linked In to push Mott MacDonald's
"important drivers for our business [, sustainability and climate change]"
(Ian Allison, Mott MacDonald in my comment at 5:59pm today):  
"I need you help to give your views on the Climatescope online tool … Mott
MacDonald is undertaking a survey … Climatescope is a global index aimed at
helping private sector developers, their consultants, governments and research
bodies decide where to invest in Clean energy … ."  
By David Viner  
Source: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/survey-climatescope-clean-energy-
investment-tool-david-viner?articleId=6037208072106053632

* * *

Conclusion: Mott MacDonald's "expert" is undergoing preventive maintenance.

                
                                        * richard verney says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:29 pm

Perhaps someone should write to The Independent and ask them about their IT
housekeeping policy.  
Have all stories older than 15 years been deleted.? Or is the deletion of
articles selective, and if so what forms the selection process?

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:06 pm

_Published in the year 2000, I thought maybe the story was just too old, and
the Independent simply removed the story to save archive space, or maybe this
had to do with some site redesign and the URL simply got broken. Yet when I
remove the quote marks to search for the phrase in general, and not exactly,
other stories back as far as 1994 about global warming and snow appear: …_  
(from above-posted article by Anthony Watts)  
Appears to selective.

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:07 pm

Appears to **be** selective.

                
                                          * richard verney says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:27 am

Janice  
Since this is not a scientific article, I only quickly scanned it, and
obviously missed the reference of back to 1994. At first glance, the deletion
therefore appears to be part of some selective process as you suggest.

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 10:30 am

Dear Richard Verney,  
I hope you realize that I was only informing you, not trying to cast
aspersions on your intelligence. Your fine mind has repeatedly demonstrated on
WUWT that you are a fine information analyst. If my tone was offensive, please
forgive me. Remember, others likely scanned the article quickly and missed
that information, also, so, your comment ended up helping others, too!  
If you are in Scotland, in that snowstorm, keep warm and add an extra pat of
butter to your oatmeal in the morning 🙂 (i.e., fat = warm). And two extra
spoonfuls of brown sugar! <- ONLY because it tastes good….!

# (:))

Take care,  
Janice

                
                                        * ralfellis says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:13 am

> > It seems hardly likely they are attempting to  
>  cover up a blunder after 15 years.  
>  It may well be that Independent staff had forgotten all about it. if you
inhabit Warmist Fantasist sites, and never read the Climate Realist sites, you
may never have seen this article for years. It is more likely that someone at
the Independent inadvertently dialed into WUWT, and was shocked by what heshe
saw.  
>  R

                
                                        * Gary Pearse says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 9:42 am

TonyL, you are a nice guy. But, you know, this children not ever seeing snow
again is, I would say, an iconic representation of the hysterics of CAGW
proponents that will live on in the future. It will be a cautionary tale for
future development of science and science teaching. It will rank up there with
the 'black swan'. It will become a metaphor for the whole debacle of this 30yr
(plus, perhaps another 5yrs) period. The 'disappearing' itself, which shows
that the Independent is having a tougher time cleaving to the narrative and
doesn't want to have such an iconic blunder under it's name, will ironically
highlight it and cement it into the history of shocking times. Is Viner still
publishing stuff? I suspect he has either greatly reduced or stopped his
output or piled the old stuff under hundreds of more recent, more thoughful
papers.

                
                                      27. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:23 pm

Meanwhile new daft predictions are popping up every day. Like this one from
Nature:  
"The results provide a clear, stark message: if we assume that the Amundsen
Glacier is indeed destabilized, which current evidence suggests, then the
entire Western ice sheet will discharge into the ocean within 3000 years,
leading to a 3 meter rise in sea level within 10,000 years. This extreme loss
is due to a 'point-of-no-return' scenario: once the grounding line begins
retreating, ice will continue to melt inland, allowing water to carve a path
inward until it breaks off the whole western sheet.  
It is true that this process unfolds over a very long time period, giving us
plenty of time to respond if this scenario does occur. But the world would
look quite different. In the US alone, 12.3 million people would lose their
homes."  
12.3million people who currently live in coastal areas will lose their homes
in 10,000 years.  
So this is Nature? A journal which prints material which is so embarrassingly
idiotic that I couldn't create a satire that was more bizarrely stupid than
the original.  
Do people now enter climate science direct from Kindergarten?  
From: http://www.nature.com/scitable/blog/eyes-on-
environment/shortterm_stability_and_longterm_collapse

                
                                        * jorgekafkazar says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:40 pm

"Do people now enter climate science direct from Kindergarten?"  
No. 77 out of 79 climate specialists enter direct from their local mental
institution.

                
                                        * Bartleby says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:31 am

In Nature's defense, this looks like a blog rather than part of the journal
itself, I'm not sure blogs are refereed at all.  
But it's still a great find. I loved the part about the model being
"complicated". I used to do a fair amount of computer modeling (as have many
folks who visit this site apparently). It never ceases to amaze me that
climate researchers treat their models as reality or that casual readers of
articles like this one seem happy to suspend disbelief while reading them. I
suppose people like to read disaster stories, who would be intrigued to
discover the latest climate models suggest everything's going to be peachy for
the foreseeable future? Doesn't make good diner conversation.

                
                                          * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:21 pm

We had to wait only one day for a real disaster. The imaginary 10,000 year
event discusses here seems somehow even more non-existent than yesterday.  
I must stop looking at this rubbish.  
I feel that fools are wasting my time. 🙂

                
                                      28. Ric Werme says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:23 pm

Well, this story is still up:  
http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/climate-row-scientist-
contemplated-suicide-1892260.html  
It's about Phil Jones and his problems and thoughts of suicide from dealing
with Climategate.  
It's hard to feel too sympathetic with him since he wrote in
http://assassinationscience.com/climategate/1/FOIA/mail/1075403821.txt on the
sudden death of skeptic John Daly:

                
                                                                    From: Phil Jones <...@uea.ac.uk>
                                To: <Michael Mann> ...@virginia.edu
                                Subject: Fwd: John L. Daly dead
                                Date: Thu Jan 29 14:17:01 2004
                                     From: Timo Hämeranta <...@pp.inet.fi>
                                     To: <...@pp.inet.fi>
                                     Subject: John L. Daly dead
                                     Date: Thu, 29 Jan 2004 12:04:28 +0200
                                     X-Mailer: Microsoft Outlook, Build 10.0.4510
                                     Importance: Normal
                                    Mike,
                                       In an odd way this is cheering news !  One other thing about the CC paper - just found
                                    another email - is that McKittrick says it is standard practice in Econometrics journals
                                    to give all the data and codes !!  According to legal advice IPR overrides this.
                                    Cheers
                                    Phil
                                     "It is with deep sadness that the Daly Family have to announce the sudden death of John
                                     Daly.Condolences may be sent to John's email account (daly@john-daly.com)
                                     "
                                     Reported with great sadness
                                     Timo Hämeranta
                                     xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
                
                
                      29. evanmjones says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:29 pm

Well, I read the entire thing. It is wrong about the snow. It is wrong about
the 0.2C/decade. It is roughly right about the +0.6C warming. It is correct
that AGW is manifesting itself primarily in the winter. The sensationalization
gets it a downcheck.-  
I therefore give it a D. A middle-of-the-road D.

                
                                      30. clipe says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:32 pm

> So who are we to believe? For a final word, I turned to the greatest climate
change scientist of all, Dr David Viner, one-time senior research scientist at
the climatic research unit of the University of East Anglia, who predicted in
2000 that, within a few years, winter snowfall would become "a very rare and
exciting event".  
>  However, he was trapped under a glacier in Stockport, so was unable to
comment at the time the Telegraph went to press.

http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/seanthomas/100222487/when-it-comes-to-
climate-change-we-have-to-trust-our-scientists-because-they-know-lots-of-big-
scary-words/

                
                                        * jorgekafkazar says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:45 pm

The "big scary words" article is a classic. A brief excerpt:  
"I asked Stephen Belcher, the head of the Met Office Hadley Centre, whether
the recent extended winter was related to global warming. Shaking his famous
'ghost stick', and fingering his trademark necklace of sharks’ teeth and
mammoth bones, the loin-clothed Belcher blew smoke into a conch, and replied,  
'Here come de heap big warmy….'"  
Follow clipe's link for the rest.

                
                                          * D.J. Hawkins says:
                

November 16, 2015 at 11:49 am

Not right now, thanks. I'm eating lunch, and forcibly ejecting a ham and
cheese sandwich via my nostrils is not on my bucket list. Later, when oxygen
is available for recovery from uncontrollable laughter.

                
                                      31. evanmjones says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:36 pm

_Oh I 'm bound to go  
Where there ain't no snow  
Where the rain don't fall  
The winds don't blow  
In the Big Rock Candy Mountains._  
He was describing his version of paradise, come to think of it.

                
                                      32. J. Philip Peterson says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:38 pm

Is he still alive? It's time to rub it in his face if he is.

                
                                      33. Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:42 pm

"Page not found ….  
Sorry … ."  
Right.

                
                                      34. Mark says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:42 pm

The change old temperature data, so why not old articles?

                
                                      35. garymount says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:47 pm

Every time it snowed where I live I would take a picture and tweet it along
with a link to "Snow Is A Thing of the Past".  
( @protonice )  
I should take a picture of todays rain and tweet it along with a link to "Dry
Weather Today is a pimple Compared to the Dry Weather we are going to get",
published a few months ago in The Vancouver Sun.

                
                                        * Wayne Delbeke says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:15 pm

Gary - LOL. Yes 2015 had a dastardly dry summer, a dastardly wet fall. SNAFU.
When I went to UBC from the dry interior in 1966, my car didn't dry out for 8
months (ie when I left Vancouver and went back to the interior). That fall set
the record at the time for continuous days of rainfall.

                
                                          * garymount says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:03 am

Well, I missed that weather by one year as I moved to the Vancouver region the
following year, Halloween 1967. Summers have always been hot and dry and in
fact it was May of this year that was the driest on record that isn't even a
summer month, and the record of 51 or 54 days without rain was not broken this
year.  
This morning the rainfall since Sept 1 has been 355 mm while the average is
300 mm. I highly doubt that next may will be even near as dry as this past
may.  
Last October (2014) give or take a month saw 150 mm instead of the average 100
mm, but none of the alarmist reports about the dry weather mentioned this and
instead cherry picked months.  
The dry weather was hyped by alarmists hear as being a result of climate
change.  
The wind storm on the last weekend of August, that wasn't even predicted half
an hour before it occurred has been hyped by alarmists :  
"Although the windstorm is now over, the freshly battered Metro Vancouver's
situation has been suggested to be a sign of worse weather to come. Climate
change scientists have been asserting that more extreme weather like this will
become commonplace if the global warming continues without sufficient
regulation," -- The Peak - Student Newspaper of Simon Fraser, September 8,
2015, page 5.  
Note, the temperatures were below normal during the wind storm compared to the
wind storm of 2006 where Stephen Hume wrote about the 68% above normal
temperatures using his special Celsius physics. No mention what the
temperatures were during the great wind storm of 1934 in this region.

                
                                          * garymount says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:14 am

I forgot to mention, just a couple of years ago or so during a cold wet spring
it was declared that this is the weather climate scientists say will be the
new norm. This would wreck havoc with our tourism industry so it was written.
No mater the weather, wet or dry, it's climate changes fault, and these
declarations also don't re-appear when the predictions don't pan out.  
Note, I wrote hear above when I meant here. knotty me, I should have read what
I wrote before submitting. I have been having trouble sleeping since Turdeau
has been anointed king of Canada and now I hear Dion stating that climate
change is to be the top concern of all the cabinet ministers of the land.
Sickening.

                
                                      36. Severing says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:49 pm

Aaaaand down the Memory Hole it goes! Thank you Winston, now quick, off to the
Two Minutes Hate with you! Time to hiss at Emannuel Koch.

                
                                      37. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 5:56 pm

As a disclaimer - I don't really care all that much whether the Independent
did this on purpose.  
I just like drawing lots of attention to how completely stupid the media,
media "experts".  
And attention to the fact that looney alarmist predictions are invariably
further from reality than a random guess. The nitwits have learned though, I
suppose. Inasmuch as they now couch alarmism in vague and often meaningless
conditional terms. They only make solid prediction about events that will NOT
occur after their retirement or death.  
The odd idiot breaks free from the climate alarm asylum and further empties
his mind in the presence of a journalist. In which case we get to witness the
joyous spectacle of a once proud believer losing his marbles.  
As has now happened with poor Mr Viner.  
(I have removed his title - for his own benefit!! It was only doing him harm.)

                
                                        * Billy Liar says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 9:38 am

_The odd idiot breaks free from the climate alarm asylum and further empties
his mind in the presence of a journalist. In which case we get to witness the
joyous spectacle of a once proud believer losing his marbles._  
I see what you did there! You 're referring to Professor 'Arctic will be ice
free in 2015' Peter Wadhams aren't you?

                
                                          * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:11 pm

How could we ever forget:  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2015/09/28/wacky-wadhams-climate-murder-conspiracy-
complaint-dismissed/

                
                                      38. D.I. says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:05 pm

It's called 'Climastrology',in the past we had 'Spiritualism' 'tea leave
readers' 'seances' 'astrologists' 'ouija board readers' 'tarot card readers'
all sucking money from the gulible,  
It seems that Governments have seen the potential for sucking money from the
'Gulible' and gone along with 'Climastrology'.  
In the future people will look back and laugh at the stupidity of people
paying for 'Climastrological' predictions.

                
                                      39. John Robertson says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:17 pm

I suspect as the scheme implodes and members of the Cult of Calamitous Climate
are deprogrammed by cold weather and angry impoverished taxpayers.  
The records of their gullibility here on the internet will come under serious
attack.  
The US Democrats are already on the record wanting to control(regulate) the
web and so is the UN.  
Strange how people who campaign for immunity from prosecution also want to
control the history.

                
                                        * noaaprogrammer says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 10:18 pm

Someone needs to write a book titled, "2084," about Climatism.

                
                                      40. davidmhoffer says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:37 pm

I don't know if there is any deliberate action being taken here, but that's
not, IMHO, what we should be discussing. What we should be discussing is how
to preserve the original article for easy reference now that the original is
gone. I know A_thony linked to his copy in this article, but at some future
point, I'll forget where that was. Future being about 48 hours for me…..  
Perhaps a special link in the WUWT sidebar?

                
                                        * Bill H says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:12 pm

Disappearing Failed Climate Predictions..  
'If your doom and gloom predictions fail to materialize, we will make them go
away and restore your credibility..'  
Sounds like a dang RON.CO commercial.. For just 49.99 we will make your past
failed predictions Viner! (Oh wait.. that should say 'VANISH'… my bad 🙂  
Welcome to the New World Order.. Ignore those failed predictions behind the
curtain….  
Nothing that is happening prior to Paris is surprising me and I set that bar
very low. Makes me wonder if Viner is giving a speech?

                
                                      41. Tucci78 says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 6:49 pm

Ah, the Internet.  
Once it goes up, guys, you ain't _never_ getting it suppressed.

> > **Earlier this summer, a group of “scientists” led by a couple of US
government employees, published an utterly fraudulent paper which, in effect,
erased the decline in global surface temperatures. They did this by the rather
elegant method of simply changing the recorded temperatures to something else.  
>  …  
>  This is just another example of the utter lawlessness that has infected the
Executive Branch agencies under Barack Obama. The only exception to providing
agency documents to the Congress is executive privilege. There is no special
privilege available for the political hacks masquerading as scientists in
NOAA. This has been hashed out thoroughly since Watergate. The only question
is whether Smith, as a committee chairman, can make his demand stick. The
agency is refusing Smith’s request for one reason: they know this action they
have taken is in support of Obama’s political agenda.  
>  …  
>  The more we know about how NOAA, and the climate change _(snip)_ funded by
NOAA, operate the more it is apparent that the entire field is fraudulent up
to its myopic eyeballs and exists solely to suck cash out of the federal
government and to arrogate power and importance to a lot of very little and
inconsequential men whose inadequate personal lives make them want to lord it
over the rest of us.

>>

>>> -- streif **" Climate science frauds try to hide data from Congress"** (31
October 2015)

>>

>> **

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:04 pm

Yes! Indeed! Nice example, Tucci.  
Oh, I just can't help myself….

> **Tucci-co, Tucci-co, TUUUUUUUUcci-co!**

(inspired by:  
"Figaro" -- Luciano Pavarotti

(youtube))

# (:))

(just a little comedia relief)  
Personally…  
I'd rather be discussing "Figaro" than Viner any -- day.  
Okay, okay, OKAAAAAAAAAAAAY.  
Back to science.  
~[:|]

                
                                          * Mike the Morlock says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:49 pm

Janice  
Thank you. made my day.  
michael

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:10 pm

Oh, THANK YOU, Mike (who is most certainly not a) Morlock. That Tucci -- NEVER
acknowledges my attempts to have a little fun with him. How nice of you to
take the time.  
Heh. Glad you got a smile out of that.

# (:))

                
                                          * Tucci78 says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:42 pm

_Accidenti!_  
(The first word spoken in _The Barber of Seville_ , and naturally the first
word taught to us Italian-American parochial school kids when we were brought
to a performance of that opera.)

                
                                          * Mike the Morlock says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:26 pm

I woke up last night with a wicked idea. I thought wouldn't it be fun to start
a rumor about the Paris shindig? I mean, well since they don't like "new ice"
and don't think it's as good as old ice, why not put out a story that the
organizers are importing ancient ice for the delegate's mixed drinks. Their
standing in the pecking order at the conference would reflect which geological
era their ice came from. All sorts of stories as intrigues could and would
take on a life of their own. Sigh I laughed until my sides hurt.  
Since I retired I fear I have to much free time.  
michael

                
                                            * Tucci78 says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 10:08 pm

Setting aside his feast of Eloi _tartare_ , **Mike the Morlock** suggests:

> I woke up last night with a wicked idea. I thought wouldn’t it be fun to
start a rumor about the Paris shindig. I mean, well, since they don’t like
“new ice” and don’t think it’s as good as old ice, why not put out a story
that the organizers are importing ancient ice for the delegate’s mixed drinks.
Their standing in the pecking order at the conference would reflect which
geological era their ice came from. All sorts of stories as intrigues could
and would take on a life of their own.

There is, of course, merit in this. Better yet, let us connive to deliver
these quanta of "ancient ice" to the conference, carefully labeled.  
D'you think Penn Jillette might like to get in on this gentle jest?

> > **It’s a pretty stark analysis, and not without merit. There are plenty of
climate change scientists who are equally forthright on the possibilities of
change, or no change, and of more hot, or less hot, or of rain, or no rain, or
of Britain turning into the Sahara by next weekend, or instead becoming a
freezing cold Frostyworld ruled by a strange, glistening ice-queen –
crucially, it all depends on the time of day you ask them, and whether or not
they had asparagus the day before.  
>  So who are we to believe? For a final word, I turned to the greatest
climate change scientist of all, Dr David Viner, one-time senior research
scientist at the climatic research unit of the University of East Anglia, who
predicted in 2000 that, within a few years, winter snowfall would become "a
very rare and exciting event".  
>  However, he was trapped under a glacier in Stockport, so was unable to
comment at the time the Telegraph went to press.**

>>

>>> -- Sean Thomas **" When it comes to climate change, we have to trust our
scientists, because they know lots of big scary words"** (19 June 2013)

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 8:53 am

_Accidenti!_ ???!  
How do you mean this, Mr. Tucci? As in: "Che accidenti state facendo, you
annoying woman??"  
or "Accidenti, che bella comment!" ???  
Well, thank you, at least, for taking the time to acknowledge it.

                
                                            * Tucci78 says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:24 pm

Writes **Janice Moore** :

> Accidenti! ???!

Sheesh. Y'know, you're on the Web right now. They've got "search engines" 'n
everything.  
From **Wiktionary** :

> > **Interjection  
>  accidenti!  
>  (in anger) Damn it! etc  
>  (in amazement) Good heavens! etc  
>  wow**

Italian-Americans of my generation grew up hearing it from our grandparents
**_all_** the time, which is why it got laughs from those of us who were
field-trip 'd to see performances of _Il barbiere di Siviglia_ in parochial
school.

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:33 pm

I noticed, Dr. Tucci……  
that you NEVER ANSWERED MY QUESTION.  
I think your answer is adding up to, essentially: "Sheesh!"  
So, I take that back. Got my answer 🙂

                
                                            * Tucci78 says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:29 pm

**Janice Moore** writes:

> I noticed, Dr. Tucci……  
>  that you NEVER ANSWERED MY QUESTION.

Not much of a question, Ms. Moore. Recall that you started this with your **_"
TUUUUUUUUcci-co!"_** silliness (plainly not realizing that a _" -co"_ word
ending in such a context is not Italianate; more appropriate would've been _"
Tucci- **o! " [employing the suffix _" -uccio"_ meaning "small" or "little"]
in emulation of the aria's repeated call of _" Figaro!"_ ).  
I replied - in clever parsimony - with the first word spoken in that _opera
buffa_ - which carries with it the connotation in the American language: ****"
Damn!"**

> > **Driving truckloads of money out into the New Mexico desert and dumping
it into a massive pit is one of America 's greatest traditions.**

>>

>>> -- Dave Barrodale (Onion News Network Analyst)

_

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:41 pm

Dear Dr. Tucci,  
I did not use the plain "o" suffix because I did not want to imply at all that
you are a small man. To be perfectly candid, no, I was, indeed, ignorant of
Italian, there -- my conscious intent was simply to get a better rhyme
parallel with Figaro, but used "c" instead of "g."  
Next time…. I will merrily sing out:

> > > TUUUUUUUcci -- go!!

I think I may have offended you and I regret that. I hope that you can forgive
my having fun in such a silly way. We are ALLIES, you know! 🙂  
Thank you for the education.  
Janice

                
                                      42. John F. Hultquist says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:14 pm

A. W. wrote: ">i>One wonders about the timing, whether it is related to …"
etc.  
The timing could be related to the fact that **it is snowing** – in Kansas,
Colorado, Washington State, British Columbia, and ….  
David Viner likely meant East Anglia but I don 't recall that was specified.

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:27 pm

Nice **observation.** (and lol)  
Keep warm, John (and Nancy).  
-- and don't feel bad about the italics deal…. you just made those of us who
have ALSO done that kind of thing feel much better 🙂

                
                                          * John F. Hultquist says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:06 pm

Hi, Janice.  
Missed the bracket. Not the first time.  
Years ago there were many comments where the person (maybe me) would fail to
close the italics or bold and that might carry through for many of the
following comments. The mods would usually fix it after letting us know what
klutzes we were. Haven't seen such in a long time so I guess that is automated
now.  
Can a blame it on being worn out?  
I cut and split a bit of firewood for a needy neighbor today -- wanting to get
it under cover before the storm (now over the Strait of Juan de Fuca with rain
reaching the Cascade Crest) gets here. Then I did my own chores and fixed
supper. Nancy was doing a music thing (fiddle) with others at a rehab place.
Only then did a check to see what was up here.  
Best to you and anyone getting rain, snow, or cold tonight.

                
                                          * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 10:18 am

Dear John Hultquist,  
What a guy. Thanks for chatting a little bit. My family and friends (in the
Seattle -> Bellingham area) were a bit anxious yesterday about the storm
headed their way. I hope that it blew itself out over the straits and wasn't
as bad as feared.  
Take care and keep on fiddlin'!  
Janice  
P.S. I quoted your encouragement to me, a non-scientist, rather shy (oh, boy,
THAT sure changed, heh) of commenting on WUWT, "You know things. Share." with
Monna Manhas who has been here awhile, but is quite reticent (so should LOTS
of people, here). You see what a fine difference you make? Even the small
things…. the ripples spread on and on. 🙂

                
                                        * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:24 pm

I live in Somerset, England. And we have had numerous winters of astonishingly
deep and beautiful snowfall. Some of the heaviest snowfalls I have ever seen
have been in the last few years.  
I have measured -17degC on one night. There was ice on the inside of my front
door!!  
There ain't no - end of snow!!

                
                                      43. Stoic says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:29 pm

"Who controls the past controls the future; who controls the present controls
the past." Ingsoc (Newspeak for English Socialism or the English Socialist
Party) is the political ideology of the totalitarian government of Oceania in
George Orwell's dystopian novel Nineteen Eighty-Four.

                
                                      44. Curious George says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:37 pm

Our blunder? Let bygones be bygones.  
(Signed) 97%

                
                                      45. pat says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 7:58 pm

11 Nov: LA Times: 'Everything is blinding white': Huge Sierra snowstorm pays
off for winter resorts  
By Joseph Serna and Bettina Boxall  
A massive storm that dropped snow across hundreds of miles of the Sierra
Nevada is paying dividends for winter resorts, if social media is any
indicator.  
From Lake Tahoe and Mt. Rose to Mammoth Mountain, vacation destinations have
taken to Twitter to boast that their slopes are ready for visitors…  
http://www.latimes.com/local/weather/la-me-ln-snow-storm-
sierra-20151111-story.html

                
                                      46. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:02 pm

The second article on this topic in the Independent in 2011 simply made the
situation worse.  
By misrepresenting the first article.  
They really are trying to desperately stage manage the interpretation of their
own failure:  
http://www.thegwpf.com/ministry-of-truth-independent-newspaper-channels-
orwell/

                
                                      47. indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:07 pm

And a more in depth analysis of the situation is here.  
Take the time to re-read the original March 2000 Viner article and then the
2011 Conner manipulation.  
Lying liars and the lies they tell. Shameful and desperate stuff:  
http://www.thegwpf.com/met-office-spins-itself-deeper-into-the-hole/

                
                                      48. John of Cloverdale, WA, Australia. says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 8:51 pm

We have one of those false prophets in Australia, called Tim Flannery. The
socialists haven't erased it from memory yet  
http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/index.php/heraldsun/comments/tim_flannery_should_explain_these_full_dams/

                
                                      49. Louis says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:00 pm

I've heard of snow removal, but this is the first time I've ever heard of
anyone feeling the need to remove the absence of snow.

                
                                      50. michael hart says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:44 pm

I used to buy The Independent for many years, from the first day it was
published.  
It gives me no (net) pleasure to read this account of their fall. Like the
BBC, they shall reap what they have sown.

                
                                      51. David Ramsay Steele says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:45 pm

Ou sont des absences des neiges d'antan?

                
                                      52. jorgekafkazar says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 9:52 pm

I've checked numerous times over the past few years to see if Viner's totally
embarrassing foot-in-mouth escapade is still there. I checked about two weeks
ago and got the bad link message. Frankly, I was a bit surprised they'd left
it up this long. It's gone, David Viner, but don't you worry. It will never be
forgotten.

                
                                      53. Patrick says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 10:45 pm

I would not be so quick to suggest anything odd here. Most sites that publish
online articles archive those articles after a while, somewhere, as per
policy. Sometimes online articles do get purged, again as per policy. It's
just good data "house keeping" practice to bin stuff no longer needed. But,
yeah, seems to be a common theme now. Thank crunchie for the "waybackmachine".

                
                                      54. Lewis P Buckingham says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 11:12 pm

It might be an idea to keep another prediction that the dams will not fill by
Prof Flannery  
At the moment Sydney and the Warragamba catchment is awash.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/products/IDR033.shtml

                
                                        * Lewis P Buckingham says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:47 am

128 km Wollongong (Appin) Radar  
Received at: 08:44 UTC Fri 13 Nov 2015 EST EDT CST CDT WST  
06:44PM 07:44PM 06:14PM 07:14PM 04:44PM  
Friday Friday Friday Friday Friday  
This link is time sensitive and does not show the storm extending from Dubbo
to the Eastern seaboard of NSW

                
                                      55. beththeserf says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 11:48 pm

Things go missing … deep ocean heat … troposphere hot spot ….  
medieval warming period … records that show yr workings …

                
                                      56. Erik Christensen says:
                

November 12, 2015 at 11:52 pm

Saved the page long time ago, alexjc38 brilliant comment included, its very
funny:

* * *

Calling Charles Onians  
alexjc38 wrote:  
Sunday, 27 December 2009 at 09:53 pm (UTC)  
Hello? Charles Onians in 2000? Don't ask me to explain but I'm posting this
back to you via a time warp from December 2009. Yes, the future! You probably
won't believe me and will think I'm mad or joking, but get this. Britain is
suffering its second extremely cold winter in a row - we have enough snow,
ice, frost and freezing fog to cobble dogs with (whatever that means.) Far
from being "a very rare and exciting event", snowfall has become a major
hazard in this country twice this past year - and we haven't even got to
February 2010 yet. Also (again you will probably think I'm joking) but the CRU
has just become a liability to climate science - leaked e-mails and files have
revealed a web of deceit and manipulation that threatens to undermine the
theory of Anthropogenic Global Warming itself. I urge you to pull this article
immediately, as it will become a laughing stock in years to come. Charles?
Hello? Hello? … Rats, I'm probably too late.

                
                                        * Janice Moore says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:36 pm

LOL. 🙂

                
                                      57. Athelstan. says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:13 am

They would rewrite history…………um, except they do.  
"Now, if we could just remove any and all traces of the Climategate
emails"…………………..  
It would be a trick of nature - eh Mike?

                
                                      58. Alexander Feht says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:16 am

During the last couple of months, Accuweather web site stopped showing record
temperatures of the past, as well as last year's temperatures (at least for my
neck of the woods).  
It seems that there is a concerted cowardly secret effort in the mainstream
media to confuse people about the weather as much as possible. As one of the
heroes fighting bugs in "Starship Troopers" says near the end: "They are
afraid!"

                
                                        * Marcus says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 7:30 am

So did The Weather Network , last time I looked!!!

                
                                      59. AndyG55 says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:39 am

Someone out there always has a copy.  
That is the internet 🙂

                
                                      60. pat says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 12:48 am

read all:  
12 Nov: ABC America: AP: Seth Borenstein: CLIMATE COUNTDOWN: When's a Warming
Treaty Not a Treaty?  
(Matthew Lee and Donna Cassata in Washington, Angela Charlton in Paris and
Karl Ritter in Stockholm contributed to this report.)  
It's an issue of definitions and the way an agreement is framed, said Purvis,
who is president of the non-governmental organization Climate Advisers.  
The U.S. Constitution and the rest of the world have different definitions of
the word "treaty," Purvis said. Elsewhere, a treaty is a binding agreement.
But in the U.S., there are several types of international agreements and only
6 percent of them end up being formal treaties that require Senate approval,
he said. The last international, Senate-approved treaty was in 2010.  
The climate treaty, Purvis said, is likely to end up as an "executive
agreement" like the 1945 Yalta Accord at the end of World War II. This
requires only presidential approval…  
Purvis said it probably will hinge on a 1992 international treaty, signed by
President George H.W. Bush and approved by the Senate, that promised to do
something about climate change; a decades-old U.S. air pollution law; a U.S.
Supreme Court decision that said the air pollution law applies to carbon
dioxide; and presidential executive action…  
http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/wireStory/climate-countdown-whens-warming-
treaty-treaty-35165698

                
                                      61. knr says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:22 am

oddly this is an area where the warmest pathology really works against them ,
for has they hold that anything that enters the dogma of 'the cause' , cannot
be challenged nor changed because its 'perfect truth' such as Mann hockey
stick.  
When it has been shown by overwhelming evidenced by nether 'truth ' and a long
way from 'perfect ' they stuck with trying to either BS their way out of it or
,ironically , to deny they ever made the claim in the first place as in the
Himalaya glaciers all gone by 2035 claim.  
A practice they are currently engaged in over past claims that part of climate
'doom' would be an increase in hurricanes, when in reality the reverse has
happened .

                
                                      62. John Shade says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:26 am

Well done. It is good that this little part of all the drivel we have been
subjected to from such people over past decades had been captured for
posterity.

                
                                      63. nc says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:34 am

No no no it is subsidies the oil companies receive, the CBC, Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, taxpayer funded, says so, so there you are all
misinformed.  
Do I need a sarc tag?  
The CBC almost everyday is posting sometimes multiple postings a day, climate
related missinformation leading up to the Paris carbon party. It is truly
amazing what they are doing, the shear volume. It would be interesting to know
who is behind this barrage.

                
                                        * Bob Weber says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 7:43 am

Done of course to justify pre-ordained positions in Paris.

                
                                      64. J. Philip Peterson says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:51 am

Couldn’t find the article I was looking for, but some other false/failed
claims/predictions:  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2015/08/27/ten-years-after-katrina-lets-learn-from-
those-predictions-of-more-bigger-hurricanes/  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2015/09/13/mt-baker-glaciers-disappearing-a-
response-to-the-seattle-times/  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2015/10/24/al-gore-and-the-media-were-wrong-u-s-
major-hurricane-drought-now-one-decade-and-counting/  
http://wattsupwiththat.com/2015/04/22/failed-earth-day-predictions/  
(it was a fairly recent post too - maybe from a Jimbo list)

                
                                      65. rishrac says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:57 am

Every time it snows I remind everyone of how it is a "very rare and exciting
event". I keep trying to sell tickets to see this but nobody seems to be
interested.  
It will live on in my memory even if it's gone from the internet. I think I
have a responsibility to remind people of how special it is when it snows, and
snows, and snows.  
I applied for climate refugee status with the UN so they could cover my all
expense paid trip to Sun Valley, but I haven't heard back. The situation is
desperate here, it's below freezing again tonight. The window is closing on
this. It maybe even colder in January. So climate refugee only applies to
warmer to colder and not colder to warmer? I'm wondering if I should lawyer up
on this. Think of all those poor people who moved from NY /NJ /Penn/Con/Mas to
Florida without any government assistance at all! But " it's worse than we
thought" think of the ones who for financial reasons can't leave! We must take
action now!

                
                                      66. Scottish Sceptic says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:13 am

I think I may have mentioned "children won't know what snow is" around a dozen
times in the last few days!  
And with snow briefly settling on the hills today, it more or less proves the
ASSERTION was a complete lie.

                
                                        * M Courtney says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:39 am

What people forget about the “children won’t know what snow is” line was that
it didn't refer to changes in the weather.  
It referred to changes in education.

                
                                          * H.R. says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:55 am

M Courtney wrote

> It referred to changes in education.

Good point. Just the other day, I was chatting with Winston Smith about the
outlook for the coming winter. When I began musing about the prospects for
snow, he had no idea what I was talking about.

                
                                        * bit chilly says:
                

November 14, 2015 at 7:01 pm

looking at the drop in temp of the atlantic this summer the likelihood of snow
during the paris conference is fairly high ( note the use of climastrological
terminology there) ,how ironic would that be 🙂

                
                                      67. richard verney says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:19 am

This is somewhat O/T but pertains to the expected predictions in the run up to
Paris that 2015 is the warmest year on record, apparently UAH is not reading
the current El NIno as pushing up temperatures. October 2015 was indeed a warm
month, and many predicted that temperatures would remain high (and increase)
for the next 4 to 6 months, but so far in November (first 12 days),
temperatures have been falling back from the October figure.  
ENSO is still showing up strongly in the ENSO meter, and, of course, it is too
early to say how November will pan out, but it would be 'useful' if the
November satellite data (which no doubt will be available early December) adds
some realism and adds a contrarian standpoint to the claims that 2015 is the
warmest year ever on record.  
See: http://notrickszone.com/#sthash.kT65AL9n.dpbs

                
                                        * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:15 am

This is an artificial debate.  
The people who came into this subject late, such as myself take no great issue
with the suggestion that we are living during a period of slight warming and
slight sea level rise.  
Both are almost imperceptible but detectable using modern sophisticated
instrumentation.  
However, what the hypothesis suggests is accelerating warming and accelerating
sea level rise in response to a higher rate of emissions of CO2.  
If we live during a time of a slight warming trend and a slight sea level rise
trend - then obviously there is a good chance that in each year the
temperature and the sea level will be by some degree warmer and higher than
during the period in which these things were measured.  
Since "Sea level reached 120 meters below current sea level at the Last
Glacial Maximum 19,000–20,000 years ago." (wikipedia) then the general public
should be able to reassure themselves that humans can NOT be entirely to blame
for these trends.  
i.e. the trend predates modern emissions by some considerable margin.  
And the current trends as measured by satellites are unremarkable, in light of
the striking rate of change that is revealed in the last 20,000 years.  
This message has not got through into the minds of the populous.  
Most people that I meet are still bamboozled by the "warmest year on record"
or "warmest decade on record" memes.  
I am surprised that there aren't any "highest sea level on record" messages.  
Of course, so much information is left out of these messages that they
represent deception by omission.  
And let us always remember that had "climatologists" established that we were
currently living during a period of a slight cooling trend then they would
have set about generating alarm about that - and holding that humans were
responsible due to particulates and aerosols or suchlike.  
In other words they would happily leap on any train, and ride it in whatever
direction it was going.  
Of course, during the 1970's some scientists did throw their weight behind an
"ice age" alarm, so we have record of this process.  
In fact that WOULD be much more alarming - since the cold periods have
dominated earth's history.  
i don't know how we can get the message out to those who are still tricked by
"warmest decade on record" memes. Somehow or other we need to communicate a
sense of the rapid changes that have occurred over the last few thousand years
and how in the light of these - this age is unexceptionally.  
Yes, there appears to be some slight warming. Yes, there appears to be some
slight sea level rise.  
But, so what? It is not evidence of human activity.  
Nor does it tell us that CO2 is having no effect.  
And certainly it does not tell us that we are experiencing or going to
experience "extreme weather"  
The truth is that it is all so unremarkable that so far it tells us nothing.  
Much greater rises were occurring long before humans started digging up coal.  
In fact, the period of fastest change seems to have abated about 8,000 years
ago.  
ACCELERATION of the rate of warming might be consistent with the hypothesis.  
But even that has occurred naturally at many points prior to the arrival of
climate fear.  
And since the 1980s-1990s we see either deceleration of change or a steady
rate with some variability depending on the source of data.  
There must be some way in which we can get these simple concepts into the
minds of the majority of modern people who, let's accept it, probably can not
read graphs.  
I came to this topic with a genuine desire to find out what impact CO2 was
having on the climate.  
I can now finally clearly see - that nobody knows. And due to the
politicization of this subject, I suspect that there will not be any further
progress in climate science for many decades.  
They have trapped themselves in a quagmire of lies, distortions and confusion.
And promoted their topmost idiots into positions of greatest influence.  
Wicked mess - is an understatement!!!!

                
                                          * bit chilly says:
                

November 14, 2015 at 7:04 pm

great assessment of the current situation. i am waiting patiently for the
explanation regarding the rapid cooling of the north east atlantic this past
several months .

                
                                          * bit chilly says:
                

November 14, 2015 at 7:07 pm

north sea temperature since late 2011.  
http://project.ncof.co.uk/B4G/graphics/series_full_sst.gif

                
                                        * Bob Weber says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 7:52 am

"October 2015 was indeed a warm month, and many predicted that temperatures
would remain high (and increase) for the next 4 to 6 months, but so far in
November (first 12 days), temperatures have been falling back from the October
figure."  
Hello Richard, TSI was high for the last part of October 2015, and has since
dropped off.  
http://lasp.colorado.edu/data/sorce/total_solar_irradiance_plots/images/tim_level3_tsi_24hour_3month_640x480.png  
The sun controls the climate.

                
                                          * richard verney says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 10:31 am

Thanks the plot.  
It seems likely that in the coming years, we will see to what extent the sun
influences climate. I am hoping that there are no large scale volcano
eruptions that may hinder the analysis of the impacts of a weak sun.

                
                                      68. Scottish Sceptic says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:33 am

**it would be ‘useful’ if the November satellite data (which no doubt will be
available early December) adds some realism**  
When I used to monitor HADCRUT there was almost a linear relationship between
how late the results came out and the amount of cooling. The massive cooling
of Feb 2007? meant a whopping three weeks late - after around a week of
saturation "the world is getting warmer" claptrap. So, it was clearly an
orchestrated campaign to prevent any take up on the "coolest February for 14
years" (long since cherry picked out of the data!)  
But now, it seems from your comment, that we'll know that the satellites are
showing exceptional cooling - just because we aren't getting the results for
the DeadParrotTalks

                
                                      69. co2islife says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:38 am

State funded "scientists" that make such indefensible and inaccurate
predictions that are proven wrong should be forced to repay all their grant
money and face charges for incompetence and scientific malpractice. These
frauds are looting the public treasury and no one holds them to account.

                
                                      70. Mervyn says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:43 am

It was just too much of a burden for Dr Viner to live down and carry to the
day he dies. It reflects the rottenness of scientists all those years ago.

                
                                        * indefatigablefrog says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:19 am

Well, I sure that he is quite comfortable financially.  
There's no business like snow business, like snow business, we know!!!

                
                                        * Athelstan. says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:23 am

It highlights the scurrilous efforts of the sort - mainly if not exclusively
the political claque of liberal loons and Ivy league academia - who wish to
alter the reality and who openly deny the truth, "children won't know what
snow is" - just, which crew - are in denial now?

                
                                      71. TruthComission says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 4:27 am

This proves how important it is that skeptics save copies of these crazy
statements and studies which keep coming up daily. Those snapshots are needed
for the history books. The establishment is going to do some serious clean up
in the future.

                
                                      72. Resourceguy says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:34 am

You might check for air brushed images of dear leaders erased in political
purges also.

                
                                      73. richard verney says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 6:56 am

Just to rub salt into Viner's wounds, the Daily Mail is reporting that parts
of Britain are currently being blanketed by the white stuff that children just
will not know. Whilst this is just weather, The daily Mail reports:  
"Parts of Britain have been blanketed in snow and thousands of homes have been
left without power as Storm Abigail causes major disruption to Britain with
its Hurricane-force winds and thundery downpours.  
Scotland has been worst hit by the UK's first 'named storm', which swept in
from across the Atlantic overnight, but the rest of the country can expect
adverse weather conditions throughout the day with forecasters warning of
'significant river flooding' across much of the north of Britain.  
Snow has already started falling across villages in the North Pennine hills in
North Yorkshire, as well as in the Scottish Highlands, and the Met Office is
warning of further heavy, thundery showers which could cause surface water and
localised flooding.  
Conditions could be made worse by the remnants of Hurricane Kate, which is
currently heading over the Atlantic towards the UK after leaving the US.  
It comes after one hillwalker had to be rescued from Ben Nevis last night
after he risked 'certain death' by attempting to climb Britain's highest peak
in winds of 84mph. "  
Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3316687/It-s-AbiGALE-
Britain-rocked-power-cuts-school-closures-storm-brings-high-winds-heavy-rain-
one-climber-saved-certain-death-trying-climb-Ben-Nevis-100mph-
gusts.html#ixzz3rNqKTwz5  
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3316687/It-s-AbiGALE-Britain-rocked-
power-cuts-school-closures-storm-brings-high-winds-heavy-rain-one-climber-
saved-certain-death-trying-climb-Ben-Nevis-100mph-gusts.html

                
                                        * bit chilly says:
                

November 14, 2015 at 7:17 pm

most over hyped low pressure system in the history of uk weather. this was the
5th time the met had forecast 40 mph plus winds for my area of scotland since
the beginning of october. they failed to materailise the first 3 times and
only a brief spell in the middle of the night on the 4th forecast. i know this
as i was out fishing each time.  
the actual weather versus that forecast for "the first named storm" was
nothing out of the ordinary for a scottish winter. i can remember one storm
that sank all the boats in elie harbour around twenty years ago. no need to
worry though, this
https://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open/file/aa6dfd04-d53f-4741-1bb7-bdf99fb153be/1/hick2comb.pdf
is the definitive paper on scottish coastal storms, and no amount of data
fudging will change the absolute facts it contains, ie , it was stormier
during cooler periods in the past.

                
                                      74. Frank Kotler says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 7:01 am

Dr. Biner was half right, you know. Snow isn't very rare, but some people get
pretty excited!

                
                                      75. Resourceguy says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 7:19 am

In the olden days of climate change fraud the predictions were short term and
ridiculous. This exposed them to the risk of fact checking. In the modern era
of climate change fraud, all of the ludicrous predictions are safely extended
beyond retirement dates and expertly defended with taunts directed at the fact
checkers. The move to daily releases of such tripe also helped support the
volume-based argument of consensus and synthetic truth.

                
                                      76. Anonymous says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 9:49 am

Will you please stop repeating this story. Please bury it as It's sort of
embarrassing.  
My council was trying to get some snow clearing equipment - just to shift it
from the paths leading to the local schools. We didn't have any and the
schools didn't have any as "well, we were told we wouldn't be getting anymore
snow so we got rid of it as it was taking up space".  
A lot of small councils dumped their snow shifting equipment at clearance
rates on the basis of this advice. It cost a lot to replace.  
Big mistake…

                
                                      77. Hazel says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:03 pm

"They" must want to start over with clean slate. Too late!

                
                                      78. whiten says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 1:05 pm

"However, the warming is so far manifesting itself more in winters which are
less cold than in much hotter summers."

* * *

To me is so amazing while looking around and seeing so many blind ones.  
You see the above is the basic undeniable conclusion of a global warming,
either natural or anthropogenic  
( as per effect of RF).  
The winters should be warming, or be less cold as claimed, in a warming
climate (as per effect of RF).  
According to this guy there should be a warming trend for winters, as he
actually believed in the AGW.  
That is how it supposes to be and expected to be.  
As that seems to be not the case with reality, then is not a surprise that
such claims are deleted to "oblivion".  
Especially when considering that the latest approach on proving AGW is by
expecting to observe in the future a considerable further increase of extremes
in the summer - winter temps, the opposite of the claim above, when and where
the winters should be colder or less warmer while the summers keep warming or
be hotter, which by the way seems to be the case in reality so far to a
degree.  
So trying a new way to "prove" AGW through some thing that supposes to
disprove it, requires that the old basic simple claim be destroyed and deleted
to "oblivion", as it creates a paradox and contradiction to the the new false
and spin-doctored one.  
So a simple possible fact that winters have being in a cooling trend for the
last ~ 15 years, which actually puts very much in doubt any possible
continuing GW (as per RF effect), either natural or anthropogenic one, is
going to be used as evidence and proof of AGW…..and that requires the deletion
of past statements as the one above, which clearly will be a contradiction to
the new coned desperate approach…….and there is an abundance of such past
statements and articles in the road to "perdition".  
Don't be so surprised…:)  
It is the AGW way….anything is possible….even full - proof insanity……..or
foolproof AGW……..  
cheers

                
                                      79. Kip Hansen says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 2:22 pm

The Independent's own perma-link also returns a 404 - Page Not Found.
ind.pn/8Xiaa8 from Connor's article.

                
                                      80. wallensworth says:
                

November 13, 2015 at 3:07 pm

Viner probably got tired of rolling his eyes and saying "Yes. I really did say
that."

                
                                      81. adrian_o says:
                

November 15, 2015 at 9:24 am

Steve Connor "lambasts" the story because it's not subtle enough. But he
agrees with the message. He is also an alarmist, and just as wrong as Viner.
And just as wrong, saying that the peat bog fires around Moscow were caused by
global warming. Even the IPCC concluded that that was false.  
If someone ever writes the history of climate alarmism, he will find layers
upon layers upon layers of garbage.  
Something like a big municipal dump.

                
                                      82. Poptech says:
                

November 15, 2015 at 12:26 pm

Here are some more backup copies  
https://mynaturaldiary.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/snowfalls-are-now-just-a-
thing-of-the-past-environment-the-independent-000320.pdf  
https://archive.is/UN322

                
                                      83. johann wundersamer says:
                

November 15, 2015 at 9:08 pm

'Snowfalls are now just a thing of the past'  
from the start was a journalistic try to fill the summer gap - parliaments in
vacancie, citizens + childs out to swim:  
hebrew 'zarot and jakrut',  
look up  
ger. Term 'Saure Gurkenzeit':  
volksetymologische Erklärung  
verbindet ihn mit dem  
spätsommerlichen, also in die  
Ferienzeit fallenden Angebot  
frisch eingelegter saurer Gurken  
Verballhornung des jiddischen  
Zóres- und Jókresszeit, hebräisch zarót und jakrút;  
jiddisch zoro und joker), der „Zeit der Not und der Teuerung“.

* * *

'missing snowfall' is just a header to sell a paper.  
Regards - Hans

                
                                      84. Jablonski says:
                

November 19, 2015 at 7:05 am

Of course it was deliberate. You can't use the heat waves and heavy snow fall
we're having now to sell the lie that temperatures have risen dramatically
since 1998 if you have articles floating around talking about the mild winters
we were having right around then. So you have to disappear them.  
We've always been at war with Oceana. And he loved Big Brother.

                
                                      85. Jeff Mitchell says:
                

November 21, 2015 at 11:18 pm

I read the story at the link where the post says Steve Connor lambasted the
original article that said snow would be rare. That article didn't lambaste
the original, it supported the use of the statement that said snow would be
rare because you have to have brief headlines. It also supported the premise
of the original article. I don't know if someone else posted this thought as I
didn't read all of the comments.

Comments are closed.

# Search WUWT:

Search

# Donate to support WUWT

Support our work: HERE ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/donate-

now.png)![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/donate-now.png)

# The Maxim of our resolve

“ _Walk toward the fire. Don’t worry about what they call you._ " - Andrew
Breitbart | read more

# Blog Stats

                
                                      * 389,592,030 hits
                

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/ICCC13-175-225.png)

# Top Posts & Pages

                
                                      * Glacier National Park Quietly Removes Its 'Gone by 2020' Signs 
                      * 2019 Atlantic hurricane forecast 
                      * The moral case for honest and competent climate science 
                      * 'A Yahoo From Yahoo News': Trump's EPA Chief Fires Back At Reporter Who Misquoted Him 
                      * New Policy Brief Shows No Evidence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise 
                      * Researchers retract a paper because it turns out not to be about bulls&$# 
                      * On the Flat Earth Rants of Joe Postma 
                      * The Holocene Sea Level Highstand 
                      * El Niño and [its] contribution to 21st Century Warming - interview with Dr. Roy Spencer. 
                      * Anti-Trump AG Sued For Using Bloomberg-Funded Attorneys To Promote A Climate Crusade
                

# Weather Picture of the Day

![](https://cache1.intelliweather.net/wpotd/todayx240.jpg)

Advertisements

**" …the world's most viewed climate website"**  
- Fred Pearce _The Climate Files:  
The Battle for the Truth about Global Warming_

**" …invaluable"** - Steven F. Hayward, _The Weekly Standard_

**" …changed the world and is one of the most influential resources on global
warming.** - Jonathon Moseley, _American Thinker_

**" …flashy (apparently widely distributed)"** - Michael E. Mann

# Follow me on Twitter

My Tweets

# Follow WUWT via Email

You are following WUWT via email

Join 41,530 other subscribers

Email Address

Follow

Advertisements

# ENSO METER

![](http://4castwidgets.intelliweather.net/enso/wuwt/elninometer-current.gif)

# Recent Posts

                
                                      * Demystifying feedback.
                      * EIA data shows wind & solar met 3% of U.S. energy after $50 billion in subsidizes
                      * Glacier National Park Quietly Removes Its 'Gone by 2020' Signs
                      * El Niño and [its] contribution to 21st Century Warming - interview with Dr. Roy Spencer.
                      * The Holocene Sea Level Highstand
                      * Anti-Trump AG Sued For Using Bloomberg-Funded Attorneys To Promote A Climate Crusade
                      * How deep-ocean vents fuel massive phytoplankton blooms
                      * 2019 Atlantic hurricane forecast
                      * Former communications director, and spokesperson for Al Gore, Named Chief of Content, Communications, and Public Affairs for National Geographic Society.
                      * 'A Yahoo From Yahoo News': Trump's EPA Chief Fires Back At Reporter Who Misquoted Him
                      * The moral case for honest and competent climate science
                      * New Policy Brief Shows No Evidence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise
                      * The epic search for oldest ice in Antarctica is starting
                      * Researchers retract a paper because it turns out not to be about bulls&$#
                      * Early lives of Alaska sockeye salmon accelerating with climate change
                

November 2015 M | T | W | T | F | S | S  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
« Oct | | Dec »  
| 1  
2| 3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8  
9| 10| 11| 12| 13| 14| 15  
16| 17| 18| 19| 20| 21| 22  
23| 24| 25| 26| 27| 28| 29  
30 |

# Archives

Archives Select Month June 2019 (36) May 2019 (201) April 2019 (201) March
2019 (227) February 2019 (197) January 2019 (222) December 2018 (232) November
2018 (214) October 2018 (192) September 2018 (180) August 2018 (181) July 2018
(178) June 2018 (194) May 2018 (191) April 2018 (164) March 2018 (185)
February 2018 (170) January 2018 (178) December 2017 (153) November 2017 (176)
October 2017 (173) September 2017 (188) August 2017 (218) July 2017 (185) June
2017 (121) May 2017 (131) April 2017 (131) March 2017 (147) February 2017
(125) January 2017 (149) December 2016 (139) November 2016 (138) October 2016
(171) September 2016 (133) August 2016 (142) July 2016 (138) June 2016 (156)
May 2016 (160) April 2016 (163) March 2016 (172) February 2016 (137) January
2016 (133) December 2015 (158) November 2015 (136) October 2015 (123)
September 2015 (129) August 2015 (130) July 2015 (146) June 2015 (144) May
2015 (157) April 2015 (125) March 2015 (126) February 2015 (115) January 2015
(106) December 2014 (130) November 2014 (136) October 2014 (163) September
2014 (185) August 2014 (190) July 2014 (173) June 2014 (195) May 2014 (216)
April 2014 (182) March 2014 (185) February 2014 (164) January 2014 (202)
December 2013 (144) November 2013 (146) October 2013 (147) September 2013
(148) August 2013 (165) July 2013 (174) June 2013 (164) May 2013 (193) April
2013 (171) March 2013 (164) February 2013 (165) January 2013 (172) December
2012 (126) November 2012 (139) October 2012 (176) September 2012 (151) August
2012 (144) July 2012 (175) June 2012 (179) May 2012 (177) April 2012 (178)
March 2012 (190) February 2012 (161) January 2012 (142) December 2011 (161)
November 2011 (168) October 2011 (180) September 2011 (189) August 2011 (190)
July 2011 (170) June 2011 (187) May 2011 (177) April 2011 (177) March 2011
(172) February 2011 (183) January 2011 (193) December 2010 (183) November 2010
(168) October 2010 (191) September 2010 (179) August 2010 (200) July 2010
(188) June 2010 (140) May 2010 (124) April 2010 (122) March 2010 (136)
February 2010 (142) January 2010 (157) December 2009 (168) November 2009 (163)
October 2009 (132) September 2009 (106) August 2009 (92) July 2009 (96) June
2009 (94) May 2009 (89) April 2009 (99) March 2009 (99) February 2009 (60)
January 2009 (60) December 2008 (58) November 2008 (45) October 2008 (63)
September 2008 (75) August 2008 (77) July 2008 (68) June 2008 (72) May 2008
(54) April 2008 (54) March 2008 (39) February 2008 (40) January 2008 (31)
December 2007 (27) November 2007 (37) October 2007 (29) September 2007 (17)
August 2007 (31) July 2007 (20) June 2007 (25) May 2007 (31) April 2007 (31)
March 2007 (27) February 2007 (24) January 2007 (25) December 2006 (22)
November 2006 (11)

# Categories

Categories Select Category 2017 Solar Eclipse 350.org connect the dots 97%
consensus 99% certainty Adjustments/Corrections Aerosols Agriculture AGU AGU
2013 AGU 2014 AGU 2015 AGU16 Air pollution Al Gore Alarmism Albedo AMO
Announcements Antarctic Anthropocene Anthropogenic Ocean Warming Arctic ARGO
data Astronomy Atmospheric physics Attribution Bad science Bad science
journalism Bengtsson Climate McCarthyism scandal Berkeley Earth Surface
Temperature Biodiversity biofuels Biomass Book Review Cancun Climate
Conference Cap-and-trade Carbon credits Carbon dioxide Carbon footprint Carbon
sequestration Carbon soot carbon tax Celebrities on AGW censorship CFC's Chaos
and Climate Citizen science Climate Attribution Climate cash Climate Change
Debate Climate Communications Climate Craziness of the Week Climate data
Climate Economics Climate FAIL Climate Hypocrisy Climate Lawsuits Climate
Models Climate Myths Climate News Climate News Roundup Climate Politics
Climate reconciliation Climate Reference Network climate refugees Climate
Science Climate sensitivity Climate ugliness Climate_change Climategate
Climategate 3.0 Clouds Coal Cold wave Common sense Consensus COP conferences
Copenhagen Climate Conference Copygate coral reefs Cosmic rays Cowtan & Way
Curious things Current News Desertification Disaster disinvitation Drought
Durban Climate Conference dust storms Earth Earthquakes Economy-health
Education Educational opportunity El Nino Basics Emergence Emergent Climate
Phenomena Emissions Endangered Species Energy ENSO Environment EPA erosion
Experiments Extinction extreme weather Fake News Fakegate feedbacks flooding
fog FOI Forecasting Forests Fracking Freeman Dyson FUG Fun_stuff Fusion power
Gavin Schmidt Geoengineering geothermal energy Gergis et al GHCN GISS Glaciers
Global cooling Global Greening Global Temperature Update Global warming Global
Warming in Perspective Global Warming Optimism GLOC Gore-a-thon 2011 Gore-a-
thon 2012 Gorefest11 Government funding of science Government idiocy Graph of
the Week Gravity Green Blob Green Mafia Green New Deal Green tech Greenland
ice sheet HADCRUT4 hail Hausfather et al 2017 heat wave Hiatus in Global
Warming History Hits and Misses How Climate Works Humor humour hurricanes
hydroclimatology Hydropower Ice Ages IPCC IPCC AR5 leak IPCC AR5 Report Ira
It's Worse Than We Thought! James Hansen John Cook junk science Karl et al.
2015 Katowice Conference Land Surface Air Temperature Data Land use land cover
change Landslides Letters To The Editor Lewgate Lewis and Crok lightning
Little Ice Age Local_issues Lower Troposphere Temperature Lukewarmerism
Marcott et al proxy paper Mass Extinctions measurement media
MedievalWarmPeriod Methane MetOffice Michael E. Mann MJO Modeling modification
monsoons More On Series NASA NASA GISS National Climate Assessment Report
Natural CO2 sources natural gas Natural Warming NCADAC NCDC NCEI News
Newsbytes NGOs NOAA NOAA 2 year FOIA documents NOAA ERSST.v4 Pauses Buster
Noble Cause Corruption nuclear power Obama Climate Plan Obamas War on Energy
Obvious science Ocean acidification Ocean Heat Content Ocean Temperatures
Oceans Oil and Gas Open Thread Opinion Optical phenonmena Ozone
Paleoclimatology Papal Climate Encyclical Paris Climate Accord PDO Peer review
PEOPLE WILL DIE! Personal note petroleum Plankton and other critters Podcasts
Polar Amplification Polar Bears Polar Vortex Polarbeargate Politics Positive
effects of CO2 Post-normal science Presentations Proxies Puzzling things Quote
of The Month Quote of the Week Radiation Radiative Imbalance Rainfall RCP 8.5
Science Fiction records Reference Pages Renewable energy reproducibility
RICO20 Ridiculae Rio+20 Russia Salinity Satire Science Sea Sea ice Sea Ice
News Sea level Sea Surface Temperature Snow snowfall social cost of carbon
Solar solar flare solar power Southern Annular Mode Space Spaceweather
Specific Humidity Spencer-Braswell and Dessler statistics Stephan Lewandowsky
Stern Review Stratospheric water vapor Surfacestations paper Surveys
Sustainability Tabloid Climatology TAO/TRITON Buoys Technology Temperature The
"Clitanic" aka Spirit of Mawson The Rat-hole problem The Skeptic's Case The
Weather Channel The WUWT Hot Sheet The Yamal Deception thorium power Throwback
Thursday Predictions thunderstorms tornadoes Transportation Trenberth's
missing heats Tropical Hot spot Tropics Tsunami UHI UKMO HADCRUT4
Uncategorized Uncertainty United Nations USCRN USGS Volcanoes Vortex Vulcanism
Waste heat Watts et al 2012 Weather Weather_stations Wiki Wars Wildfires
Willis Autobiography wind power WUWT-TV

# Bookmarks

                
                                      * 1000+ skeptical papers
                      * A Walk On The Natural Side - Jim Steele
                      * AccuWeather GW Blog
                      * American Elephants
                      * Andrew Bolt
                      * Appinsys
                      * Australian Climate Madness
                      * Autonomous Mind
                      * Bishop Hill
                      * Bob Carter
                      * C3 Headlines
                      * Carlin Economics
                      * Cartoons By Josh
                      * Christopher Booker
                      * Climate Abyss - John Nielsen-Gammon
                      * Climate Audit
                      * Climate Change 101
                      * Climate Change Dispatch
                      * Climate Conversation - NZ
                      * Climate Debate Daily
                      * Climate Depot
                      * Climate Progress
                      * Climate Realists
                      * Climate Realists of Norway
                      * Climate Resistance
                      * Climate Sanity
                      * Climate Science - Pielke Sr.
                      * Climate Skeptic
                      * Climate Views
                      * CO2 Science
                      * Collide-a-scape - Keith Kloor
                      * Die Kalte Sonne
                      * Digging in the Clay
                      * Dr. Norman Page
                      * Dr. Roger Pielke Jr.
                      * Dr. Roy Spencer
                      * Dr. Tim Ball
                      * Ecotretas
                      * EU Referendum - Richard North
                      * Friends of Science
                      * Green Hell Blog
                      * Haunting the library
                      * ICECAP
                      * International Climate Science Coalition
                      * James Delingpole @ Breitbart
                      * Jennifer Marohasy
                      * Jo Nova
                      * Judith Curry
                      * Lucia's The Blackboard
                      * Marcel Crok – De staat van het klimaat
                      * Master Resource
                      * Moshtemp - Steve Mosher
                      * NCDC Hi/Lo Records lookup
                      * Niche Modeling - David Stockwell
                      * No Frakking Consensus
                      * No Tricks Zone
                      * NYT Dot Earth - Revkin
                      * Our World in Data
                      * Planet Gore
                      * Real Climate
                      * scienceofdoom
                      * Skeptical Science – John Cook
                      * Small Dead Animals
                      * SOHO solar images
                      * Solar Cycle 24 Board
                      * Stoat - Connolley
                      * Surfacestations Gallery
                      * Surfacestations Main
                      * Susan Crockford - polarbearscience
                      * Tallbloke’s Talkshop
                      * Tamino's Open Mind
                      * The Air Vent
                      * The Chiefio - E.M. Smith
                      * The Cosmic Tusk
                      * The Daily Bayonet
                      * The GWPF
                      * The Hockey Schtick
                      * The Lukewarmer's Way - Tom Fuller
                      * The Next Grand Minimum
                      * The Reference Frame
                      * Thomas Fuller – 3000quads
                      * Tom Nelson
                      * Trust Yet Verify
                      * UAH AMSU Daily Temps
                      * Warren Meyer
                      * Warwick Hughes
                      * Weather Picture of the Day
                      * WFT - Interactive Climate Graph Engine
                      * William Briggs
                      * World Climate Report
                

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2010/10/hsi_montford.jpg)![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/spencer_tggwb.jpg)

# Click for the:

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2012/08/watts_et_al_2012_button.png)

# Sea Ice Page

![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/09/jaxa_amsre_thumbnail.png)

# Solar Images & Data Page

![](https://sdo.gsfc.nasa.gov/assets/img/latest/latest_256_HMIIC.jpg)

# ENSO/SST Page

![](https://www.ospo.noaa.gov/data/sst/anomaly/anomnight.current.small.gif)

# WUWT Tag Cloud

Al Gore antarctica Arctic Australia Bill McKibben california climate climate
change Climate model Climatic Research Unit email controversy Current sea
level rise Earth El Niño-Southern Oscillation Energy environment Global
warming Goddard Institute for Space Studies greenhouse gas greenland Heartland
Institute Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC James Hansen Judith
Curry La Nina Little Ice Age Met Office Michael Mann NASA National Climatic
Data Center National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Weather
Service NOAA Pacific Ocean Peter Gleick Polar ice packs Science &
Environmental Policy Project Sea ice Steve McIntyre sun temperature
Temperature record United States United States Environmental Protection Agency
Watts Up With That?

# Feed Me

![RSS Feed](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/images/rss/green-small.png) RSS - Posts

![RSS Feed](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/images/rss/green-small.png) RSS - Comments

![USB Temperature Datalogger - small, compact, inexpensive, easy to use. Many

models

available.](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/usb_datalogger_160ad.jpg)![USB

Temperature Datalogger - small, compact, inexpensive, easy to use. Many models

available.](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/usb_datalogger_160ad.jpg)

# Meta

                
                                      * Log in
                      * Entries RSS
                      * Comments RSS
                      * WordPress.org
                

# Copyright Notice

Material on this website is copyright © 2006-2019, by Anthony Watts, and may
not be stored or archived separately, rebroadcast, or republished without
written permission. (Miriam O'Brien aka slandering "Sou" from Hotwhopper, that
means you.)

For permission, contact us. See the About>Contact menu under the header.

All rights reserved worldwide.

Some material from contributors may contain additional copyrights of their
respective company or organization.

We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on WUWT. If you
continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. This
notice is required by recently enacted EU GDPR rules, and since WUWT is a
globally read website, we need to keep the bureaucrats off our case! Cookie
Policy

Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Expound by Konstantin Kovshenin

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

%d bloggers like this:

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

