

![Annenberg Learner](/images/header/annenberg-learner.jpg)

Teacher resources and professional development across the curriculum

Teacher professional development and classroom resources across the curriculum

![Monthly Update sign up](/images/header/mail_list_box.png)

![Mailing List signup](/images/header/mail_list_icon.png)

![Search](/images/header/search_icon.jpg)

![Annenberg Learner](/images/header/annenberg-learner.jpg)

MENU

                
                                      * About Us
                      * Video Series
                      * Professional Development
                      * Course & Video Licensing
                      * Lesson Plans
                      * Interactives
                      * News & Blog
                      * SEARCH
                
                      * About Us
                      * Video Series
                      * Prof. Development
                      * Licensing
                      * Lesson Plans
                      * Interactives
                      * News
                      * Blog
                
                      * About Us
                        * FAQ
                        * Staff
                        * Mission and History
                        * Site Map
                        * Site Tour
                        * Use Policy
                        * Legal Policy
                        * Privacy Policy
                        * Annenberg Foundation
                          * Annenberg Space for Photography 
                          * Explore.org 
                          * Funding 
                        * Contact Us
                      * Video
                

Series

                
                                        * Video Programs 
                          * View All 
                          * Arts 
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Discipline Page 
                          * Foreign Language
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                          * Literature & Language Arts
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Literature Discipline Page 
                            * Language Arts Discipline Page 
                          * Mathematics
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Mathematics Discipline Page 
                          * Science
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Science Discipline Page 
                          * Social Studies & History
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Social Studies & History Discipline Page 
                          * Learner Express
                          * VoD/Broadband FAQ 
                        * Discontinued Series 
                      * Professional
                

Development

                
                                        * Facilitator Guide 
                        * Course FAQ 
                      * Course &
                

Video Licensing

                
                                      * Lesson
                

Plans

                
                                        * View All 
                        * Arts 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Foreign Language
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Literature & Language Arts
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Mathematics 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Science 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Social Studies & History 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                      * Interactives
                        * View All 
                          * Student
                          * Teacher/Adult
                        * Arts 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Foreign Language
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Literature & Language Arts
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Mathematics 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Science 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Social Studies & History 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                      * News
                

& Blog

                
                                        * Learner Log Blog 
                        * News and Press
                        * Monthly Updates 
                          * Signup 
                        * @Social 
                          * LinkedIn
                          * Facebook
                          * Twitter
                          * Pinterest
                          * YouTube
                          * Google+
                      * About Us
                        * FAQ
                        * Staff
                        * Mission and History
                        * Site Map
                        * Site Tour
                        * Use Policy
                        * Legal Policy
                        * Privacy Policy
                        * Annenberg Foundation
                          * Annenberg Space for Photography 
                          * Explore.org 
                          * Funding 
                        * Contact Us
                      * Video Series 
                        * Video Programs 
                          * View All 
                          * Arts 
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Discipline Page 
                          * Foreign Language
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                          * Literature & Language Arts
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Literature Discipline Page 
                            * Language Arts Discipline Page 
                          * Mathematics
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Mathematics Discipline Page 
                          * Science
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Science Discipline Page 
                          * Social Studies & History
                            * Grade K-2 
                            * Grade 3-5 
                            * Grade 6-8 
                            * Grade 9-12 
                            * College/Adult 
                            * Social Studies & History Discipline Page 
                          * Learner Express
                          * VoD/Broadband FAQ 
                        * Discontinued Series 
                      * Professional
                

Development

                
                                        * Facilitator Guide 
                        * Course FAQ 
                      * Course &
                

Video Licensing

                
                                      * Lesson Plans 
                        * View All 
                        * Arts 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Foreign Language
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Literature & Language Arts
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Mathematics 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Science 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                        * Social Studies & History 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * Discipline Page 
                          * ALL 
                      * Interactives
                        * View All 
                          * Student
                          * Teacher/Adult
                        * Arts 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Foreign Language
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Literature & Language Arts
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Mathematics 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Science 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                        * Social Studies & History 
                          * Grade K-2 
                          * Grade 3-5 
                          * Grade 6-8 
                          * Grade 9-12 
                          * College/Adult 
                          * ALL 
                      * News & Blog
                        * Learner Log Blog 
                        * News and Press
                        * Monthly Updates 
                          * Signup 
                        * @Social 
                          * LinkedIn
                          * Facebook
                          * Twitter
                          * Pinterest
                          * YouTube
                          * Google+
                

![The Habitable Planet](/courses/envsci/images/sm_logo.gif)Habitable Planet
home page

                
                                      * Content By Unit
                        1. Many Planets, One Earth
                        2. Atmosphere
                        3. Oceans
                        4. Ecosystems
                        5. Human Population Dynamics
                        6. Risk, Exposure, and Health
                        7. Agriculture
                        8. Water Resources
                        9. Biodiversity Decline
                        10. Energy Challenges
                        11. Atmospheric Pollution
                        12. Earth's Changing Climate
                          * Online Textbook
                          * Interactive Lab
                          * Visuals
                          * Scientists
                          * Professional Development Guide (pdf)
                          * Glossary
                        13. Looking Forward: Our Global Experiment
                      * Content By Type
                        * ![online text](/courses/envsci/images/icon_text_2.gif) Online Textbook (PDFs)
                        * ![video](/courses/envsci/images/icon_video_2.gif) Videos
                        * ![interactive labs](/courses/envsci/images/icon_lab_2.gif) Interactive Labs
                        * ![visuals](/courses/envsci/images/icon_visual_2.gif) Visuals
                        * ![scientists](/courses/envsci/images/icon_sci_2.gif) Scientists
                        * ![course guide](/courses/envsci/images/icon_guide_2.gif) Professional Development Guide
                        * ![glossary](/courses/envsci/images/icon_gloss_2.gif) Glossary
                

# Unit 12: Earth's Changing Climate // Section 1: Introduction

                
                                      * Jump to a section:
                      * 1//
                      * 2Tipping Earth's Energy Balance //
                      * 3Climate Change: What the Past Tells Us //
                      * 4Past Warming: The Eocene Epoch //
                      * 5Global Cooling: The Pleistocene Epoch //
                      * 6Present Warming and the Role of CO2 //
                      * 7Observed Impacts of Climate Change //
                      * 8Other Potential Near-Term Impacts //
                      * 9Major Laws and Treaties //
                      * 10Further Reading //
                

* * *

For the past 150 years, humans have been performing an unprecedented
experiment on Earth's climate. Human activities, mainly fossil fuel
combustion, are increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the
atmosphere. These gases are trapping infrared radiation emitted from the
planet's surface and warming the Earth. Global average surface temperatures
have risen about 0.7°C (1.4°F) since the early 20th century.

Earth's climate is a complex system that is constantly changing, but the
planet is warmer today than it has been for thousands of years, and current
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels have not been equaled for millions of
years. As we will see below, ancient climate records offer some clues about
how a warming world may behave. They show that climate shifts may not be slow
and steady; rather, temperatures may change by many degrees within a few
decades, with drastic impacts on plant and animal life and natural systems.
And if CO2 levels continue to rise at projected rates, history suggests that
the world will become drastically hotter than it is today, possibly hot enough
to melt much of Earth's existing ice cover. Figure 1 depicts projected surface
temperature changes through 2060 as estimated by NASA's Global Climate Model.

![Surface air temperature increase, 1960 to

2060](/courses/envsci/visual/img_med/surface_air_temp.jpg)

**Figure 1.** Surface air temperature increase, 1960 to 2060  
**See larger image**

**Source:** (C) National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Past climate changes were driven by many different types of naturally-
occurring events, from variations in Earth's orbit to volcanic eruptions.
Since the start of the industrial age, human activities have become a larger
influence on Earth's climate than other natural factors. High CO2 levels
(whether caused by natural phenomena or human activities) are a common factor
between many past climate shifts and the warming we see today.

Many aspects of climate change, such as exactly how quickly and steadily it
will progress, remain uncertain. However, there is strong scientific consensus
that current trends in GHG emissions will cause substantial warming by the
year 2100, and that this warming will have widespread impacts on human life
and natural ecosystems. Many impacts have already been observed, including
higher global average temperatures, rising sea levels (water expands as it
warms), and changes in snow cover and growing seasons in many areas.

A significant level of warming is inevitable due to GHG emissions that have
already been released, but we have options to limit the scope of future
climate change--most importantly, by reducing fossil fuel consumption (for
more details, see Unit 10, "Energy Challenges"). Other important steps to
mitigate global warming include reducing the rate of global deforestation to
preserve forest carbon sinks and finding ways to capture and sequester carbon
dioxide emissions instead of releasing them to the atmosphere. (These
responses are discussed in Unit 13, "Looking Forward: Our Global Experiment.")

top of page

                
                                      * previous section 
                      * // Section 1: Introduction //
                      * next section
                
                      * About This Course
                      * Using This Site
                      * Site Map
                
                      * Home
                      * Catalog
                      * About Us
                      * Search
                      * Contact Us
                      *
                

![LearnerLog](https://learnerlog.org/images/learner/nav-about.png)

(C) Annenberg Foundation 2017. All rights reserved. Legal Policy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

