

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

                
                                      * Comments & replies 
                      * Public profile 
                      * Account details 
                      * Emails & marketing
                

* * *
                
                                      * Membership 
                      * Contributions 
                      * Subscriptions
                

* * *
                
                                      * Sign out
                

Search

                
                                      * switch to the  International edition 
                      * switch to the  UK edition 
                      * switch to the  US edition 
                      * switch to the  Australia edition
                

current edition: International edition

                
                                      * News 
                      * Opinion 
                      * Sport 
                      * Culture 
                      * Lifestyle
                

Show More __

                
                                      * __News
                        * World news 
                        * UK news 
                        * Science 
                        * Cities 
                        * Global development 
                        * Football 
                        * Tech 
                        * Business 
                        * Environment 
                        * Obituaries 
                      * __Opinion
                        * The Guardian view 
                        * Columnists 
                        * Cartoons 
                        * Opinion videos 
                        * Letters 
                      * __Sport
                        * Football 
                        * Cricket 
                        * Rugby union 
                        * Tennis 
                        * Cycling 
                        * F1 
                        * Golf 
                        * US sports 
                      * __Culture
                        * Books 
                        * Music 
                        * TV & radio 
                        * Art & design 
                        * Film 
                        * Games 
                        * Classical 
                        * Stage 
                      * __Lifestyle
                        * Fashion 
                        * Food 
                        * Recipes 
                        * Love & sex 
                        * Health & fitness 
                        * Home & garden 
                        * Women 
                        * Men 
                        * Family 
                        * Travel 
                        * Money
                

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

                
                                      * Make a contribution 
                      * Subscribe 
                      * __International edition
                        * switch to the  UK edition 
                        * switch to the  US edition 
                        * switch to the  Australia edition 
                      * Search jobs 
                      * Dating 
                      * Holidays 
                      * Digital Archive 
                      * Discount Codes 
                      * The Guardian app 
                      * Video 
                      * Podcasts 
                      * Pictures 
                      * Newsletters 
                      * Today's paper 
                      * Inside the Guardian 
                      * The Observer 
                      * Guardian Weekly 
                      * Crosswords 
                      * Facebook 
                      * Twitter 
                      * Search jobs 
                      * Dating 
                      * Holidays 
                      * Digital Archive 
                      * Discount Codes
                
                      * Environment 
                      * Climate change 
                      * Wildlife 
                      * Energy 
                      * Pollution
                

More

Climate Consensus - the 97%

Climate change

# IPCC model global warming projections have done much better than you think

Global warming since 1990 has fallen within the range of IPCC climate model
projections

Dana Nuccitelli

Tue 1 Oct 2013 05.07 BST First published on Tue 1 Oct 2013 05.07 BST

                
                                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share via Email
                

![IPCC Earth](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-

images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/26/1380216469572/IPCC-

Earth-011.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=96930f2ca0aaffc7368cd83932201c6c)

Models that simulate the Earth's climate are constantly improving. Photograph:
NASA/Corbis

The figure below from the 2013 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) report compares the global surface warming projections made in the
1990, 1995, 2001, and 2007 IPCC reports to the temperature measurements.

![IPCC AR5 Figure 1.4.  Solid lines and squares represent measured average

global surface temperature changes by NASA \(blue\), NOAA \(yellow\), and the

UK Hadley Centre \(green\).  The colored shading shows the projected range of

surface warming in the IPCC First Assessment Report \(FAR; yellow\), Second

\(SAR; green\), Third \(TAR; blue\), and Fourth \(AR4;

red\).](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-

images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/10/1/1380599335494/ProjvsObs450.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=a1e6a6d87ccc116e41c64044a6fbfc84)

IPCC AR5 Figure 1.4. Solid lines and squares represent measured average global
surface temperature changes by NASA (blue), NOAA (yellow), and the UK Hadley
Centre (green). The colored shading shows the projected range of surface
warming in the IPCC First Assessment Report (FAR; yellow), Second (SAR;
green), Third (TAR; blue), and Fourth (AR4; red).

Since 1990, global surface temperatures have warmed at a rate of about 0.15°C
per decade, within the range of model projections of about 0.10 to 0.35°C per
decade. As the IPCC notes,

> "global climate models generally simulate global temperatures that compare
well with observations over climate timescales ... The 1990–2012 data have
been shown to be consistent with the [1990 IPCC report] projections, and not
consistent with zero trend from 1990 ... the trend in globally-averaged
surface temperatures falls within the range of the previous IPCC projections."

## What about the Naysayers?

In the weeks and months leading up to the publication of the final 2013 IPCC
report, there has been a flood of opinion articles in blogs and the mainstream
media claiming that the models used by the IPCC have dramatically over-
predicted global warming and thus are a failure. This narrative clearly
conflicts with the IPCC model-data comparison figure shown above, so what's
going on?

These mistaken climate contrarian articles have all suffered from some
combination of the following errors.

## 1) Publicizing the flawed draft IPCC model-data comparison figure

Late last year, an early draft of the IPCC report was leaked, including the
first draft version of the figure shown above. The first version of the graph
had some flaws, including a significant one immediately noted by statistician
and climate blogger Tamino.

> "The flaw is this: all the series (both projections and observations) are
aligned at 1990. But observations include random year-to-year fluctuations,
whereas the projections do not because the average of multiple models averages
those out ... the projections should be aligned to the value due to the
existing trend in observations at 1990.

>

> Aligning the projections with a single extra-hot year makes the projections
seem too hot, so observations are too cool by comparison."

In the draft version of the IPCC figure, it was simply a visual illusion that
the surface temperature data _appeared_ to be warming less slowly than the
model projections, even though the measured temperature trend fell within the
range of model simulations. Obviously this mistake was subsequently corrected.

This illustrates why it's a bad idea to publicize material in draft form,
which by definition is a work in progress. That didn't stop Fox News, Ross
McKitrick in the Financial Post, Roger Pielke Jr., the Heartland Institute,
and Anthony Watts from declaring premature and unwarranted victory on behalf
of climate contrarians based on the faulty draft figure.

## 2) Ignoring the range of model simulations

A single model run simulates just one possible future climate outcome. In
reality, there are an infinite number of possible outcomes, depending on how
various factors like greenhouse gas emissions and natural climate variability
change. This is why climate modelers don't make predictions; they make
projections, which say in scenario 'x', the climate will change in 'y'
fashion. The shaded regions in the IPCC figure represent the range of outcomes
from all of these individual climate model simulations.

The IPCC also illustrates the "multi-model mean," which averages together all
of the individual model simulation runs. This average makes for an easy
comparison with the observational data; however, there's no reason to believe
the climate will follow that average path, especially in the short-term. If
natural factors act to amplify human-caused global surface warming, as they
did in the 1990s, the climate is likely to warm faster than the model average
in the short-term. If natural factors act to dampen global surface warming, as
they have in the 2000s, the climate is likely to warm more slowly than the
model average.

When many model simulations are averaged together, the random natural
variability in the individual model runs cancel out, and the steady human-
caused global warming trend remains left over. But in reality the climate
behaves like a single model simulation run, not like the average of all model
runs.

This is why it's important to retain the shaded range of individual model
runs, unlike Bjorn Lomborg in The Australian, Judith Curry in The Australian,
Benny Peiser at GWPF, Roger Pielke Jr., David Rose in the Mail on Sunday
(copied by Hayley Dixon in The Telegraph), and Der Spiegel, all of whom only
considered the model average.

This group all made an additional related third error as well.

## 3) Cherry Picking

Most claims that the IPCC models have failed are based on surface temperature
changes over the past 15 years (1998–2012). During that period, temperatures
have risen about 50 percent more slowly than the multi-model average, but have
remained within the range of individual model simulation runs.

However, 1998 represented an abnormally hot year at the Earth's surface due to
one of the strongest El Niño events of the 20th century. Thus it represents a
poor choice of a starting date to analyze the surface warming trend
(selectively choosing convenient start and/or end points is also known as
'cherry picking'). For example, we can select a different 15-year period,
1992–2006, and find a surface warming trend nearly 50 percent _faster_ than
the multi-model average, as statistician Tamino helpfully illustrates in the
figure below.

![Fast warming trend 1992–2006, slow warming trend

1997–2012](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-

images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/28/1380337244671/gisstrend12.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=404be1a375a05ba07ab49598bc54ce3c)

Global surface temperature data 1975–2012 from NASA with a linear trend
(black), with trends for 1992–2006 (red) and 1998–2012 (blue).

In short, **if David Rose wasn't declaring that global surface warming was
accelerating out of control in 2006, then he has no business declaring that
global surface warming has 'paused' in 2013**. Both statements are equally
wrong, based on cherry picking noisy short-term data.

## IPCC models have been accurate

For 1992–2006, the natural variability of the climate amplified human-caused
global surface warming, while it dampened the surface warming for 1997–2012.
Over the full period, the overall warming rate has remained within the range
of IPCC model projections, as the 2013 IPCC report notes.

> "The long-term climate model simulations show a trend in global-mean surface
temperature from 1951 to 2012 that agrees with the observed trend (very high
confidence). There are, however, differences between simulated and observed
trends over periods as short as 10 to 15 years (e.g., 1998 to 2012)."

The IPCC also notes that climate models have accurately simulated trends in
extreme cold and heat, large-scale precipitation pattern changes, and ocean
heat content (where most global warming goes). Models also now better simulate
the Arctic sea ice decline, which they had previously dramatically
_underestimated_.

All in all, the IPCC models do an impressive job accurately representing and
projecting changes in the global climate, contrary to contrarian claims. In
fact, the IPCC global surface warming projections have performed much better
than predictions made by climate contrarians.

It's important to remember that weather predictions and climate predictions
are very different. It's harder to predict the weather further into the
future. With climate predictions, it's short-term variability (like
unpredictable ocean cycles) that makes predictions difficult. They actually do
better predicting climate changes several decades into the future, during
which time the short-term fluctuations average out.

That's why climate models have a hard time predicting changes over 10–15
years, but do very well with predictions several decades into the future, as
the IPCC illustrates. This is good news, because with climate change, it's
these long-term changes we're worried about:

![IPCC surface temperature change

projections](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-

images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/30/1380503041075/AR5_surfacetempproj.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=e1a02c3249f941cd7f2a4d0912c6bbd1)

IPCC AR5 projected global average surface temperature changes in a high
emissions scenario (RCP8.5; red) and low emissions scenario (RCP2.6; blue).

Topics

                
                                      * Climate change 
                      * Climate Consensus - the 97%
                
                      * Climate science denial 
                      * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
                      * blogposts
                
                      * Share on Facebook
                      * Share on Twitter
                      * Share via Email
                      * Share on LinkedIn
                      * Share on Pinterest
                      * Share on WhatsApp
                      * Share on Messenger
                
                      * Reuse this content
                

## View all comments >

Order by

                
                                      * newest
                      * oldest
                      * recommendations
                

Show 25

                
                                      * 25
                      * 50
                      * 100
                      * All
                

Threads

                
                                      * collapsed
                      * expanded
                      * unthreaded
                

Loading comments… Trouble loading?

View more comments

## more on this story

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/27/1380265053068/d8829113-bf3d-416c-9e32-9980f13c96a0-2060x1236.jpeg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=7727e861858b0c6122bd52f680705e7d)
                

### Climate change report: live reaction to IPCC conclusions

Scientists in Stockholm are due to present the most exhaustive and
authoritative state of climate science to date. Follow our live news and
reaction as the UN's climate science panel publishes the first part of its
fifth assessment report

Published: 27 Sep 2013

Climate change report: live reaction to IPCC conclusions

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/29/1380478074950/Carbon-budget-talks-urgen-010.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=35c992fc74aa65209b2b495a63b3f4b8)
                

### 'Carbon budget' talks urgent, warns Lord Stern

Leading climate economist says radical policies needed as IPCC calculations
show planet has used up over half emissions budget

Published: 29 Sep 2013

'Carbon budget' talks urgent, warns Lord Stern

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/27/1380306219331/FILE---Humans-Are-Dominan-008.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=31a61360016f5a86c62265342ec6142d)
                

### IPCC: 30 years to climate calamity if we carry on blowing the carbon

budget

Global 2C warming threshold will be breached within 30 years, leading
scientists report, with humans unequivocally to blame

Published: 27 Sep 2013

IPCC: 30 years to climate calamity if we carry on blowing the carbon budget

                
                                      * ![](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/9/27/1380306219331/FILE---Humans-Are-Dominan-008.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=31a61360016f5a86c62265342ec6142d)
                

### IPCC: 30 years to climate calamity if we carry on blowing the carbon

budget

Global 2C warming threshold will be breached within 30 years, leading
scientists report, with humans unequivocally to blame

Published: 27 Sep 2013

IPCC: 30 years to climate calamity if we carry on blowing the carbon budget

                
                                      *             * ###  IPCC climate report: human impact is 'unequivocal'
                

Published: 27 Sep 2013

IPCC climate report: human impact is 'unequivocal'

                
                                        * ###  Climate change likely to turn UK's weather more extreme
                

Published: 27 Sep 2013

Climate change likely to turn UK's weather more extreme

                
                                        * ###  Climate change will hit poor countries hardest, study shows
                

Published: 27 Sep 2013

Climate change will hit poor countries hardest, study shows

                
                                        * ###  IPCC report: Australia can expect 6C rise on hottest days
                

Published: 27 Sep 2013

IPCC report: Australia can expect 6C rise on hottest days

More more on this story

## Most popular

                
                                      * Environment 
                      * Climate change 
                      * Wildlife 
                      * Energy 
                      * Pollution
                
                      * Contact us
                      * Complaints & corrections
                      * SecureDrop
                      * Work for us
                      * Privacy policy
                      * Cookie policy
                      * Terms & conditions
                      * Help
                      * All topics
                      * All writers
                      * Digital newspaper archive
                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Advertise with us
                      * Search UK jobs
                      * Dating
                      * Discount Codes
                

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Climate+change%2CClimate+science+denial%2CIntergovernmental+Panel+on+Climate+Change+%28IPCC%29%2CClimate+change)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

