

Jump to navigation

Canadian Geographic is a magazine of **The Royal Canadian Geographical
Society**![Royal Canadian Geographical Society Logo](https://cangeo-media-

library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/images/blocks/rcgs_header/rcgs-en-short-

blue.png)

![Canadian Geographic

Logo](https://www.canadiangeographic.ca/sites/all/themes/cgcorp/logo.png)

## Main menu

                
                                      * Explore by Topic
                      * Past Issues
                      * About Us
                      * Contests
                

## Secondary Menu

                
                                      * Subscribe
                      * Shop
                      * Donate
                      * Our Sites
                      * Search
                
                      * Explore by Topic
                      * Past Issues
                      * About Us
                      * Contests
                      * Newsletters
                      * Subscribe
                      * Shop
                      * Donate
                      * Our Sites
                      * Search
                

The Royal Canadian Geographical Society family of sites:

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-rcgs.png?itok=k6Wq1b-E)
                

The Royal Canadian Geographical Society

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-photo-club_0.png?itok=M5nNPn57)
                

Canadian Geographic Photo Club

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-cg-ed_0.png?itok=SumKVm-O)
                

Canadian Geographic Education

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-cg-challenge_1.png?itok=qOBm__aX)
                

Canadian Geographic student geography challenge

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-nat-bird_0.png?itok=ZCvAQySX)
                

Help designate an official bird for Canada

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-energy-diet.png?itok=5pvy5bB1)
                

Help improve energy literacy in Canada

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-energy-iq_0.png?itok=oG0pGVxS)
                

All about Energy

                
                                      * ![Canada's Coolest School Trip](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-ccst.png?itok=suLKSFLz)
                

Grade 8 students exploring Parks Canada sites

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-developing-world.png?itok=zbooRkuL)
                

Compare countries' statistics and explore our changing world

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-idrc.png?itok=ZDjwb9j5)
                

Innovative projects in the developing world

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-hydropower.png?itok=Mw2nzrgK)
                

Canada’s hydro infrastructure

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-nation-soars.png?itok=bcvruupM)
                

Commemorating Canada's Great War flyers

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-drawn.png?itok=0tPPSqcp)
                

The revolution of mapping in the First World War

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-wings-of-courage.png?itok=YkopMH4j)
                

Canadian pilots heroically earn their wings

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-flight-path-of-heroes.png?itok=eMpW7CHf)
                

Connecting the past and present

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-lifetime-experiences.png?itok=7RyW_19O)
                

A wealth of lifetime experiences in polar travel await you

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/related_site_thumbnail/public/images/related_sites/thumbnails/our-sites-geographica_0.png?itok=-efMoQbE)
                

Canadian Geographic magazine in french: Géographica

# The truth about polar bears

Depending on whom you ask, the North’s sentinel species is either on the edge
of extinction or an environmental success story. An in-depth look at the
complicated, contradictory and controversial science behind the sound bites.

                
                                      * ![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/styles/web_article_slider_image/public/images/web_articles/article_images/835/polar_bears_1.jpg?itok=DfqXPiJ2)
                

By Zac Unger

December 1, 2012

![](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/web_articles/magazine/dec12/polar_bears_1a_lg.jpg)

Ian Stirling, arguably the best known polar bear scientist in the world, and
Mitch Taylor (pictured), one of the most controversial, have different takes
on the fate of the species. (Photo: Mitch Taylor)

On the western shore of Hudson Bay, it’s sometimes hard to remember that polar
bears are supposed to be going extinct. Every fall, hundreds of bears gather
near Churchill, Man., waiting for the bay to freeze so that they can head out
onto the ice to hunt for seals. During this period, people in town treat polar
bears more like nuisances than a sentinel species whose condition is regarded
as the clearest evidence of the coming global climate apocalypse.

If a friend has ever shown you a snapshot of a polar bear, the odds are good
that the photo was taken in Churchill. While Churchill is legendarily the
Polar Bear Capital of the World, it is also the Polar Bear Tourism Capital of
the World. There are 19 polar bear populations on the planet — 13 of them in
Canada — and none is as accessible as in Churchill, which draws an estimated
10,000 visitors every year. If you’d like to scratch your itch for bear
sighting in Baffin Bay or Tuktoyaktuk, N.W.T., you’ll probably need float
planes, ski-touring gear and a solid knowledge of igloo architecture. But in
Churchill, all it takes is a whole lot of disposable income. With hotels,
ranger stations and perky multilingual guides, the town is entirely geared
toward the modern ecotourist. For the modest sum of $11,349 (per person), you
can have the “Ultimate Polar Bear Experience”: 10 days in the Tundra Buggy
Lodge, essentially an oversized RV parked at the water’s edge.

By mid-November, the Churchill polar bears have not eaten a full meal in four
months, and they spend their days conserving energy. They laze about in front
of the assembled crowds, walking in circles, licking at the ground and just
generally killing time. Tourists jostle one another, hoping for killer photo
ops: the cutest cub, the biggest battlescarred male, the particularly curious
subadult that rears up on its hind legs and slaps its paws against the windows
of the tour bus. Occasionally, a bear wanders right into town to take a swipe
at a garbage can or sniff longingly at the odours wafting out of Gypsy’s
Bakery.

![](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/web_articles/magazine/dec12/polar_bears_map_lg.jpg)

The world's 19 polar bear populations (Map: Chris Brackley/Canadian
Geographic)

The tourists come, of course, because polar bears are a dying breed, and they
want to check that furry face off their life lists before it’s too late. The
environmental movement has never had a higher-profile spokesmodel than _Ursus
maritimus_. Every discussion about global warming has to include a mention of
polar bears; every article about the human disregard for nature has to feature
a photograph of a sad-looking bear on a tiny speck of ice.

Granted, the population numbers have been startling. Research from 1984 to
2004 showed that the western Hudson Bay population, which includes the
Churchill bears, had declined from 1,194 to 935. The trendlines from that
study suggested that by 2011, the population would fall to as low as 676.

Fast-forward to today and a new study, which reveals that the current polar
bear population of western Hudson Bay is 1,013 animals.

Wait … what? _More_ bears than there were 10 years ago? Nearly double the
prediction? “Polar bears are one of the biggest conservation success stories
in the world,” says Drikus Gissing, wildlife director for the Government of
Nunavut. “There are more bears here now than there were in the recent past.”

“That’s false,” says Kassie Siegel of the Center for Biological Diversity, the
international advocacy organization that, in 2008, successfully pushed to have
polar bears listed as “threatened” in the United States. “Polar bear
populations are in decline. That means individual bears are starving and
drowning.”

Polar bears can weigh more than 500 kilograms, they drag seals out of the
ocean with their claws, and on occasion they will attack human beings. In
short, these animals are not known for their subtlety. And yet a deep dive
into the current science behind polar bear population dynamics produces
results that are complicated, contradictory and often quite controversial. For
the segment of the media that traffics in sound bites, it’s easy to declare
that polar bears are on the verge of extinction … or that this is just another
example of the climate-change myth. The truth, as usual, lies somewhere in
between.

Underlying any story about polar bear populations is the reality that it can
be extremely difficult working with polar bears. They can range across
international boundaries, over hundreds of kilometres of forbidding ice and
frigid open water. They can dig into dens or camouflage themselves on
snowfields. And mark-recapture studies, in which bears are tranquilized, are
problematic. Drugging bears is dangerous for both the animals and the
scientists, and Inuit often object to such invasive interactions, since
drugging and physically handling bears stresses the animals and is an affront
to traditional ecological practices.

So scientists end up counting bears in many different ways, including
incorporating observations by knowledgeable local residents. But population
estimates are just that: estimates. Some subpopulations of bears haven’t been
counted in decades, if ever. And some are counted more frequently but with
slightly different survey areas or methodologies from year to year. The Polar
Bear Specialist Group, an international consortium of experts, classifies 10
of the 19 subpopulations as being “data-deficient,” which isn’t exactly
conducive to a coherent discussion about how polar bears are faring worldwide.

Despite all this hedging, the numbers still tell a powerful story. It’s just
not always clear what that story is. In Davis Strait, between Greenland and
Baffin Island, the polar bear population has grown from 900 animals in the
late 1970s to around 2,100 today. In Foxe Basin — a portion of northern Hudson
Bay — a population that was estimated to be 2,300 in the early 2000s now
stands at 2,570. And in specific areas of western Hudson Bay, the most-
studied, most-photographed group of bears on Earth seems to have been on a
slow but steady increase since in the 1970s.

News like this leaves climate-change deniers crowing from the rooftops. But a
closer look reveals that everything may not be quite so sunny. “Some
populations appear to be doing OK now, but what’s frightening is what might
happen in the very near future,” says wildlife biologist Lily Peacock, who has
worked with polar bears for the Government of Nunavut and the U.S. Geological
Survey. “All indications are that the future does not look bright.” While
population trends might appear stable, she says, “we’re picking up declines in
body condition that are really frightening.” Scientists have shown a direct
correlation between warm years and skinny bears. Even more distressing, one
study predicted that 40 to 73 percent of pregnant females could fail to
deliver healthy cubs if ice breakup happens one month earlier than in the
1990s. Polar bears are long-lived animals that reproduce slowly; counting the
number of animals that are alive _today_ might not paint an accurate picture.

![](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/web_articles/magazine/dec12/polar_bears_2.jpg)

Garbage is no longer burned in Churchill, which has eliminated one bear issue,
but Kassie Siegel’s goal of reducing atmospheric CO2 to 350 parts per million
remains elusive. (Photo: Brendan Cummings)

Take the population in the greater Churchill area, for example, which was
analyzed in a 2012 paper entitled Western Hudson Bay Polar Bear Aerial Survey.
While the Government of Nunavut, which commissioned the study, was quick to
trumpet an increase in polar bear numbers — and call for higher hunting quotas
— the University of Minnesota scientists who actually did the work were more
judicious. The sea ice in Hudson Bay is now breaking up two to three weeks
earlier than it did three decades ago. And since a bear on land is easier to
spot from a helicopter than a bear on the ice, catastrophically early ice
breakup may have just made the bears more visible. By that logic, a higher
count could actually be evidence that the bears are doing worse.

Even more troublesome is the fact that the number of cubs observed in the
western Hudson Bay population is dramatically lower than in the past. While
adult bears may be fat and savvy enough to survive a few lean years, juvenile
bears reach a tipping point quickly. Despite the triumphal notes sounded by
the Nunavut government, the study’s authors point out that the scarcity of
cubs undercuts the entire hypothesis that “increasing numbers of bears … are
the result of overall subpopulation growth.”

While it’s tempting to talk about polar bears as a single-species group, the
truth is that the success or failure of a single subpopulation might say very
little about the health of another one. “The thing to remember is the vast
range of the polar bear and the utter size of the Arctic,” says Geoff York,
the Ottawa-based senior program officer for the World Wildlife Fund’s Global
Arctic Programme. “Impacts from warming are unfolding at different rates and
different time scales.” Polar bears that make their home in James Bay — at the
fifty-third parallel north — have experienced ice-free summers for thousands
of years. Bears in the High Arctic Archipelago, however, contend with pack ice
so thick that it’s often impossible for them to hunt seals. In the southern
reaches of the bears’ range, warming could be catastrophic, but higher north,
an increase in open water could potentially make hunting _easier_.

In Davis Strait, for example, both the extent and thickness of the sea ice
have been declining dramatically. In theory, this should be trouble for the
local bears, which, like polar bears everywhere else, rely on solid sea ice as
a hunting platform. Yet this population is an eye-popping 233 percent bigger
than it was four decades ago. It’s tempting to simply declare victory and walk
away. And yet this new-found abundance is entirely the result of local
management practices that originally had nothing to do with bears.
Specifically, in 1983, the European Economic Community banned the importation
of the hides of whitecoat harp seal pups. In most places, the polar bear diet
consists primarily of ringed or bearded seals. But polar bears aren’t picky
eaters; when harp seal populations exploded, polar bears gorged. On the other
hand, one theory holds that the loss of sea ice could encourage killer whales
to move into polar bear habitat, snatching up all the seals and becoming the
new dominant marine mammal.

And what about other menu items besides seal meat? During springtime in Wapusk
National Park (just outside of Churchill), tens of thousands of lesser snow
geese can be found nesting at around the same time polar bears are coming
ashore. As ice breakup occurs earlier, the overlap between the bears and birds
gets closer in line. While a bear would have to eat the contents of about four
dozen nests to equal the caloric equivalent of just one “seal day,” there is a
_possibility_ that an occasional egg smorgasbord could help offset the effects
of sea ice loss.

![](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/web_articles/magazine/dec12/polar_bears_3_lg.jpg)

Wildlife biologist Lily Peacock takes a blood sample, a procedure seen by some
as invasive, but one that helps researchers understand what polar bears need
to produce healthy cubs. (Photo: T.F. Donnelly)

As if global warming weren’t enough of a problem, polar bears face a host of
other assaults, not the least of which is hunting. By definition, there is no
“sustainable” harvest quota for a population already in decline. That seems
obvious, right? And yet it also happens to be the wrong answer. When it comes
to the science and politics behind hunting, we have to follow polar bears down
the rabbit hole once again.

In Canada, hunting rules are determined by individual provinces and
territories, so a particularly peripatetic bear in Hudson Bay could wind up
being “managed” by Manitoba, Nunavut, Ontario, Quebec and possibly even
Newfoundland. Factor in the disparate laws in the other four polar bear
nations — the United States, Russia, Greenland and Norway — and you’ve got a
recipe for worldwide confusion.

Approximately two-thirds of the world’s polar bears live in Canada, and about
600 are legally hunted here every year. Of that, 86 percent of the hunting
occurs in Nunavut. For years, First Nations and Inuit residents of polar bear
country have reported increased interaction with bears. More bears are coming
into settlements, scavenging garbage, hassling dogs and terrifying residents.
But some scientists counter that if bears were doing well, they wouldn’t come
around town and, therefore, a greater number of bear encounters is actually
evidence of _fewer_ bears.

Inuit and Cree have harvested Hudson Bay’s polar bears for 6,000 years, before
climate change was on anybody’s radar. Harvest levels in modern times have
ebbed and flowed according to management and political priorities. Between
2004 and today, according to Nunavut’s wildlife director Drikus Gissing,
allowable harvest levels in western Hudson Bay dropped from 56 to 38 and then
to 16 — a number that was shared between Manitoba and Nunavut and also had to
include unplanned “defence kills.” For locals, hunting is important not just
for meat, hides and cultural continuity but also as a significant source of
income, since some tags are sold to sport hunters for tens of thousands of
dollars.

Terry Audla, the president of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, Canada’s national Inuit
organization, says that when it comes to really understanding how healthy the
polar bear population is, it makes no sense to pit the feelings and hunches of
far-flung conservationists against the direct observations of local people who
deal with the bears all the time. As far as overhunting goes, says Audla, “if
you’re reliant on something as a source of food, you’re going to make darn
sure that you’re keeping that source healthy.” When you live in Resolute Bay,
Nunavut, it’s hard to give a lot of weight to a conservation organization in
southern California or a worldwide endangered species treaty that is signed in
Qatar. “There’s this whole fad down south about the 100-mile local diet,” says
Audla, laughing. “Well, we’ve been doing that forever.”

But even local management of hunting is not without pitfalls. While the
territorial government in Iqaluit enforces strict rationing laws, hunters in
Quebec (where no annual quota is applied) recently killed 90 bears in a single
season. As a result, empty-handed hunters in Nunavut felt that their
traditional rights were being curtailed. And when you lose the active
engagement of the local population, you’re likely to have more polar bears
killed rather than fewer. “The Inuit have been respectful of the quota
system,” says Gissing. With an annual harvest of around 450 bears in Nunavut,
there are only a handful of poaching incidents every year, a far lower
percentage than is seen with other biggame species worldwide. But with quotas
going down at the same time that locals are seeing more bears than ever, that
level of respect is at risk. Mitch Taylor, who spent 21 years as a polar bear
biologist for the Government of Nunavut and now teaches at Lakehead University
in Thunder Bay, Ont., believes “local hunters are often better informed than
managers and sometimes better informed than researchers on polar-bear trends
in their area, and when managers request reductions in quota because of
concerns that are ill-founded, those hunters are within their rights to
address the misconceptions and clarify what populations really are doing.”

And, to add even more complexity, for populations that are stable or rising,
an overabundance of bears might lead to competition for food, decreasing the
health of the entire population. In situations like this, limited hunting
could improve overall health.

Even Geoff York of the World Wildlife Fund — not exactly an organization known
for its wanton blood lust — floats the possibility of killing polar bears as a
management tool. “This would be a difficult decision for such an iconic
species, but it may become a reality as ice loss outstrips predictions in many
regions of the Arctic,” he says. “You may have bears at risk of starving
during increased open-water periods. The reality is polar bears showing up in
places like Churchill, where you might have increased predation of cubs and
more bears starving to death, with people watching and cameras clicking.” And
pretty much everyone agrees that rich tourists enjoying their morning lattes
on deluxe Arctic extravaganzas don’t want to watch polar bears dying.

Sometimes it feels as though the closer you look at polar bears, the harder
they are to really see. Each new bit of evidence seems designed to give
another spin on the wheel of public opinion. One recent study says that polar
bears have been seen swimming as far as 687 kilometres through open water,
which certainly sounds like an ominous sign. Then another study suggests that
polar bears could be up to 500,000 years older than previously thought, which
means they’ve successfully survived multiple warming periods in the past. So
that’s a good thing, right? But then you read the study about mysterious hair
loss or the one about how polar bear milk has become contaminated with PCBs
and mercury, and you get disappointed all over again.

So bear populations are either increasing or declining. Hunting is either an
ecological outrage or a perfectly sustainable aboriginal right. On balance,
the majority of polar bear scientists agree that even if the current state of
things looks shakily stable, the future for bears is poor. Nonetheless, as
long as climate change is political, polar bears will be too. And the tone of
the discussion can get downright ugly.

Consider Mitch Taylor’s story. He spent more than two decades as a polar bear
researcher and manager for the Nunavut government and has published around 50
peer-reviewed papers. That should garner widespread respect. But Taylor has
been highly vocal about his belief that polar bears are mostly doing fine,
that cub mortality varies from year to year and that the much ballyhooed
predictions of extinction by 2050 are “a joke.” He also alleges that a lot of
the “exaggerated decline” is just a way to keep certain scientists well funded
and to transfer control of the polar bear issue from territorial to federal
hands. In response, Taylor’s critics disinvited him from meetings of polar
bear specialists that he’d been attending since 1978. They also like to point
out that he’s a signatory of the Manhattan Declaration, which questions the
very existence of climate change. But amidst all the heated charges and
countercharges, it’s hard to argue the fact that few people know polar bears
the way Taylor does. And while it might be inconvenient for current political
posturing, there’s no denying that certain subpopulations of polar bears are
managing to survive, even thrive.

Unlike some endangered species that can be saved by roping off a grove of
trees, polar bears live locally and suffer globally. Although some scientists
have suggested creating protected refuges in the High Arctic, what’s really
important is how much rain forest the Brazilians will burn in the next 50
years and how many Texans will buy SUVs instead of tuning up their 10-speeds.
And few of the environmentalists who visit Churchill talk about the thousands
of kilometres they flew to get there or whether a tourist town in the middle
of nowhere is part of the reason why the sea ice is melting in the first
place.

The current scientific consensus places the worldwide polar bear population
between 20,000 and 25,000 animals. Prior to the 1973 worldwide restriction on
commerical polar bear hunting, that number was dramatically lower, so low that
a meeting of polar bear specialists in 1965 concluded that extinction was a
real possibility. Some reports even estimated the number of bears as low as
5,000 worldwide. Yet by 1990, Ian Stirling — at the time, the senior research
scientist for the Canadian Wildlife Service and a professor of zoology at the
University of Alberta; basically, one of the most respected polar bear
scientists on the planet — felt comfortable answering the question as to
whether polar bears are an endangered species by stating flatly: “They are
not.” He went on to say that “the world population of polar bears is certainly
greater than 20,000 and could be as high as 40,000 … I am inclined toward the
upper end of that range.” Although old studies are sketchy, clearly more polar
bears are alive today than there were 50 years ago, an essentially heartening
fact that has not managed to pierce the public consciousness.

The percentage of people on Earth — heck, even the percentage of people in
Canada — who have ever seen a polar bear amounts to a rounding error down
around zero. In that context, it’s hard to understand what extinction really
means. The new inability to see an animal that you never had the opportunity
to see before? Of course, the polar bear has intrinsic worth beyond its value
to humans, but is it really more valuable than the thousand other threatened
species whose names you’ve never heard and whose faces you’ve never seen on a
magazine cover? The truth is, the polar bear exists in a space that is as much
theoretical as it is tangible. Given current climatological trends, it seems
likely that the future of the polar bear is bleak … although its current
status is almost certainly stronger than the international conversation would
have one believe.

But polar bears don’t think in terms of trends — or politics or marketing or
even in time periods longer than the interval until their next seal kill. And
while the debate rages and the tourists’ cameras fire away, the polar bears
themselves will continue to do what they’ve always done: surviving as best
they can in whatever conditions the Arctic throws at them.

## The real nanuk

The polar bear, or nanuk, has been a significant part of Inuit culture for
thousands of years and is popular in northern art and legend and as prey for
hunters. One Inuit legend describes polar bears as men in disguise — men who
shed their animal skin upon entering their homes. Another story tells of a
polar bear being lifted into the sky with hunters in hot pursuit, creating the
constellation Udleqdjun (Orion in Greek mythology).

Hunting polar bears was a delicate ritual in ancient times, and great respect
was paid to the bear, even in death. After killing a bear, a hunter would hang
the skin inside his igloo for several days, letting the animal’s spirit settle
into the afterlife with offerings of tools and other gifts. Once content, the
spirit would let other bears know, and they, too, would want to be hunted.
Most of the bear taken in the hunt was utilized: bones were carved into tools,
the hide was made into bedding or clothing, and the meat was shared throughout
the community.

Today, in places such as northern Quebec’s Nunavik region, polar bears are
considered dangerous by families camping on the land and are more of an
economic tradition than a sacred one. In most of Canada’s North, however,
polar bears are still highly respected. George Wenzel, a geography professor
at McGill University in Montréal, who spent several years in Clyde River,
Nunavut, says hunting traditions remain similar to times past, with the
exception of a shift from dogsled to snowmobile pursuit. “The polar bear is a
prestige species,” he says. There is a lot of discussion about the proper way
to hunt and how to handle the skin carefully, he explains, and the meat from
the polar bear remains a regular part of the winter diet in places where the
animal is plentiful.

For communities with enforced hunting quotas, selling tags to sport hunters
can be an important source of income, with hunting packages fetching up to
$20,000. Sport hunters must employ an Inuit guide and a dogsled, and because
some communities no longer keep dog teams, many new guides have to learn an
old skill, while others can preserve the tradition through the hunts. Hunting
families can provide multiple guides and supply meat to their communities.

## Everything you ever wanted to know about polar bears

**The facts of life**  
From its double-layered coat to the furry underside of its paws, the polar
bear is well adapted to frigid Arctic temperatures. A male Ursus maritimus,
the largest member of the bear family, can stand more than three metres tall
on its hind legs, weigh 600 kilograms and live up to 30 years. A female gives
birth every three years or so, usually to twins that stay with their mother
for more than two years. The polar bear’s diet consists primarily of the skin
and blubber of ringed and bearded seals. It hunts seals using its keen sense
of smell and incredible patience, tracking down birth lairs or waiting hours
for a seal to surface at a breathing hole.

**Where’s that bear?**  
There are 19 subpopulations of polar bears in the world, of which 13 can be
found in Canada. The **southern Beaufort Sea** population, shared with Alaska,
and the **northern Beaufort Sea** population, both of which are off the coasts
of the Yukon and Northwest Territories, are either in or predicted to decline.
A small population in **Viscount Melville Sound** , off the northern coasts of
Victoria and Banks islands, could increase with changing sea ice conditions.
**M’Clintock Channel** , off eastern Victoria Island, has seen polar bear
numbers drop from about 900 to less than 300 over the past three decades.
**Lancaster Sound** , off Baffin Island’s northern coast, is home to a
declining population. The **Gulf of Boothia** population, off the northwestern
end of Baffin Island, is stable. **Foxe Basin** is home to one of Canada’s
largest polar bear populations, estimated at more than 2,500 animals in 2010.
**Norwegian Bay** polar bears, south of Axel Heiberg Island and west of
Ellesmere Island, are genetically different from all other polar bears
worldwide, and their population status is unknown. Although the health of the
**western Hudson Bay** population is the subject of debate, **southern Hudson
Bay** , home to the most southerly polar bear population in the world, is
relatively stable. Canada shares three of its populations with Greenland: the
**Baffin Bay** and **Kane Basin** groups are both decreasing in numbers, while
the **Davis Strait** population has increased in the past few decades but may
now be in decline. The status of Greenland’s other two populations, in **east
Greenland** and the **Arctic Basin** , is unknown. Russia is home to four
populations of polar bears. The **Barents Sea** population, shared with Norway
and Greenland, is healthy, while the status of the **Kara Sea** and **Laptev
Sea** populations is unknown. The **Chukchi Sea** polar bears, shared with
Alaska, could be in decline, though their current status is unclear.

**Research in motion**  
Scientists study and count polar bears using two methods: capture-recapture
and aerial survey. Capture-recapture, though dangerous because of the
researchers’ proximity to the bear, helps determine the health and range of a
population. Scientists take skin and blood samples, measure the bear’s height
and weight and use ear tags to identify the country of capture. In an aerial
survey, researchers in helicopters count bears along a predetermined line.
This method can be tricky, as polar bears blend in well with the ice and bears
in dens or behind ridges can be missed.

**Changing environment**  
Warming temperatures are affecting the range of polar bear populations,
shrinking their habitat and eventually, scientists fear, their numbers. While
some northern bears may benefit from a more readily available diet, southern
bears could find that food sources such as seal are more difficult to hunt and
that human-bear encounters occur more frequently. Melting sea ice forces polar
bears to fast for longer periods of time, impacting reproduction rates and the
overall health of a population. Warming temperatures also increase human
traffic, bringing pollution that impacts the health of both the bears and
their prey.

## Share this page

View the discussion thread.

![](https://cangeo-media-library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-

public/styles/current_issue_thumbnail/public/images/print_issue/cover/5669/cover_ss19.jpg?itok=yDJ_D629)

CURRENT ISSUE

Canadian Geographic Travel: Gorilla Safari in Uganda

Spring/Summer 2019

View Issue

Subscribe to Can Geo Today >Digital Edition >Our **FREE** Newsletters  >

## Share this page

## About the Society

![The Royal Canadian Geographical Society Logo](https://cangeo-media-

library.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/images/blocks/rcgs_footer/rcgs-logo-

blue.png)

_Canadian Geographic_ is a magazine of The Royal Canadian Geographical
Society. The Royal Canadian Geographical Society is dedicated to making Canada
better known to Canadians, and the world.

The RCGS is a registered charity. Click here to learn more.

Donate and Support Geography in Canada

## General

                
                                      * About Us
                      * Advertise with us
                      * Newsletters
                      * Kids - Animal facts
                      * Maps
                      * Featured Destinations
                      * Contests
                      * Jobs
                      * Internships
                      * Submission Guidelines
                      * Photographers-in-Residence
                      * Contact Us
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Privacy Policy
                

## Customer Care

                
                                      * Subscribe (Print edition)
                      * Subscribe (Digital edition)
                      * Customer Care/Login
                      * Renew your Subscription
                      * Give a Gift Subscription
                      * Pay a Bill
                      * Back Issues
                      * Canadian Geographic Calendars
                      * Special Publications
                      * Accessibility Standard for Customer Service Plan
                

## Education

                
                                      * Canadian Geographic Education News
                      * Giant Floor Maps
                      * Tiled Maps
                

## Topics

About Can Geo

Canada 150

Charting Change

Community

Contests

Education

Energy

Environment & Nature

Events & Exhibits

Exploration

Explore Podcast

Gear Reviews

History

Kids

Map archive

Mapping

National & Provincial Parks

Ocean Bridge

People & Culture

RCGS

Science & Technology

The Franklin Expedition

The North

The Polar Blog

The Terror

Travel & Places

Wildlife

## Our Sites

The Royal Canadian Geographical Society

Canadian Geographic Photo Club

Canadian Geographic Education

Canadian Geographic Challenge

The National Bird Project

Classroom Energy Diet Challenge

Energy IQ

Canada's Coolest School Trip

A Developing World

Charting Change

Canadian Hydropower Interactive Map

A Nation Soars

Drawn to Victory

Wings of Courage

Flight Path of Heroes

Lifetime Experiences

Géographica

**Follow us on Social Media**

![Twitter Logo](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/blocks/social_footer/icon-

twitter.png) ![Facebook

Logo](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/blocks/social_footer/icon-

facebook.png)![Instagram

Logo](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/blocks/social_footer/icon-instagram.png)
![Pinterest Logo](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/blocks/social_footer/icon-

pinterest.png) ![YouTube

Logo](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/blocks/social_footer/icon-youtube.png)
![LinkedIn Logo](/sites/cgcorp/files/images/blocks/social_footer/icon-

linkedin.png)

© 2019 Canadian Geographic Enterprises

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

