

Skip to main content

Heritage Foundation

Back to Top

Submit __

Frequently Searched

  * Index of Military Strength
  * Blueprint for Balance
  * Index of Economic Freedom
  * Iran and Trump
  * America's Biggest Issues
  * Tax Reform

__The Heritage Foundation

Open Navigation Open Search

## Secondary Navigation

  * About Heritage
  * Events
  * Renew
  * Donate
  * Press
  * Contact

Explore Issues __ open search

Top Issues

  * Taxes
  * Health Care Reform
  * Budget and Spending
  * Immigration
  * Terrorism

## Secondary Navigation

  * About Heritage
  * Events
  * Renew
  * Donate
  * Press
  * Contact

Domestic Policy

  * Agriculture

  * Education

  * Government Regulation

  * Housing

Political Thought

  * American Founders

  * Conservatism

  * Progressivism

  * Public Opinion

International

  * Asia

  * Europe

  * Global Politics

  * Middle East

Government Spending

  * Budget and Spending

  * Debt

  * Social Security

Energy & Environment

  * Coal, Oil, Natural Gas

  * Energy Economics

  * Nuclear Energy

  * Renewable Energy

Legal and Judicial

  * Courts

  * Crime and Justice

  * Election Integrity

  * The Constitution

Infrastructure & Technology

  * Cybersecurity

  * Space Policy

  * Technology

  * Transportation

National Security

  * Defense

  * Homeland Security

  * Immigration

  * Terrorism

Culture

  * Gender

  * Life

  * Marriage and Family

  * Religious Liberty

Health Care

  * Health Care Reform

  * Medicaid

  * Medicare

  * Public Health

Poverty & Welfare

  * Hunger and Food Programs

  * Poverty and Inequality

  * Welfare

Economy

  * International Economies

  * Markets and Finance

  * Taxes

  * Trade

# Evidence on the Effectiveness of Abstinence Education: An Update

Report Education

# Evidence on the Effectiveness of Abstinence Education: An Update

February 19, 2010 29 min read __Download Report

Authors: Christine Kim and Robert Rector

_ Copied _

Select a Section 1/0

Toggle open close

**Abstract:** _Teen sexual activity is costly, not just for teens, but also
for society. Teens who engage in sexual activity risk a host of negative
outcomes including STD infection, emotional and psychological harm, and out-
of-wedlock childbearing. Genuine abstinence education is therefore crucial to
the physical and psycho-emotional well-being of the nation's youth. In
addition to teaching the benefits of abstaining from sexual activity until
marriage, abstinence programs focus on developing character traits that
prepare youths for future-oriented goals. When considering effective
prevention program aimed at changing teen sexual behavior, lawmakers should
consider all of the available empirical evidence and restore funding for
abstinence education._

Teen sexual activity remains a widespread problem confronting the nation. Each
year, some 2.6 million teenagers become sexually active--a rate of 7,000 teens
per day.[1] Among high school students, nearly half report having engaged in
sexual activity, and one-third are currently active.[2]

Sexual activity during teenage years poses serious health risks for youths and
has long-term implications. Early sexual activity is associated with an
increased risk of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), reduced psychological
and emotional well-being, lower academic achievement, teen pregnancy, and out-
of-wedlock childbearing. Many of these risks are avoidable if teens choose to
abstain from sexual activity. Abstinence is the surest way to avoid the risk
of STDs and unwed childbearing.

Abstinence education "teaches abstinence from sexual activity outside marriage
as the expected standard for all school age children" and stresses the social,
psychological, and health benefits of abstinence.[3] Abstinence programs also
provide youths with valuable life and decision-making skills that lay the
foundation for personal responsibility and developing healthy relationships
and marriages later in life. These programs emphasize preparing young people
for future-oriented goals.

Studies have shown that abstinent teens report, on average, better
psychological well-being and higher educational attainment than those who are
sexually active.[4] Delaying the initiation of or reducing early sexual
activity among teens can decrease their overall exposure to risks of unwed
childbearing, STDs, and psycho-emotional harm. Authentic abstinence programs
are therefore crucial to efforts aimed at reducing unwed childbearing and
improving youth well-being.

**Studies of Abstinence Education**

This paper discusses 22 studies of abstinence education. Sixteen studies
examined abstinence programs that were primarily intended to teach abstinence.
Of these 16 studies, 12 reported positive findings. The other six studies
analyzed virginity pledges, and of these six studies, five reported positive
findings. Overall, 17 of the 22 studies reported statistically significant
positive results, such as delayed sexual initiation and reduced levels of
early sexual activity, among youths who have received abstinence education.
Five studies did not report any significant results.

In addition to these 22 studies, five other studies have been cited in various
reviews of abstinence program evaluations.[5] However, these five studies are
not fully discussed in this paper for several reasons.

First, a 2007 study evaluated a voluntary component of a three-part abstinence
program that focused on life skills education. The voluntary component does
not represent the core abstinence curriculum of the Heritage Keepers program,
but an evaluation of the abstinence curriculum is discussed in this paper.
Because the students who participated in the voluntary section had already
received the core abstinence education curriculum, the study effectively
measured the "incremental impact" of the voluntary component, not the full
program impact.[6]

A second study evaluated the Operation Keepsake program in Cleveland. While
the study reported positive results (i.e., reduced levels and delayed
initiation of sexual activity), the statistical significance of findings was
less certain. While the findings were positive, they were statistically
significant at only the 94 percent and 93 percent confidence levels--below the
standard 95 percent confidence threshold.[7] An evaluation of For Keeps, an
updated version of Operation Keepsake, is discussed in this paper.

A third study examined a teen pregnancy prevention program in Denmark, South
Carolina, in the early 1980s.[8] Although teen pregnancy rates declined during
the early intervention period, the results cannot be meaningfully interpreted
because of the uncertain nature of the services received by the students.

A fourth study examined a Canadian program, which was designed as a
traditional sex education program but was delivered without a contraception
component in the evaluation's specific context.[9]

Finally, a fifth study analyzed the Postponing Sexual Involvement program in
Atlanta in the mid-1980s.[10] Although the study reported positive findings
(i.e., delayed onset of sexual activity), the content of the program has been
questioned. For example, was the intervention a pure abstinence program, or
were other components critical?

**Study Design**

The research field of abstinence program evaluation is developing, so only a
handful of programs has been evaluated thus far.[11] Currently, several
hundred abstinence programs are in operation nationwide. These programs vary
substantially in the youth populations that they serve, in their
implementation, and in their curricula. Importantly, the few evaluated
programs inadequately represent the spectrum of abstinence programs.
Consequently, the available findings are mostly generalizable to the specific
conditions under which those particular programs were implemented and to the
youth populations that they served.

The studies discussed in this paper used a variety of research methods to
assess the degree to which specific abstinence programs influenced teen sexual
behavior.[12]

Experimental studies have the most rigorous evaluation design. A true
experiment enables the researchers to draw conclusions about the program's
impact with a high degree of confidence. To simulate the scenario of how
abstinence program participants would have behaved if they had not received
any abstinence education, an experiment randomly assigns youths to receive or
not to receive abstinence education. In theory, random assignment eliminates
any systematic differences between the intervention group and the control
group, making the two virtually identical except for the intervention--in this
case, abstinence education. In reality, well-designed and well-implemented
experiments are few. This is particularly true for abstinence program
evaluation.[13]

Most of the evaluations reported in this analysis are quasi-experiments, which
incorporate certain elements of experimental design, such as identifying a
comparable group of youths for comparison and using statistical methods to
account for pre-intervention differences between youths who received
abstinence education and those who did not.

Quasi-experimental studies adjust for a host of observable factors other than
abstinence education that might confound the results. Depending on the rigor
of the evaluation design and the adequacy of the statistical analysis employed
by the researchers, the degree of confidence with which conclusions may be
drawn about the findings from non-experimental studies can vary. Consequently,
all findings should be interpreted with the full context of the program and
evaluation in view.

The virginity pledge studies used a longitudinal survey of self-reported
data.[14] The longitudinal survey followed the same group of individuals from
adolescence to young adulthood. The pledge studies applied various statistical
methods to estimate the underlying relationship between pledging during
adolescence and behavioral outcomes in young adulthood.

This paper focuses on the significant positive behavioral outcomes as reported
by the studies, such as delayed onset of sexual activity, reduced levels of
early sexual activity, and fewer sexual partners among adolescents.[15] In
addition, this paper discusses five studies that reported no significant
impact. (For a list of the studies, summary findings, and evaluation design
characteristics, see the Appendix and the Reference List.)

While abstinence programs emphasize the message of abstinence until marriage
as the standard for all school-age children, simply delaying the initiation or
reducing current levels of sexual activity among teens can decrease teens'
overall exposure to the risk of physical and psycho-emotional harm.

**Studies That Reported Positive Behavioral Change**

Positive behavioral changes were reported in 12 studies of abstinence
programs. (See the Appendix and Reference List.)

**Abstinence-only Intervention.** A 2010 study in the medical journal
_Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine_ , published by the American
Medical Association, concludes that an "abstinence-only intervention reduced
sexual initiation" as well as recent sexual activity among a group of African-
American adolescents.[16] Two years after attending an eight-hour abstinence
program, about one-third of the participants had initiated sexual activity,
compared to nearly one-half of the non-participants who enrolled in a general
health program. That is, the abstinence program reduced the rate of sexual
initiation by one-third. Moreover, abstinence program participants who became
sexually active were not less likely to use contraception.

By contrast, the study also evaluated two alternative interventions, one that
only taught contraception (i.e., the "safe sex" approach) and another that
contained both abstinence and contraception content (i.e., comprehensive sex
education), and found that neither program delayed or reduced teen sexual
activity.[17] Furthermore, these programs, whose main emphasis is on
contraception, failed to increase use among adolescents.

The study implemented a randomized controlled experiment, the gold standard
for such evaluations. Six hundred sixty-two sixth- and seventh-grade African-
American students participated in the experiment. These students attended four
public middle schools that served low-income communities in a northeastern
U.S. city. Students were randomly assigned to attend an eight-hour abstinence-
only program, an eight-hour "safe sex" program that promoted contraception, an
eight- or twelve-hour comprehensive sex education program that taught both
abstinence and contraception, or an eight-hour general health class without
any sex education content, which served as the control group.

**Reasons of the Heart.** Taught over 20 class periods by certified and
program-trained health educators, the Reasons of the Heart (ROH) curriculum
focuses on individual character development and teaches adolescents the
benefits that are associated with abstinence until marriage.

A 2008 study evaluated the ROH curriculum's impact on adolescent sexual
activity among seventh grade students in three suburban northern Virginia
public schools.[18] The researchers also collected data on a comparison group
of seventh grade students in two nearby middle schools that did not
participate in the program. Students in those schools instead received the
state's standard family life education, which included two videos on HIV/ STD
prevention and one on abstinence.

The evaluators surveyed seventh grade students in all five schools before and
after the program. They found that, a year after the program, 32 (9.2 percent)
of the 347 ROH students who were virgins at the initial survey had initiated
sexual activity, compared with 31 (or 16.4 percent) of the 189 comparison
group students. Controlling for the differences between the comparison group
and ROH students,[19] the study reported that ROH students were half as likely
as comparison group students to initiate sexual activity.[20] The evaluators
concluded, "This result appears to compare favorably to the reductions in
initiation achieved by some of the abstinence programs [evaluated in earlier
studies]."[21]

**Sex Can Wait.** Sex Can Wait is a three-series abstinence education program
with one series for upper-elementary students, a second for middle school
students, and a third for high school students. The Sex Can Wait program lasts
five weeks and offers lessons on character building, important life skills,
and reproductive biology.

A 2006 study evaluated the program's long-term (18-month) impact on adolescent
sexual behavior.[22] The researchers compared students who participated in Sex
Can Wait to those who received their school districts' standard sex education
curricula on two behavioral outcomes: overall abstinence and abstinence during
the last 30 days. As the authors noted, "the study compared the effects of the
Sex Can Wait curriculum to 'current practice' rather than true 'control
conditions.'"[23]

The researchers found that, 18 months after the program, upper-elementary
students who participated in Sex Can Wait were less likely than non-
participants to report engaging in recent sexual activity. Among middle school
students, participants were also less likely than non-participants to report
engaging in sexual activity ever and in the preceding month before the
18-month follow-up. Finally, among high school students, the authors found
reduced levels of sexual activity in the short term but not in the 18-month
follow-up.[24]

**Heritage Keepers.** Heritage Keepers is a primary prevention abstinence
program for middle school and high school students. The program offers an
interactive three-year, two-level curriculum.

To assess Heritage Keepers' impact, a group of evaluators compared some 1,200
virgin students who attended schools that faithfully implemented the program
to some 250 students in demographically and geographically comparable schools
who did not receive the abstinence intervention.[25] One year after the
program, 14.5 percent of Heritage Keepers students had become sexually active
compared with 26.5 percent of the comparison group.

Overall, Heritage Keepers students "were about one-half as likely" as
comparison group students to initiate sex after adjusting for pre-program
differences between the two groups.[26] The study found similar results in
subsets of African-American students, Caucasian students, boys, and girls.

**For Keeps.** A study published in 2005 evaluated the For Keeps curriculum as
implemented in five urban and two suburban middle schools in the Midwest.[27]
Schools were assigned by the school districts to receive the program, which
was part of a county-wide teen pregnancy prevention initiative.

Taught by outside facilitators, For Keeps was a five-day curriculum with
40-minute sessions that focused on character development and the benefits of
abstinence and tried to help students understand how pregnancy and sexually
transmitted diseases can impede their long-term goals. It also emphasized the
psycho-emotional and economic consequences of early sexual activity. The
curriculum was intended both for students who had become sexually active and
for those who had not.

The evaluation collected data on all students through a pretest survey, and
some 2,000 youths (about 70 percent of those who took the pretest survey)
responded to a follow-up survey conducted about five months after the program
ended.[28] Among youths who engaged in any sexual behavior during the follow-
up period, some who participated in For Keeps reported a reduction in "the
amount of casual sex, as evidenced by fewer episodes of sex and fewer sexual
partners" during the evaluation period,[29] although program participants did
not differ from non-participants in the likelihood of engaging in sexual
activity during the follow-up interval.[30]

**Best Friends.** The Best Friends (BF) program began in 1987 and operates in
about 90 schools across the United States. The Best Friends curriculum is an
abstinence-based character-building program for girls starting in the sixth
grade and offers a variety of services such as group discussions, mentoring,
and community activities. Discussion topics include friendship, love and
dating, self-respect, decision making, alcohol and drug abuse, physical
fitness and nutrition, and AIDS/STDs. The curriculum's predominant theme is
encouraging youths to abstain from high-risk behaviors and sexual activity.

A 2005 study evaluated the District of Columbia's Best Friends program, which
operated in six of the District's 20 middle schools.[31] The study compared
data on BF participants to data from the Youth Risk Behavior Surveys (YRBS)
conducted for the District. When the authors of the study compared Best
Friends schools to District schools that did not have the program, they found
that Best Friends schools tended to be located in the more disadvantaged
sections of the city and were academically comparable to or slightly worse
than the District's middle schools in general.

Adjusting for the survey year, students' age, grade, and race and ethnicity,
the study reported that Best Friends girls were nearly 6.5 times more likely
to abstain from sexual activity than YRBS respondents. They were 2.4 times
more likely to abstain from smoking, 8.1 times more likely to abstain from
illegal drug use, and 1.9 times more likely to abstain from drinking.[32]

**Not Me, Not Now.** Not Me, Not Now, a community-wide abstinence intervention
program, targeted children ages nine through 14 in Monroe County, New York,
which includes the city of Rochester. The Not Me, Not Now program devised a
mass communications strategy to promote the abstinence message through paid
television and radio advertising, billboards, posters distributed in schools,
educational materials for parents, an interactive Web site, and educational
sessions in school and community settings. The program had five objectives:
raising awareness of the problem of teen pregnancy, increasing understanding
of the negative consequences of teen pregnancy, developing resistance to peer
pressure, promoting parent- child communication, and promoting abstinence
among teens.

Not Me, Not Now was effective in reaching early teens, with some 95 percent of
the target audience in the county reporting that they had seen a Not Me, Not
Now ad. During the intervention period, there was a statistically significant
positive shift in attitudes among pre-teens and early teens in the county.

The sexual activity rate of 15-year-olds across the county dropped by a
statistically significant amount, from 46.6 percent to 31.6 percent, during
this period.[33] The pregnancy rate for girls ages 15 through 17 in Monroe
County fell by a statistically significant amount, from 63.4 pregnancies per
1,000 girls to 49.5 pregnancies per 1,000. The teen pregnancy rate fell more
rapidly in Monroe County than in comparison counties and upstate New York in
general, and the differences in the rates of decrease were statistically
significant.[34]

**Abstinence by Choice.** Abstinence by Choice operated in 20 schools in the
Little Rock area of Arkansas. The program targeted seventh, eighth, and ninth
grade students and reached about 4,000 youths each year. The curriculum
included a five-day workshop with speakers, presentations, skits, videos, and
an adult mentoring component.

A 2001 evaluation analyzed a sample of 329 students and found that only 5.9
percent of eighth grade girls who had participated in Abstinence by Choice a
year earlier had initiated sexual activity compared with 10.2 percent of non-
participants. Among eighth grade boy participants, 15.8 percent had initiated
sexual activity, compared with 22.8 percent among non-participating boys.[35]
(The sexual activity rate of students in the program was compared with the
rate of sexual activity among control students in the same grade and schools
prior to commencement of the program.)

**HIV Risk-Reduction Intervention.** A 1998 study evaluated a two-day
abstinence-based HIV risk-reduction intervention. The program was delivered to
some 200 African-American middle school students in Philadelphia.[36] Students
volunteered to participate in a weekend health promotion program, and the
volunteers were then randomly assigned to an abstinence education program, a
safer-sex education program, or a regular health program (the control group)
delivered by trained adult and peer (high school student) facilitators.

The researchers found that, during the three-month follow-up, students in the
abstinence programs were less likely to report having engaged in recent sexual
activity compared with students in the control group and that they were
marginally less likely to report having engaged in recent sexual activity
compared to students in the safer-sex program.[37]

Although the three groups generally did not differ in their reports of sexual
activity in the preceding three months during the six-month and 12-month
follow-ups, the researchers did report that, among students who had sexual
experience before the intervention, those in the safer-sex group reported
fewer days of sexual activity on average than students in the control group
and the abstinence group reported.

**Stay SMART.** Delivered to Boys and Girls Clubs of America participants,
Stay SMART integrated abstinence education with substance-use prevention and
incorporated instructions on general life skills as well. The 12-session
curriculum, led by Boys and Girls Club staff, used a postponement approach to
early sexual activity and targeted both sexually experienced and sexually
inexperienced adolescents. Participation in Boys and Girls Clubs and Stay
SMART was voluntary.

A 1995 study evaluated Stay SMART's impact on adolescent sexual behavior. The
study measured the sexual attitudes and behavior of more than 200 youths who
participated in Stay SMART or Stay SMART plus the boosters and compared their
outcomes to some 100 youths who did not participate in Stay SMART but were
still involved in the Boys and Girls Clubs.[38] The analysis controlled for
demographic and baseline characteristics to test for the program's independent
effect on adolescent sexual behavior and attitudes.

The study found that, two years after the program, youths who had engaged in
prior sexual activity and participated in the stand-alone Stay SMART program
exhibited reduced levels of recent sexual activity compared with non-
participants and, interestingly, participants in the Stay SMART-plus-boosters
program as well.[39] Among participants who were virgins prior to the program,
the study did not find a statistically significant program effect.

**Project Taking Charge.** Project Taking Charge was a six-week abstinence
curriculum delivered in home economics classes during the school year. It was
designed for use in low-income communities with high rates of teen pregnancy.
The curriculum contained elements on self-development; basic information about
sexual biology (e.g., anatomy, physiology, and pregnancy); vocational goal-
setting; family communication; and values instruction on the importance of
delaying sexual activity until marriage.

The program was evaluated in Wilmington, Delaware, and West Point,
Mississippi, based on a small sample of 91 adolescents.[40] Control and
experimental groups were created by randomly assigning classrooms either to
receive or not to receive the program. The students were assessed immediately
before and after the program and at a six-month follow-up. In the six-month
follow-up, Project Taking Charge was shown to have had a statistically
significant effect in increasing adolescents' knowledge of the problems
associated with teen pregnancy, the problems of sexually transmitted diseases,
and reproductive biology.

The program may also have delayed the onset of sexual activity among some of
the participants. About 23 percent of participants who were virgins at the
pretest initiated sexual activity during the follow-up interval, compared with
50 percent of the youths in the control group, although the authors urged
caution in interpreting these numbers due to the small sample size.[41]

**Teen Aid and Sex Respect.** An evaluation of the Teen Aid and Sex Respect
abstinence programs in three Utah school districts reported that certain
groups of youths who received these programs delayed the initiation of sexual
activity.[42] To determine the effects of the programs, students in schools
with the abstinence programs were compared with students in similar control
schools within the same school districts. Statistical adjustments were applied
to control for any initial differences between program participants and
control group students.

In the aggregate sample, the researchers did not find any differences in the
rates of sexual initiation between youths who had received abstinence
education and those who had not. However, analyzing a cohort of high school
students who had fairly permissive attitudes,[43] they found that program
participants were one-third less likely to engage in sexual activity one year
after the programs compared with non-participants (22.4 percent versus 37
percent).[44]

Even when the researchers adjusted for students' dating and drinking behavior,
religious involvement, family composition, peer pressure, and other factors,
the differences between the two groups remained statistically significant.
(Statistically significant changes in behavior were not found among a similar
group of junior high school students.) The researchers found it notable that
youths who had more permissive attitudes were "not only receptive and
responsive to the abstinence message in the short run, but that some influence
on behavior [was] also occurring."[45]

**Virginity Pledge Studies**

Using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), a
nationally representative sample of American youth,[46] several studies have
found that adolescent virginity pledging was associated with delayed or
reduced levels of teen sexual activity, other risky behaviors, teen pregnancy,
and STDs. (See the Appendix and the Reference List.)

**Delayed Sexual Activity.** A 1997 study published in the _Journal of the
American Medical Association_ examined a large national sample of teenagers in
the seventh through 12th grades.[47] The study compared students who had taken
a formal virginity pledge with students who had not taken a pledge but were
otherwise identical in race, income, school performance, degree of
religiousness, and other social and demographic factors. Based on this
analysis, the authors found that the level of sexual activity among students
who had taken a formal pledge of virginity was one-fourth the level of their
counterparts who had not taken a pledge. The researchers also noted that
"[a]dolescents who reported having taken a pledge to remain a virgin were at
significantly lower risk of early age of sexual debut."[48]

Another study of the virginity pledge movement, published in 2001, found a
similar association between pledging and delayed sexual activity. According to
the authors:

Adolescents who pledge, controlling for all of the usual characteristics of
adolescents and their social contexts that are associated with the transition
to sex, are much less likely than adolescents who do not pledge, to have
intercourse. The delay effect is substantial and robust. Pledging delays
intercourse for a long time.[49]

Based on a sample of more than 5,000 students, the study reported that taking
a virginity pledge was associated with a reduction of approximately one-third
in the likelihood of early sexual activity, adjusted for a host of other
factors linked to sexual activity rates including gender, age, physical
maturity, parental disapproval of sexual activity, school achievement, and
race. When taking a virginity pledge was combined with strong parental
disapproval of sexual activity, the probability of initiating sexual activity
was reduced by 75 percent or more. The authors did note that the pledge effect
depended on youths' age and their peer group context.

**Life Outcomes in Young Adulthood.** By the third wave of the Add Health
survey, administered in 2001, respondents had reached young adulthood, ranging
between 19 and 25 years of age. In some cases, the virginity pledge may have
been taken up to seven years earlier. Nonetheless, for many respondents, the
delaying effect associated with pledging during adolescence appeared to last
into young adulthood.

Analyzing the most recent Add Health data, a 2004 study found that adolescent
virginity pledging was linked to a number of positive life outcomes.[50] For
example, a 22-year-old white female pledger from an intact family with median
levels of family income, academic performance, self-esteem, and religious
observance was two-thirds less likely to become pregnant before age 18 and 40
percent less likely to have a birth out of wedlock compared with a non-pledger
with identical characteristics. Strong pledgers[51] with the same
characteristics were 40 percent less likely to initiate sexual activity before
age 18 and had an average of one-third fewer sexual partners compared with
non-pledgers with the same demographic profile.

**STDs and Risky Sexual Behaviors.** Analyzing the same sample of respondents,
another study found that virginity pledging during adolescence was also
associated with lower rates of STD infection among young adults. The STD rate
among pledgers averaged 25 percent lower than the rate of non-pledgers of the
same age, gender, race, family background, and religiosity. Significantly, the
study found that virginity pledging was a stronger predictor of STD reduction
than condom use on five different measures of STDs.[52]

The protective effect of pledging may have extended to other behaviors as
well. According to a 2005 study, young adults who took a virginity pledge
during adolescence were less likely to engage in a number of risky sexual
behaviors compared with those who did not take a pledge.[53]

**Studies Reporting No Significant Effects**

**The Mathematica Study.** In 2007, Mathematica Policy Research released a
study that evaluated four abstinence programs: My Choice, My Future! in
Powhatan, Virginia; ReCapturing the Vision in Miami, Florida; Families United
to Prevent Teen Pregnancy in Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Teens in Control in
Clarksdale, Mississippi.[54] Primarily preventive in their intent, these
programs focused on upper elementary and middle school children. The average
age of the participants ranged from 10 to 13. Two of the sites were in urban
settings, and two were in rural communities.

The four programs varied in duration and intensity. Three programs--two multi-
year curricula and a one-year curriculum--required participation. Their
intensity ranged from several sessions a year to daily classes. One program,
an up-to-four-year curriculum, met daily but made participation optional. In
that program, only about half of the students assigned to the program actually
participated. Of those who participated at all, less than half attended a
meaningful portion of the sessions offered.

The evaluation employed a rigorous experimental design. The researchers
surveyed students four to six years after initial program enrollment to assess
the impact of the four programs on youth behavior. Although long-term impact
is ideal, some students in this study's sample were last surveyed later than
is conventional in this field. [55] For example, at the program site with the
shortest curriculum length (about one year), students averaged about 10 years
old at enrollment, and the gap between program completion and the last follow-
up survey was as long as five years. During this gap, the students received no
additional abstinence education or intervention support.

In the final follow-up survey, the study reported no statistically significant
differences between program participants and non-participants. Among both
program and control groups, half of the students remained abstinent. Among
students who had become sexually active by the time of the final survey,
program participants and non-participants had similar rates of condom use.
(The four abstinence programs did not promote contraceptive use.)

At one of the program sites, the study found that 48 percent of the program
participants remained abstinent in the final follow-up compared with 43
percent of the non-participants. At the same site, program participants were
also more likely (a difference of 7 percentage points) to report expectations
of abstinence until marriage compared with non-participants. Although these
differences were not statistically significant, the study's authors noted
that, "[g]iven the smaller sample sizes available for estimate impact at the
site level...the study cannot rule out modest site-specific impacts on these
outcomes."[56]

**WAIT Training.** A 2005 study evaluated the WAIT Training abstinence
education program as it was implemented in four high schools in Colorado.[57]
Except for one of the program schools, students in the study's sample were
mostly in the ninth grade. The study did not specify what type of sex
education services, if any, students in the control group received. In the
12-month follow-up, the researchers did not find any differences in the sexual
initiation transition rates between students in the program group and those in
the control group.

**California's Postponing Sexual Involvement (PSI)**. In the early 1990s,
California incorporated the PSI curriculum into its statewide Education Now
and Babies Later (ENABL) initiative to reduce teenage pregnancy. However,
proponents of abstinence education have challenged whether or not the
initiative is a genuine abstinence program given Planned Parenthood's role in
its implementation.[58]

The PSI curriculum included five sessions of 45 to 60 minutes, delivered
either in school or in community settings by adult or youth instructors.
Youths who received PSI were also required to receive reproductive health
education before beginning the PSI curriculum. Students in the control groups
received the standard sexuality curriculum offered by their schools.

An experimental study evaluated California's PSI program.[59] Based on data
collected on some 7,300 students, the study found no significant differences
between PSI youths and non-participants in their sexual behavior, pregnancy
rates, and STD rates 17 months after the program.[60] However, the study did
find short-term positive effects on youths' beliefs and intentions about
sexual activity and self-efficacy.

**Will Power/Won't Power.** In the mid-1980s, Girls Incorporated (formerly
Girls Clubs of America) developed a series of programs designed to prevent
teen pregnancy. Will Power/Won't Power targeted younger adolescent girls, ages
12 to 14. The program taught young girls skills to help them resist peer
pressure and risky behavior. The full curriculum was delivered in six two-hour
lessons.

A study evaluating the effectiveness of Will Power/Won't Power in delaying the
onset of sexual activity compared some 250 participants to 155 non-
participants.[61] Participants volunteered to join the program; youths who
declined enrollment became the control group.

Students were surveyed a year after the program. At that point, the study
found that 12.8 percent of participants versus 13.5 percent of non-
participants had initiated sexual activity since the program. However, the
difference was not statistically significant. Further analysis suggested that
the level of program participation might have played a role.

**Virginity Pledges and STDs.** Drs. Hannah Brückner and Peter Bearman, who
found, using the Add Health data, that "[a]dolescents who pledge are much
_less_ likely to have intercourse than adolescents who do not pledge,"[62]
also analyzed the pledge effect on STD infection among young adults. They
reported "no significant differences in STD infection rates between pledgers
and non-pledgers, despite the fact that they [pledgers] transition to first
sex later, have less cumulative exposure, fewer partners, and lower levels of
nonmonogamous partners."[63]

**Conclusion**

Today's young people face strong peer pressure to engage in risky behavior and
must navigate media and popular culture that endorse and even glamorize
permissiveness and casual sex. Alarmingly, the government implicitly supports
these messages by funding programs that promote contraception and "safe-sex."

In FY2008, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services spent $610.1
million on such programs targeting teens--at least four times what it spent on
abstinence education.[64] Regrettably, last year, the Obama Administration and
Congress disregarded the social scientific evidence on abstinence education
and eliminated all federal funding for it. Instead, they created additional
funding for comprehensive sex education. In his FY2011 budget, the President
proposed to increase spending on these programs.

Although 80 percent of parents want schools to teach youths to abstain from
sexual activity until they are in a committed adult romantic relationship
nearing marriage--the core message of abstinence education--these parental
values are rarely communicated in the classroom.[65]

In the classroom, the prevailing mentality often condones teen sexual activity
as long as youths use contraceptives. Abstinence is usually mentioned only in
passing, if at all.[66] Sadly, many teens who need to learn about the benefits
of abstaining from sexual activity during the teenage years never hear them,
and many students who choose to abstain fail to receive adequate support for
their decisions.

Teen sexual activity is costly, not just for teens, but also for society.
Teens who engage in sexual activity risk a host of negative outcomes including
STD infection, emotional and psychological harm, lower educational attainment,
and out-of-wedlock childbearing.

Genuine abstinence education is therefore crucial to the physical and psycho-
emotional well-being of the nation's youth. In addition to teaching the
benefits of abstaining from sexual activity until marriage, abstinence
programs focus on developing character traits that prepare youths for future-
oriented goals.

When considering effective prevention programs aimed at changing teen sexual
behavior, lawmakers should consider _all_ of the available empirical evidence
and restore funding for abstinence education.

__Christine C. Kim_ is a Policy Analyst and Robert Rector is a Senior Research
Fellow in the Domestic Policy Studies Department at The Heritage Foundation.
This study updates an earlier study by the authors: Abstinence Education:
Assessing the Evidence, Heritage Foundation _ Backgrounder _No. 2126, April
22, 2008._

**Appendix (PDF)**

**Reference List**

**Studies Reporting Significant Results**

John B. Jemmott III, Loretta S. Jemmott, and Geoffrey T. Fong. "Efficacy of a
Theory-Based Abstinence-Only Intervention Over 24 Months," _Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine_ , Vol. 164, No. 2 (February 2010), pp.
152-159.

Stan Weed, Irene H. Ericksen, Allen Lewis, Gale E. Grant, and Kathy H.
Wibberly, "An Abstinence Program's Impact on Cognitive Mediators and Sexual
Initiation," _American Journal of Health Behavior_ , Vol. 31, No. 1 (2008),
pp. 60-73.

George Denny and Michael Young, "An Evaluation of an Abstinence-Only Sex
Education Curriculum: An 18-Month Follow-Up," _Journal of School Health_ ,
Vol. 76, No. 8 (October 2006), pp. 414-422.

Stan E. Weed, Irene H. Ericksen, and Paul James Birch, "An Evaluation of the
Heritage Keepers Abstinence Education Program," Institute for Research and
Evaluation (Salt Lake City), November 2005, at
_www.heritageservices.org/Stan%20Weed's%20HHS%20Conference%20article.pdf_
(December 1, 2006).

Elaine A. Borawski, Erika S. Trapl, Loren D. Lovegreen, Natalie Colabianchi,
and Tonya Block, "Effectiveness of Abstinence-Only Intervention on Middle
School Teens," _American Journal of Health Behavior_ , Vol. 29, No. 5
(September/October 2005), pp. 423-434.

Robert Lerner, "Can Abstinence Work? An Analysis of the Best Friends Program,"
_Adolescent & Family Health_, Vol. 3, No. 4 (April 2005), pp. 185-192.

Andrew Doniger, John S. Riley, Cheryl A. Utter, and Edgar Adams, "Impact
Evaluation of the 'Not Me, Not Now' Abstinence-Oriented, Adolescent Pregnancy
Prevention Communications Program, Monroe County, N.Y.," _Journal of Health
Communication_ , Vol. 6, No. 1 (January-March 2001), pp. 45-60.

Stan E. Weed, "Title V Abstinence Education Programs: Phase I Interim
Evaluation Report to Arkansas Department of Health, Institute for Research and
Evaluation," October 15, 2001.

John B. Jemmott III, Loretta Sweet Jemmott, and Geoffrey T. Fong, "Abstinence
and Safer Sex HIV Risk-Reduction Interventions for African American
Adolescents: A Randomized Controlled Trial," _JAMA_ , Vol. 279, No. 19 (May
20, 1998), pp. 1529-1536.

Tena L. St. Pierre, Melvin M. Mark, D. Lynne Kaltreider, and Kathryn J. Aikin,
"A 27-Month Evaluation of a Sexual Activity Prevention Program in Boys & Girls
Clubs Across the Nation," _Family Relations_ , Vol. 44, No. 1 (January 1995),
pp. 69-77.

Stephen R. Jorgensen, Vicki Potts, and Brian Camp, "Project Taking Charge:
Six-Month Follow-Up of a Pregnancy Prevention Program for Early Adolescents,"
_Family Relations_ , Vol. 42, No. 4 (October 1993), pp. 401-406.

Stan E. Weed _et al._ , "Predicting and Changing Teen Sexual Activity Rates: A
Comparison of Three Title XX Programs," report to the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Office of Adolescent Pregnancy Programs, December
1992.

Michael Resnick _et al._ , "Protecting Adolescents from Harm: Findings from
the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health," _JAMA_ , Vol. 278, No.
10 (September 10, 1997), pp. 823-832.

Peter S. Bearman and Hanna Brückner, "Promising the Future: Virginity Pledges
and First Intercourse," _American Journal of Sociology_ , Vol. 106, No. 4
(January 2001), pp. 852-912.

Robert E. Rector, Kirk A. Johnson, and Jennifer A. Marshall, "Teens Who Make
Virginity Pledges Have Substantially Improved Life Outcomes," Heritage
Foundation _Center for Data Analysis Report_ No. CDA04-07, September 21, 2004,
at _www.heritage.org/Research/Abstinence/cda04-07.cfm_.

Robert Rector and Kirk A. Johnson, "Adolescent Virginity Pledges, Condom Use,
and Sexually Transmitted Diseases Among Young Adults," paper presented at the
Eighth Annual National Welfare Research and Evaluation Conference of the
Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, June 14, 2005, at
_http://s3.amazonaws.com/thf_media/2010/pdf/79366_1.pdf_.

Robert Rector and Kirk A. Johnson, "Adolescent Virginity Pledges and Risky
Sexual Behaviors," paper presented at the Eighth Annual National Welfare
Research and Evaluation Conference of the Administration for Children and
Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, June 14, 2005, at
_http://s3.amazonaws.com/thf_media/2010/pdf/79314_1.pdf_.

**Studies Reporting No Significant Results**

Christopher Trenholm, Barbara Devaney, Kenneth Fortson, Melissa Clark, Lisa
Quay Bridgespan, and Justin Wheeler, "Impacts of Abstinence Education on Teen
Sexual Activity, Risk of Pregnancy, and Risk of Sexually Transmitted
Diseases," _Journal of Policy Analysis and Management_ , Vol. 27, No. 2
(Spring 2008), pp. 255-276.

Lisa A. Rue and Stan E. Weed, "Primary Prevention of Adolescent Sexual Risk
Taking: A School-Based Model," presented at the 2005 Abstinence Evaluation
Conference, Baltimore, Maryland.

Douglas Kirby, Meg Korpi, Richard P. Barth, and Helen H. Cagampang, "The
Impact of the Postponing Sexual Involvement Curriculum Among Youths in
California," _Family Planning Perspectives_ , Vol. 29, No. 3 (May-June 1997),
pp. 100-108.

Leticia Postrado and Heather Johnston Nicholson, "Effectiveness in Delaying
the Initiation of Sexual Intercourse of Girls Age 12-14: Two Components of the
Girls Incorporated Preventing Adolescent Pregnancy Program," _Youth and
Society_ , Vol. 23, No. 3 (March 1992), pp. 356-379.

Hannah Brückner and Peter Bearman, "After the Promise: The STD Consequences of
Adolescent Virginity Pledges," _Journal of Adolescent Health_ , Vol. 36, Issue
4 (April 2005), pp. 271-278.

**Five Studies Mentioned But Not Discussed in This Paper** [67]****

Melissa A. Clark, Christopher Trenholm, Barbara Devaney, Justin Wheeler, and
Lisa Quay, "Impacts of the Heritage Keepers Life Skills Education Component,"
Mathematica Policy Research, August 2007, p. 1, at _www.mathematica-
mpr.com/publications/PDFs/heritagekeepers08-07.pdf_ (February 27, 2008).

Elaine Borawski _et al._ , "Evaluation of the Teen Pregnancy Prevention
Programs Funded Through the Wellness Block Grant (1999-2000)," Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Center for Health Promotion Research,
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, March 23, 2001.

Helen P. Koo, George H. Dunteman, Cindee George, Yvonne Green, and Murray
Vincent, "Reducing Adolescent Pregnancy Through a School- and Community-Based
Intervention: Denmark, South Carolina, Revisited," _Family Planning
Perspectives_ , Vol. 26, No. 5 (September-October 1994), pp. 206-211 and 217.

B. Helen Thomas, Alba Mitchell, and M. Corinne Devlin, "Small Group Sex
Education: The McMaster Teen Program," in Brent C. Miller, Josefina J. Card,
Roberta L. Paikoff, and James C. Peterson, eds., _Preventing Adolescent
Pregnancy: Model Programs and Evaluations_ (Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage
Publications, Inc., 1992), pp. 28-52.

Marion Howard and Judith Blamey McCabe, "Helping Teenagers Postpone Sexual
Involvement," _Family Planning Perspectives_ , Vol. 22, No. 1 (January-
February 1990), pp. 21-26.

Show References __

[1]Mark Regnerus, _Forbidden Fruit: Sex & Religion in the Lives of American
Teenagers_ (New York, N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2007), p. 3. This
calculation is based on data from the National Survey of Family Growth.

[2]U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, National Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 2007. Those who have
engaged in sexual activity during the three months preceding the survey are
considered "currently active."

[3]Section 510 of Title V of the Social Security Act contains eight standards
by which all abstinence programs must abide.  
See U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children
and Families, "Fact Sheet: Section 510 State Abstinence Education Program,"
updated November 6, 2007, at
_www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/fysb/content/abstinence/factsheet.htm_ (March 13,
2007).

[4]Denise D. Hallfors, Martha W. Waller, Carol A. Ford, Carolyn T. Halpern,
Paul H. Brodish, and Bonita Iritani, "Adolescent Depression and Suicide Risk:
Association with Sex and Drug Behavior," _American Journal of Preventative
Medicine_ , Vol. 27, No. 3 (October 2004), pp. 224-230; Denise D. Hallfors,
Martha W. Waller, Daniel Bauer, Carol A. Ford, and Carolyn T. Halpern, "Which
Comes First in Adolescence--Sex and Drugs or Depression?" _American Journal of
Preventative Medicine_ , Vol. 29, No. 3 (October 2005), pp. 163-170; Joseph J.
Sabia and Daniel I. Rees. "The Effect of Sexual Abstinence on Female
Educational Attainment," _Demography_ , Vol. 46, No. 4 (November 2009), pp.
695-715; and Robert Rector and Kirk Johnson, "Teenage Sexual Abstinence and
Academic Achievement," paper presented at the Ninth Annual Abstinence
Clearinghouse Conference, August 2005, at
_www.heritage.org/Research/Welfare/upload/84576_1.pdf_.

[5]Lauren Sue Scher, Rebecca A. Maynard, and Matthew Stagner, "Interventions
Intended to Reduce Pregnancy-Related Outcomes Among Teenagers," Campbell
Collaboration, updated April 2006, at _www.campbellcollaboration.org/doc-
pdf/teenpregreview__dec2006.pdf_ (January 17, 2008); Douglas Kirby, "Emerging
Answers 2007," National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy,
November 2007, at _www.thenationalcampaign.org/EA2007_ (February 27, 2008).

[6]Melissa A. Clark, Christopher Trenholm, Barbara Devaney, Justin Wheeler,
and Lisa Quay, "Impacts of the Heritage Keepers Life Skills Education
Component," Mathematica Policy Research, August 2007, p. 1, at
_www.mathematica-mpr.com/publications/PDFs/heritagekeepers08-07.pdf_ (February
27, 2008).

[7]Elaine Borawski _et al._ , "Evaluation of the Teen Pregnancy Prevention
Programs Funded Through the Wellness Block Grant (1999-2000)," Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Center for Health Promotion Research,
Department of Epidemology and Biostatistics, March 23, 2001.

[8]Helen P. Koo, George H. Dunteman, Cindee George, Yvonne Green, and Murray
Vincent, "Reducing Adolescent Pregnancy Through a School- and Community-Based
Intervention: Denmark, South Carolina, Revisited," **** _Family Planning
Perspectives_ , Vol. 26, No. 5 (September-October 1994), pp. 206-211 and 217.

[9]B. Helen Thomas, Alba Mitchell, and M. Corinne Devlin, "Small Group Sex
Education: The McMaster Teen Program," in Brent C. Miller, Josefina J. Card,
Roberta L. Paikoff, and James C. Peterson, eds., _Preventing Adolescent
Pregnancy: Model Programs and Evaluations_ (Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage
Publications, Inc., 1992), pp. 28-52. According to the study, contraception
was not taught because at the time this subject was not within Ontario
Ministry of Education guidelines for seventh and eighth grade students.

[10]Marion Howard and Judith Blamey McCabe, "Helping Teenagers Postpone Sexual
Involvement," **** _Family Planning Perspectives_ , Vol. 22, No. 1 (January-
February 1990), pp. 21-26.

[11]A 2006 Government Accountability Office report notes that "the efforts to
study and build a body of research on the effectiveness of most abstinence
education programs have been under way for only a few years, in part because
grants under the two programs that account for the largest portion of federal
spending on abstinence--the State Program [Title V] and the Community-Based
Program--were not awarded until 1998 and 2001, respectively." U.S. Government
Accountability Office, _Abstinence Education: Efforts to Assess the Accuracy
and Effectiveness of Federally Funded Programs_ , GAO-07-87, October 2006, pp.
20 and 31, at _www.gao.gov/new.items/d0787.pdf_ (April 16, 2008).

[12]A number of studies have analyzed changes in teens' intentional behavior,
such as attitude toward abstinence, characteristics important to behavioral
change, self-efficacy, and STD knowledge. The present analysis reports only
studies that measured actual behavioral outcomes.

[13]See Scher _et al._ , "Interventions Intended to Reduce Pregnancy-Related
Outcomes Among Teenagers."

[14]The reliability of self-reported data on youth sexual behavior has been
raised as an issue. See Janet E. Rosenbaum, "Reborn a Virgin: Adolescents'
Retracting of Virginity Pledges and Sexual Histories," _American Journal of
Public Health_ , Vol. 96, Issue 6 (June 2006), pp. 1098-1103.

[15]Findings are considered statistically significant if they have a
statistical confidence level of 95 percent or greater. Some of the studies
reporting positive results also reported non-significant results, which are
included in the Appendix.

[16]John B. Jemmott III, Loretta S. Jemmott, and Geoffrey T. Fong. "Efficacy
of a Theory-Based Abstinence-Only Intervention over 24 Months," Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 164, No. 2 (February 2010), pp. 156,
157.

[17]The study reports that a twelve-hour comprehensive sex education program
appeared to have a marginally significant (at 94 percent confidence level)
effect on reducing recent sex. The study examined other outcomes as well,
which are listed in the Appendix.

[18]Stan Weed, Irene H. Ericksen, Allen Lewis, Gale E. Grant, and Kathy H.
Wibberly, "An Abstinence Program's Impact on Cognitive Mediators and Sexual
Initiation," _American Journal of Health Behavior_ , Vol. 31, No. 1 (2008),
pp. 60-73.

[19]Students in the comparison group and ROH students matched on 10 of the 12
demographic and attitudinal characteristics measured. The comparison group had
a higher proportion of African-American students. Comparison group students
also felt they would have more opportunity for sex in the coming year.

[20]The odds ratio was 0.413, and the relative risk ratio was 0.457. The
finding is statistically significant at the 99.2 percent confidence level.

[21]Weed _et al._ , "An Abstinence Program's Impact on Cognitive Mediators and
Sexual Initiation," p. 70.

[22]George Denny and Michael Young, "An Evaluation of an Abstinence-Only Sex
Education Curriculum: An 18-Month Follow-Up," _Journal of School Health_ ,
Vol. 76, No. 8 (October 2006), pp. 414-422.

[23] _Ibid.,_ p. 415.

[24]These findings were statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence
level and above.

[25]Stan E. Weed, Irene H. Ericksen, and Paul James Birch, "An Evaluation of
the Heritage Keepers Abstinence Education Program," Institute for Research and
Evaluation (Salt Lake City), November 2005, at
_www.heritageservices.org/Stan%20Weed's%20HHS%20Conference%20article.pdf_
(December 1, 2006). Presented at a national conference, this study was
reviewed by a team of program evaluation experts selected through an external
consultant by the Office of Population Affairs in the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. The Heritage Keepers program also includes a
voluntary life skills education component. The participants were youths who
had already received the Heritage Keepers abstinence program. Mathematica
Policy Research evaluated the skills life education component, which measured
the _marginal_ impact of this component as all participants had already
received the Heritage Keepers abstinence program. Because the life skills
education does not represent the core Heritage Keepers abstinence program, its
evaluation is not discussed in this paper.

[26]The finding was statistically significant at the 99 percent confidence
level and above. Students in the comparison group were at somewhat higher risk
of early sexual activity than program participants were. However, the authors
used statistical methods to control for the differences between the two
groups.

[27]Elaine A. Borawski, Erika S. Trapl, Loren D. Lovegreen, Natalie
Colabianchi, and Tonya Block, "Effectiveness of Abstinence-Only Intervention
on Middle School Teens," _American Journal of Health Behavior_ , Vol. 29, No.
5 (September/ October 2005), pp. 423-434.

[28]The program group had a higher proportion of suburban students, and the
follow-up interval for the program group averaged five days longer than the
comparison group. Students who completed the follow-up survey were also more
likely to be female, younger, white, living with two parents, suburban, and
more abstinence-oriented.

[29]Borawski _et al._ , "Effectiveness of Abstinence-Only Intervention on
Middle School Teens," pp. 429-431. Frequency of sexual activity was measured
by the likelihood of engaging in six or more episodes versus the likelihood of
engaging in five or less episodes during the evaluation period. The number of
sexual partners was measured by the likelihood of having two or more sexual
partners during the evaluation period. The findings were statistically
significant at the 95 percent confidence level and above.

[30]This was the finding for the entire sample, the sub-sample of virgins, and
the sub-sample of sexually active youths.

[31]Robert Lerner, "Can Abstinence Work? An Analysis of the Best Friends
Program," _Adolescent & Family Health_, Vol. 3, No. 4 (April 2005), pp.
185-192.

[32]All results were statistically significant at the 99.99 percent and higher
confidence level. The study's evaluator conducted further analyses on the
possibility of spurious program effects. When the sample consisted only of
students who remained in the program throughout the year, excluding students
who joined the program in mid-year, Best Friends girls were still less likely
to report smoking, using illegal drugs, drinking, or engaging in sexual
activity. Furthermore, compared with girls who completed the Best Friends
program, those who dropped out were _not_ more likely to smoke, use illegal
drugs, drink, and engage in sexual activity. Girls who dropped out were also
more likely to be older. Even when the evaluator artificially increased the
incidence of these four risk behaviors among Best Friends participants at the
baseline by 100 percent, the hypothetical estimates with the 100 percent
increase would still be lower than the actual incidents among YRBS
respondents.

[33]Laura Kahn _et al._ , "Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance--United States
1997," Centers for Disease Control and Prevention _Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Reports_ , Vol. 47, 1998, pp. 1-89.

[34]Andrew Doniger, John S. Riley, Cheryl A. Utter, and Edgar Adams, "Impact
Evaluation of the 'Not Me, Not Now' Abstinence-Oriented, Adolescent Pregnancy
Prevention Communications Program, Monroe County, N.Y.," _Journal of Health
Communication_ , Vol. 6, No. 1 (January-March 2001), pp. 45-60. One caveat is
that the study did not assess trend data on the counties prior to the
intervention campaign. With only one pre-intervention data point (1992 data on
sexual activity rates and 1993 data on pregnancy rates), the study cannot
completely rule out the possibility that the declines would have occurred
independent of the campaign. Both the shift in attitudes and the decline in
sexual activity rate were statistically significant at the 95 percent
confidence level. The differences between the rates of decline in adolescent
pregnancy in Monroe County and the other geographic areas were statistically
significant at the 95 percent to 99 percent confidence levels.

[35]Stan E. Weed, "Title V Abstinence Education Programs: Phase I Interim
Evaluation Report to Arkansas Department of Health, Institute for Research and
Evaluation," October 15, 2001. The study did not adjust for the differences
between program participants and non-participants. The written report does not
include data on statistical significance, but data provided by Dr. Weed to the
authors of this paper showed that the program's effects in reducing the onset
of sexual activity were statistically significant at the 98 percent confidence
level.

[36]John B. Jemmott III, Loretta Sweet Jemmott, and Geoffrey T. Fong,
"Abstinence and Safer Sex HIV Risk-Reduction Interventions for African
American Adolescents: A Randomized Controlled Trial," _JAMA_ , Vol. 279, No.
19 (May 20, 1998), pp. 1529-1536. The study also measured condom use. For the
three follow-ups, the study reported three sets of 24 comparison estimates.
One of the 24 comparison estimates between the abstinence and control groups
was statistically different, favoring the abstinence group. Ten of the 24
comparison estimates between the safer-sex and control groups were
statistically different, favoring the safer-sex group. Three of the 24
comparison estimates between the abstinence and safer-sex groups were
statistically different, favoring the safer-sex group.

[37]The findings from the comparison between the abstinence and control groups
were statistically significant at the 98 percent confidence level. However,
the findings from the comparison between the abstinence and safer-sex groups
were statistically significant only at the 92 percent and 94 percent
confidence levels.

[38]Tena L. St. Pierre, Melvin M. Mark, D. Lynne Kaltreider, and Kathryn J.
Aikin, "A 27-Month Evaluation of a Sexual Activity Prevention Program in Boys
& Girls Clubs Across the Nation," _Family Relations_ , Vol. 44, No. 1 (January
1995), pp. 69-77.

[39]This finding was statistically significant at the 99 percent and above
confidence level. The sub-sample of non-virgins in the 27-month follow-up was
small: about 67 youths (28 in the Stay SMART only program, 18 in the program
plus the boosters, and 21 in the control group).

[40]Stephen R. Jorgensen, Vicki Potts, and Brian Camp, "Project Taking Charge:
Six-Month Follow-Up of a Pregnancy Prevention Program for Early Adolescents,"
_Family Relations_ , Vol. 42, No. 4 (October 1993), pp. 401-406.

[41]The finding was statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence
level. Seven (23 percent) of the 30 youths in the intervention group initiated
sexual activity during the six-month follow-up period, compared with 10 (50
percent) of the 20 youths in the control group.

[42]Stan E. Weed _et al._ , "Predicting and Changing Teen Sexual Activity
Rates: A Comparison of Three Title XX Programs," report to the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Office of Adolescent Pregnancy Programs,
December 1992.

[43]Permissive attitudes in the study were measured by responses to the
following statements: "Having sexual intercourse should be treated as just a
normal and expected part of teenage dating relationships"; "Having sex with a
boyfriend or girlfriend is a good way to show how much you care for them";
"Teens who have been dating for a long time should be willing to go along and
have sexual intercourse if their partner wants to"; "It is all right for
teenagers to have sex before marriage if they are in love"; and "I think it is
OK for unmarried teenagers to have sexual intercourse if they use birth
control." Weed _et al._ , "Predicting and Changing Teen Sexual Activity
Rates," pp. 25-26.

[44]The sub-sample here included Sex Respect, Teen-Aid, and Value & Choices
participants. The effects on the cohort of high school students with more
permissive attitudes were significant at the 99 percent confidence level.

[45]Weed _et al._ , "Predicting and Changing Teen Sexual Activity Rates," p.
64.

[46]Add Health is a major longitudinal survey of adolescent and young adult
behavior and is funded by 17 federal agencies.  
It is based on a nationally representative survey of approximately 14,000
youth. The survey began in 1994, and the same respondents were interviewed
again in 1995 and 2001.

[47]Michael Resnick _et al._ , "Protecting Adolescents from Harm: Findings
from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health," _JAMA_ , Vol. 278,
No. 10 (September 10, 1997). The association between virginity pledging and
reduced sexual activity was statistically significant at the 99.9 percent
confidence level.

[48] _Ibid._ , p. 830.

[49]Peter S. Bearman and Hanna Bruckner, "Promising the Future: Virginity
Pledges and First Intercourse," _American Journal of Sociology_ , Vol. 106,
No. 4 (January 2001), pp. 861 and 862. The virginity pledge effects were
statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level.

[50]Robert E. Rector, Kirk A. Johnson, and Jennifer A. Marshall, "Teens Who
Make Virginity Pledges Have Substantially Improved Life Outcomes," Heritage
Foundation _Center for Data Analysis Report_ No. __ CDA04-07, September 21,
2004,  
at _www.heritage.org/Research/Abstinence/cda04-07.cfm_.

[51]The question "Have you ever signed a pledge to abstain from sex until
marriage?" appears in all three waves of Add Health. Strong pledgers are a
subgroup of pledgers who provided consistent answers to the question in all
three waves of the survey. If they reported having taken a pledge, their
answer in the subsequent wave(s) remained the same.

[52]Robert Rector and Kirk A. Johnson, "Adolescent Virginity Pledges, Condom
Use, and Sexually Transmitted Diseases Among Young Adults," paper presented at
the Eighth Annual National Welfare Research and Evaluation Conference of the
Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, June 14, 2005, at
_www.heritage.org/Research/Welfare/upload/79366_1.pdf_.

[53]Robert Rector and Kirk A. Johnson, "Adolescent Virginity Pledges and Risky
Sexual Behaviors," paper presented at the Eighth Annual National Welfare
Research and Evaluation Conference of the Administration for Children and
Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, June 14, 2005, at
_www.heritage.org/Research/Welfare/upload/79314_1.pdf_.

[54]Christopher Trenholm, Barbara Devaney, Ken Fortson, Lisa Quay, Justin
Wheeler, and Melissa Clark, _Impacts of Four Title V, Section 510 Abstinence
Education Programs: Final Report_ , Mathematic Policy Research, April 2007, at
_www.mathematica-mpr.com/publications/pdfs/impactabstinence.pdf_ (November 13,
2007).

[55]To assess short-term program impact, evaluation follow-ups usually take
place immediately to a year after the program. For longer-term impact, studies
have employed follow-up intervals ranging from 12 to 48 months after program
completion.

[56]Trenholm _et al._ , _Impacts of Four Title V, Section 510 Abstinence
Education Programs: Final Report_ , p. xxii.

[57]Lisa A. Rue and Stan E. Weed, "Primary Prevention of Adolescent Sexual
Risk Taking: A School-Based Model," presented at the 2005 Abstinence
Evaluation Conference, Baltimore, Maryland. The study did not adjust for the
differences between participants and non-participants.

[58]Helen H. Cagampang, Richard P. Barth, Meg Korpi, and Douglas Kirby,
"Education Now and Babies Later (ENABL): Life History of a Campaign to
Postpone Sexual Involvement," _Family Planning Perspectives_ , Vol. 29, No. 3
(May-June 1997), p. 111, and Brad Hayward, "Some Foes of Abortion Call Budget
Plan a Gain--Wilson Denies Tilt on Family Planning," _Sacramento Bee_ ,
January 21, 1996.

[59]Douglas Kirby, Meg Korpi, Richard P. Barth, and Helen H. Cagampang, "The
Impact of the Postponing Sexual Involvement Curriculum Among Youths in
California," _Family Planning Perspectives_ , Vol. 29, No. 3 (May-June 1997),
pp. 100-108.

[60]Given the number of non-significant findings in the study, it was
surprising that the one significant finding was on the reported pregnancy rate
among the sample of PSI programs delivered by youth instructors. In that
sample, PSI participants were more likely to report ever being pregnant or
causing a pregnancy. Further analysis revealed that six seventh grade boys in
one school that received the program reported having caused a pregnancy, and
their reports appeared to have driven this result.

[61]Leticia Postrado and Heather Johnston Nicholson, "Effectiveness in
Delaying the Initiation of Sexual Intercourse of Girls Age 12-14: Two
Components of the Girls Incorporated Preventing Adolescent Pregnancy Program,"
_Youth and Society_ , Vol. 23, No. 3 (March 1992), pp. 356-379.

[62] Bearman and Bruckner, "Promising the Future," p. 859 (emphasis in
original).

[63] Hannah Bruckner and Peter Bearman, "After the Promise: The STD
Consequences of Adolescent Virginity Pledges," _Journal of Adolescent Health_
, Vol. 36, Issue 4 (April 2005). Although this 2005 study reported other
significant positive findings associated with virginity pledging, it is
counted as one of the studies that showed no significant effects because of
its main finding on STD rates. Much attention has also been focused on another
finding in the study that virgin pledgers were more likely than virgin non-
pledgers to engage in certain risky sexual behaviors. When interpreting the
results of these risky behaviors, the small size of these selective sub-
samples should be considered. For more discussion of this finding, see Rector
and Johnson, "Adolescent Virginity Pledges and Risky Sexual Behaviors," and
Jeremy E. Uecker, Nicole Angotti, and Mark D. Regnerus, "Going Most of the
Way: 'Technical Virginity' Among American Adolescents," _Social Science
Research_ , in press, available online November 5, 2007.

[64]U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Health and Human Services
Funding for Abstinence Education, Education for Teen Pregnancy and HIV/STD
Prevention, and Other Programs that Address Adolescent Sexual Activity,"
December 16, 2008 at _http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/08/AbstinenceEducation_
(February 3, 2010).

[65]Robert E. Rector, Melissa G. Pardue, and Shannan Martin, "What Do Parents
Want Taught in Sex Education Programs?" Heritage Foundation _Backgrounder_ No.
1722, January 28, 2004, at _www.heritage.org/Research/Abstinence/bg1722.cfm_.

[66]A review of nine popular comprehensive sex-ed curricula found that an
average of only 4.7 percent of the page content references abstinence. Shannan
Martin, Robert Rector, and Melissa G. Pardue, _Comprehensive Sex Education vs.
Authentic Abstinence: A Study of Competing Curricula_ (Washington, D.C.: The
Heritage Foundation, 2004), p. 11, at
_www.heritage.org/Research/Welfare/upload/67539_1.pdf_.

[67] _Supra_ , p. 4.

### Authors

Christine Kim

Former Policy Analyst

![Robert

Rector](https://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/styles/card_expert_thumbnail_report_140x140/public/profile-

photos/Rector_Robert.png?itok=nNjeLdti)

Robert Rector

Senior Research Fellow

Read Full Report __

More on This Issue

## Education

COMMENTARY3 min read

Child Safety Accounts Bill Is an Escape Route from Violence in DC Schools

COMMENTARY2 min read

Why Is Trump Snubbed on Most American Campuses?

COMMENTARY2 min read

Cruz Fights for More Flexible Education Savings Accounts

## Secondary Navigation

  * About Heritage
  * Events
  * Renew
  * Donate
  * Press
  * Contact

Subscribe to email updates

Thank you for signing up.

Follow us

Privacy Policy Copyright

(C) 2019, The Heritage Foundation

![](https://ds.reson8.com/insights.gif?rand=\[cache_buster\]&t=0&pixt=resonate&advkey=0013000000R6OopAAF&opptykey=THEF0617C&evkey=100200825&evtype=custom)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

