

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/logo.png)

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/themes/sotp-

foundation/images/logo-ei.png)![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/themes/sotp-

foundation/images/separator.png)![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/logo-cu.png)

#### News from the Earth Institute

                
                                      * #
                
                      * Menu
                      * Agriculture
                      * Climate
                      * Earth Sciences
                      * Ecology
                      * Energy
                      * Health
                      * Sustainability
                      * Urbanization
                      * Water
                

Climate

## How We Know Today's Climate Change Is Not Natural

by Renee Cho|April 4, 2017

![](/wp-content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/icon-comments.png) Comments

![Scientists studying glaciers in Glacier National Park. Photo:

GlacierNPS](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/Scientists_measuring_the_terminus_of_Grinnell_Glacier_4427592139-637x426.jpg)

Scientists studying glaciers in Glacier National Park. Photo: GlacierNPS

Last week, the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, chaired by
climate contrarian Lamar Smith, R-Texas, held a hearing on climate science.
The hearing featured three scientists who are dubious about the conclusions of
the majority of climate scientists, and climate scientist Michael Mann, best
known for his “hockey stick graph” of temperatures over the last thousand
years illustrating the impact of humans on global warming.

This week, Scott Pruitt, Environmental Protection Agency administrator, who
had said that human activity was not the primary contributor to global
warming, acknowledged that it plays a role—but stressed the need to figure out
exactly how much of one.

Despite the many climate “skeptics” in key positions of power today, 97
percent of working climate scientists agree that the warming of Earth’s
climate over the last 100 years is mainly due to human activity that has
increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Why are they so
sure?

Earth’s climate has changed naturally over the past 650,000 years, moving in
and out of ice ages and warm periods. Changes in climate occur because of
alterations in Earth’s energy balance, which result from some kind of external
factor or “forcing”—an environmental factor that influences the climate. The
ice ages and shifting climate were caused by a combination of changes in solar
output, Earth’s orbit, ocean circulation, albedo (the reflectivity of the
Earth’s surface) and makeup of the atmosphere (the amounts of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases such as water vapor, methane, nitrous oxide and
ozone that are present).

![Ice core in West Antarctic Photo: Oregon State

University](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Ice-

Core-W.-Antarctica-303x202.jpg)

Ice core from West Antarctic Photo: Oregon State University

Scientists can track these earlier natural changes in climate by examining ice
cores drilled from Greenland and Antarctica, which provide evidence about
conditions as far back as 800,000 years ago. The ice cores have shown that
rising CO2 levels and rising temperatures are closely linked.

Scientists also study tree rings, glaciers, pollen remains, ocean sediments,
and changes in the Earth’s orbit around the sun to get a picture of Earth’s
climate going back hundreds of thousands of years or more.

Today, CO2 levels are 40 percent higher than they were before the Industrial
Revolution began; they have risen from 280 parts per million in the 18th
century to over 400 ppm in 2015 and are on track to reach 410 ppm this spring.

In addition, there is much more methane (a greenhouse gas 84 times more potent
than CO2 in the short term) in the atmosphere than at any time in the past
800,000 years—two and a half times as much as before the Industrial
Revolution. While some methane is emitted naturally from wetlands, sediments,
volcanoes and wildfires, the majority of methane emissions come from oil and
gas production, livestock farming and landfills.

![Warming of the North Pole and thinning ice

Photo:WasifMalik](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/Greenland-north-pole-303x175.jpg)

Warming of the North Pole and thinning ice Photo: WasifMalik

Global temperatures have risen an average of 1.4˚ F since 1880. Sea ice in the
Arctic has thinned and decreased in the last few decades; the Greenland and
Antarctic ice sheets are decreasing in mass. The North and South Poles are
warming faster than anywhere else on Earth. Glaciers are retreating on
mountains all over the world. Spring snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere has
decreased over the last 50 years.

![Southern California heat wave. Photo: Ann

Frye](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/SoCal-heat-

wave-303x186.jpg)

Southern California heat wave. Photo: Ann Frye

The number of record-breaking hot temperatures in the U.S. is on the rise.
Oceans are the warmest they have been in a half-century; the top layer is
warming about 0.2˚F per decade. The oceans are also 30 percent more acidic
than they were at the start of the Industrial Revolution because they are
absorbing more CO2. Global sea levels rose an average of 6.7 inches in the
last century, and in the last 10 years, have risen almost twice as fast.

Here is how scientists know that the climate change we are experiencing is
mainly due to human activity and not a result of natural phenomenon.

Gavin Schmidt, director of National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said that scientists look at a lot of
different things at once.

“We have a very, very clear understanding that the amount of heat in the ocean
is increasing—the ocean heat content is going up by a lot,” said Schmidt.
“That implies that there must be an external change in the radiation budget of
the earth—more energy has to be going in than leaving.

“There are a number of ways that can happen, but each of them has a different
fingerprint. If the sun were brighter, we would see warming all the way up
through the atmosphere from the surface to the stratosphere to the mesosphere.
We don’t see this. We see instead warming at the surface, cooling in the
stratosphere, cooling in the mesosphere. And that’s a signature of greenhouse
gas forcing, it’s not a signature of solar forcing. So we know it’s not
solar.”

Moreover, according to the World Radiation Center, the sun’s radiation has not
increased since at least 1978 (when satellite monitoring began) though global
temperatures over the last 30 years have continued to rise.

In addition, the lower atmosphere (troposphere), which is absorbing the CO2
and expanding as it gets warmer, is pushing the boundary between the
troposphere and the stratosphere upwards. If the sun’s radiation were the main
factor responsible for Earth’s warming, both atmosphere layers would likely be
warming and this would not occur.

Scientists also can distinguish between CO2 molecules that are emitted
naturally by plants and animals and those that result from the burning of
fossil fuels. Carbon molecules from different sources have different numbers
of neutrons in their nuclei; these different versions of molecules are called
isotopes. Carbon isotopes derived from burning fossil fuels and deforestation
are lighter than those from other sources. Scientists measuring carbon in the
atmosphere can see that lighter carbon molecules are increasing, corresponding
to the rise in fossil fuel emissions.

Peter de Menocal, dean of science at Columbia University and founding director
of Columbia’s Center for Climate and Life, studies deep-sea sediments to
understand past climate change.

![Ocean sediment cores from the West

Atlantic](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/Ocean_core_sediments_on_the_Polarstern-303x189.jpg)

Ocean sediment cores from the West Atlantic

“Ocean sediments provide a longer term baseline [tens of millions of years]
that allows you to compare the past with the present, giving you an idea of
how variable ocean temperatures have been before we had thermometers,” said de
Menocal. “Over the last 2,000 years, there have been natural climate
variations, but they were not especially large…the Medieval Warm period around
1,000 years ago, and the little ice age which was three separate cooling
periods lasting a few decades each, beginning around 1300 to around the 1850s.
It’s the warming after the 1850s that’s been really remarkable and unique over
the last couple of millennia—you can see that in the sediment cores.”

![Photo: unlu1](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/tree-

ring-303x201.jpg)

Photo: unlu1

Evidence from ocean sediments, ice cores, tree rings, sedimentary rocks and
coral reefs show that the current warming is occurring 10 times faster than it
did in the past when Earth emerged from the ice ages, at a rate unprecedented
in the last 1,300 years.

To understand this rapid change in climate, scientists look at data sets and
climate models to try to reproduce the changes that have already been
observed. When scientists input only natural phenomena such as the sun’s
intensity, changes in the Earth’s orbit and ocean circulation, the models
cannot reproduce the changes that have occurred so far.

“We have independent evidence that says when you put in greenhouse gases, you
get the changes that we see,” said Schmidt. “If you don’t put in greenhouse
gases, you don’t. And if you put in all the other things people think
about—the changes in the earth’s orbit, the ocean circulation changes, El
Niño, land use changes, air pollution, smog, ozone depletion—all of those
things, none of them actually produce the changes that we see in multiple data
sets across multiple areas of the system, all of which have been independently
replicated.” In other words, only when the emissions from human activity are
included, are the models and data sets able to accurately reproduce the
warming in the ocean and the atmosphere that is occurring.

“Today, almost 100 percent [plus or minus 20 percent] of the unusual warmth
that we’ve experienced in the last decade is due to greenhouse gas emissions,”
said de Menocal.

![Record shattering heat in 2015 Photo: NASA](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/record-shattering-637x358.jpg)

Record shattering heat in 2015 Photo: NASA

Findings from NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies show clearly how much
natural and manmade factors contribute to global warming.

Climate deniers offer a variety of bases for their skepticism without
providing scientific evidence. The most effective thing that the climate
denier community has done, however, is to spread the notion of uncertainty
about climate change, and use it as an excuse not to take any action.

“It’s been a very effective tactic,” said de Menocal, “in part because the
scientific community spends a tremendous amount of effort quantifying that
uncertainty. And so we make it plain as day that there are things we’re
certain about, and things we’re uncertain about. There are places of debate
that exist in the community. That’s the scientific process. … The deniers are
not selling a new way of looking at the problem, they’re selling doubt, and
it’s very easy to manufacture doubt.”

“They are in total denial of the evidence that there is,” said Schmidt. “When
I challenge them to produce evidence for their attributions, all I get is
crickets. There’s no actual quantitative evidence that demonstrates anything.
… Show me the data, show me your analysis.”

“There are lot of things that we’re absolutely certain about,” said de
Menocal. “We’re absolutely certain carbon dioxide is rising in the atmosphere.
We’re absolutely certain it’s warming the planet and we’re absolutely certain
that it’s acidifying the oceans.”

Save

### Get our newsletter

I'd like to get more stories like this.

Email address

Secure and Spam free...

* * *

#### Tags:

climate changeclimate mattersClimate Scienceclimate skepticsGlobal
WarmingNASA-GISSocean sediments

### Related Posts

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/pjimage-200x150.jpg)Center for Climate and Life
Announces 2019 Fellows ![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/action-cement-construction-2219024-200x150.jpg)Floods,
Infrastructure and Climate Change

###

14

Leave a Reply

![avatar](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=40&d=mm&r=g)

I agree to help cultivate an open and respectful discussion. I understand rude
and/or profane comments will be automatically deleted.

__

__

__

__This comment form is under antispam protection

* * *

__13 Comment threads

__1 Thread replies

__0 Followers

__ Most reacted comment

__ Hottest comment thread

__ 14 Comment authors

![Randomer47](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/659319bebe5bbf1500f10d5faa53fc38?s=64&d=mm&r=g)![Scott

Simpson](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/56e5cbd6de7ceeb6d06ed01e3aaa477c?s=64&d=mm&r=g)![Charles

Jack](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/be523a2414bee3a96b446ddd69f086ea?s=64&d=mm&r=g)![mike

tobey](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0cc8a99d86bf21a183ef6e78a72df94c?s=64&d=mm&r=g)![Sarah

Fecht](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/10ef725a29601e2150a8162bb09ee40b?s=64&d=mm&r=g)
Recent comment authors

![avatar](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=48&d=mm&r=g)

I agree to help cultivate an open and respectful discussion. I understand rude
and/or profane comments will be automatically deleted.

__

__

__

__This comment form is under antispam protection

* * *

**Subscribe**

**newest** oldest __ most voted

Notify of

new follow-up comments new replies to my comments

![John

Barltrop](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/820d5562fdffe38c10a5c9bcd29e18c1?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

John Barltrop

* * *

__

I am quite surprised that members of "the flat earth society" have not made
any comment on this article……..as yet.  
Thank you for the informative article, that clearly shows, that Climate
Change, which our "spaceship" earth is undergoing is not natural………in fact far
from it. As pointed out the proof is a scientific fact………and is certainly
backed up, for example, by NASA's "Operation Ice Bridge" and other scientific
bodies and scientists involved in their specific areas of expertise.

__Vote Up 0 __Vote Down __Reply

__2 years ago

![Bernard

J.](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f91913028d40807dfd6534b3937c23ea?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Bernard J.

* * *

__

Bloomberg has a series of global temperature graphics that nicely illustrates
the relative contributions of the various forcings:

https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-whats-warming-the-world/

It's not been updated to cover the last two years, unfortunately, but the
human component is clear to see.

__Vote Up 0 __Vote Down __Reply

__2 years ago

![Kurlis](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d31594b45681b2f9a39c2e079acc511e?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Kurlis

* * *

__

" Earth’s climate has changed naturally over the past 650,000 years, moving in
and out of ice ages and warm periods. Changes in climate occur because of
alterations in Earth’s energy balance, which result from some kind of external
factor or “forcing”—an environmental factor that influences the climate."

Some kind of external factor? This doesn't sound definitive.

__Vote Up 1 __Vote Down __Reply

__1 year ago

![Macro](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c4ccfe7f43942821ed7f484d8c623833?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Macro

* * *

__

@Kurlis I don 't think this article is trying to be definitive about natural
causes of climate change in the past. The rest of that paragraph does go on to
list them, but they're not the main focus. The author is just making the point
that we know quite a lot about them now, so we understand that their role in
the present climate change is fairly small. By far the greatest part of what
we are experiencing now is human-induced.

__Vote Up -1 __Vote Down __Reply

__1 year ago

![Suyeon](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/59a9993eb9fe82e5b0f257423b850e04?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Suyeon

* * *

__

Thank you for your amazing article 🙂

__Vote Up 0 __Vote Down __Reply

__1 year ago

![Peccatori](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2a45974ecf21075d7e5ed1b1010474cb?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Peccatori

* * *

__

I just can 't bring myself to trust people this much. Science is always
right…until they discover something new and realize they were wrong the whole
time. It took 200 years to graduate from Newton's Law to Einstein. Everyone
used to believe that the world was flat…. and they were wrong. Just one or two
incorrect interpretations, lead the whole theory off course. I do not know. I
guess the science community better hurry up and figure out how to create
affordable sustainable energy and figure out how to create animals that won't
poop or we'll all be dead in a… Read more »

__Vote Up 2 __Vote Down __Reply

__8 months ago

![Tommy](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8017f13f248b1974ea65a81f37942d75?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Tommy

* * *

__

Newton 's law is not incorrect, it just cannot cover things Newton cannot
observer at his times, or simply beyond his comprehension. It does not mean
it's wrong under his model. In other word, Newton’s theory explain how the
stuff(gravity) is working. Einstein’s theory helps to understand, why the
stuff (gravity again).. is working. The article stated that created models
that simulate the current earth climate, and find that man-made, or man
emissioned carbon contribute to the current warmer climate, and the result can
be duplicated. It means in the current model is correct under these
conditions, and that green house… Read more »

__Vote Up 0 __Vote Down __Reply

__8 months ago

![Chris

Knorr](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4176d61841fa538bc29f771a621f3cc7?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Chris Knorr

* * *

__

" Today, almost 100 percent [plus or minus 20 percent] of the unusual warmth
that we’ve experienced in the last decade is due to greenhouse gas emissions,"
said de Menocal.

…smh

__Vote Up 0 __Vote Down __Reply

__4 months ago

![Timmy](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5dc495e2b107c383d3f468db83360a30?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Timmy

* * *

__

I 'm still waiting to read the part that proves it's not natural. Aren't these
the same climate scientists that were warning me that we were headed for an
ice age when I was 12?

![comment image](https://i1.wp.com/gregladen.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2013/06/Facebook_meme_Global_Cooling_11.gif)?resize=509%2C340

__Vote Up 1 __Vote Down __Reply

__3 months ago

__

![Sarah

Fecht](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/10ef725a29601e2150a8162bb09ee40b?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Editor

Sarah Fecht

* * *

__

Hi Timmy,

You're right, the Earth is actually supposed to be in a cooling phase, because
the sun is getting slightly weaker. But the Earth isn't cooling, and that's
one of the ways scientists know we're causing the Earth to warm. Here's a good
podcast if you'd like to find out more: https://player.fm/series/heres-the-
thing-with-alec-baldwin/climate-science-explained

__Vote Up 1 __Vote Down __Reply

__3 months ago

![mike

tobey](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0cc8a99d86bf21a183ef6e78a72df94c?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

mike tobey

* * *

__

Can anyone direct me to an official site where  
I can find out how much money the US government and the IPCC grants scientists
who study climate change from natural causes?

__Vote Up 0 __Vote Down __Reply

__3 months ago

![Charles

Jack](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/be523a2414bee3a96b446ddd69f086ea?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Charles Jack

* * *

__

The average lay person like myself can only listen to both sides and rightly
conclude that one side is wrong. I 'm going to go out on a limb here and say
that the wise choice would be with those whos business is scientifically
studying and analizing climatology. Seems that if they have it all wrong,
we're still OK. If the deniers are proven to be off base (wrong), we'll only
be left with the small comfort of saying "I told you so."

__Vote Up 1 __Vote Down __Reply

__3 months ago

![Scott

Simpson](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/56e5cbd6de7ceeb6d06ed01e3aaa477c?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Scott Simpson

* * *

__

The question I have always had is how accurate are the measurements. Just
during my lifetime I have seen tremendous advancements in technology. Then I
read how data has to be adjusted to account for these changes. So my big
concern is the margin of error in these estimates because we are not taking
about huge variations. 1.4 degrees increase since 1880. If the margin of error
is .5 degrees then the fluctuation could be 1 degree and we are only talking
about 1.4 degrees. Same with sea level rises. How is that measured and does it
take into account … Read more »

__Vote Up 1 __Vote Down __Reply

__3 months ago

![Randomer47](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/659319bebe5bbf1500f10d5faa53fc38?s=64&d=mm&r=g)

Guest

Randomer47

* * *

__

Ok i get that it is accelerated 10x by human factors but surely all this is
confirms thats it is natural???  
The real question is why does nobody seem to be planning for the consequences
of this climate change especially as the deadline to respond has been
shortened by 10x  
This includes planning evacuations of low lying countries or building giant
flood walls, attempting to combat desertification in any way possible and
other areas of possible future disasters  
Instead all the focus is on slowing down something that as far as i can tell
is inevitable

__Vote Up 1 __Vote Down __Reply

__2 months ago

                
                                      * Search for:
                
                      * ![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/button-newsletter.png)
                      * ## Featured Story
                

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/action-cement-

construction-2219024-200x150.jpg)

#### Floods, Infrastructure and Climate Change

                
                                      * ![Earth Institute Fieldwork Map](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/button-map.png)
                      * Load More... __Follow on Instagram
                
                      * ## Upcoming Events
                

BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2019 New York Scientific Data Summit
2019

* * *
                
                                      * ## Topics
                

Topics Select Category Agriculture Climate Earth Sciences Ecology Education
Energy Gender Equality General Earth Institute Health Natural Disasters
Poverty / Development Press Release Sustainability Urbanization Water

                
                                      * ## Research Centers & Programs
                

Climate MattersLamont-Doherty Earth ObservatoryMasters in Development
PracticeWater Matters

                
                                      * ## Authors
                

Advanced Consortium on Cooperation, Conflict, and ComplexityAdam FischerAdrian
SoghoianAlyssa RomeAvantika GoswamiAlice GraffAlex HallidayAdrienne
KenyonAllison LadueAlejandra BorundaAlex FischerAllison GreenbergAnna
MazhirovAmy McDermottRoger AndersonAndrea BascheAngelie SinghArif NooriAshley
CurtisHuili ZhuAdam SobelAnnie TickellAdam YukelsonRobert S. ChenBenjamin
PrestonBrian KahnBob AndersonCassie XuCathy VaughanColumbia Center on
Sustainable InvestmentCatherine FullertonCenter for International Earth
Science Information NetworkColumbia Water CenterCenter for Research on
Environmental DecisionsCari ShimkusCourtney SmallCourtney St. JohnDebbie
CookDebra TillingerDavid FunkhouserDavida HellerDiana B SierraDavid
MaurrasseDonna ShillingtonDiego VillarrealDwi SusantoEarth InstituteEve
WarburtonEinat LevCenter on Global Energy PolicyEric HolthausElizabeth
RobinsonEmily RothenbergEve SolomonElisabeth SydorFarah HegaziKyle
FrischkornFrancesco FiondellaFrank NitscheGina AckermanGavin SchmidtElisabeth
GawthropGeoffrey HealGilma MantillaGisela WincklerGrant GoodrichHamsa
SubramaniamHannah ChangHima BataviaHayley MartinezIndrani DasInternational
Research Institute for Climate and SocietyIvy MorganJaclyn Leigh CarlsenJames
WarieroJessica CrespoJeffrey SachsJennifer VettelJesper FrantJessica
FanzoJeremy HinsdaleJill A. VanTongerenJim CochranJim GahertyJonathan
NicholsJohn McArthurJohn MutterJu Young LeeJulia Apland HitzJulie
ArrighiKatherine AllenKalpana VenkatasubramanianKate BrashKate MorrisKate
WeinbergerKatherine ReganKatie HornerKatie JohnsonKavita Jain-CocksKelsie
DeFranciaKelsey DyezKevin KrajickKate Kennedy FreemanKim Anne KastensKim
MartineauKlaus LacknerKristin FrancozKatherine SchulmanKirsty TintoKyu
LeeKathy ZhangLakis PolycarpouLareef ZubairLaura LyLauren BarredoLauren
ZieglerLenfest CenterLonnie ThompsonLaura PirainoLindsay SiegelLucia
RodriguezMadeleine RubensteinMargie TurrinMariapaola SuttoMarie DeNoia
AronsohnMary-Elena CarrMattias ChesleyMeaghan DalyMelika EdquistMeg ReitzMegan
WinstonMeghna BhattacharjeeMichael B. GerrardMichael BarnettMichelle
CordrayMichelle ShevinMike StecklerMolly HellmuthMilap PatelMarivi Perdomo
CabaMeg TowleMargo WeissNatalie Unwin-KuruneriNikhil NarulaNatalia MrozNeil
PedersonNathan RudderPaola MejiaPatrick KinneyPaul BlockPeter ColemanPeter
KelemenPeter SchlosserPatty MechaelPratigya PolissarPoonam AroraPhebe
PiersonPrabhjot DhadiallaPrabhjot SinghPamela VreelandRenee ChoRebecca
FowlerRonny FriedrichRebecca GreenwaldRichard GonzalezRichard PlunzBob
CroccoRobert HsuRustom MasalawalaSabin Center for Climate Change LawSamantha
TressSarah BrennanSarah Wakefield AdhyaSuzanne CarbotteThomas ChenScott
BarrettSelim TliliSarah FechtShahid NaeemShahzeen Z. AttariSidney
HemmingSharon KimStacy MorfordSamantha OstrowskiShama PerveenBeth
StaufferStephanie RuizStephen HammerStephen YangSteve CohenSarah TweedieSusan
BlausteinSusan KarutiTanya HeikkilaTheresa E. HernandezTim CreytsTim
CroneTimothy GildnerTobias SiegfriedTamara PlummerTristan JonesTracy
SlagleTrevor WilliamsUyen Kim HuynhUjala QadirUpmanu LallWilliam MenkeYanis
Ben AmorYochanan KushnirYombo Tankoano

                
                                      * ## Archives
                

Select Year 2019 (206) 2018 (434) 2017 (370) 2016 (396) 2015 (415) 2014 (383)
2013 (334) 2012 (508) 2011 (511) 2010 (549) 2009 (285) 2008 (11)

                
                                      * _**State of the Planet** is a forum for discussion on varying viewpoints. The opinions expressed by the authors and those providing comments are theirs alone, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the Earth Institute or Columbia University._
                

Earth Institute, Columbia University  
Ask a Question / Suggest a Story

wpDiscuz

### Get our newsletter

Sign me up for the Earth Institute newsletter, so I can receive more stories
like this.

Email address

This website uses cookies as well as similar tools and technologies to
understand visitors' experiences. By continuing to use this website, you
consent to Columbia University's usage of cookies and similar technologies, in
accordance with the Columbia University Website Cookie Notice.Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

