

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

                
                                      * Our Work
                        * Clean Energy
                        * Clean Vehicles
                        * Food & Agriculture
                        * Global Warming
                        * Nuclear Power
                        * Nuclear Weapons
                        * Center for Science and Democracy
                      * About
                        * Accomplishments & History
                        * Leadership & Experts
                        * Funding & Financials
                        * Ways to Give
                        * News Center
                        * Jobs at UCS
                        * Contact Us
                        * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
                      * Take Action
                        * Science Network
                      * Subscribe
                      * Donate
                        * Renew Your Membership
                        * Become a Member
                        * Give Monthly
                        * Make a Planned Gift
                        * More Ways to Give
                        * Gifts in Honor or Memory
                        * Gift Memberships
                      * Science Network Leaders
                

**search**

# Scientists Agree: Global Warming is Happening and Humans are the Primary

Cause

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/Human_fingerprints.jpg)

Human fingerprints  
Image: IPCC AR5

The evidence is overwhelming. Record-breaking temperatures, humidity, and sea
level rise, along with many other indicators, show that the Earth is warming
fast, and that all the heat-trapping emissions we release into the atmosphere
from burning fossil fuels is changing our climate.

The time to act is now. But, many powerful industry interests have hindered
action and have, largely through surrogates, spread dangerous myths about
climate change.

One of the preferred tactics these groups use to sow confusion is to promote
studies that either ignore or misrepresent the evidence of thousands of
articles published in well-established and well-respected scientific journals,
which show that global warming is happening and that it is caused by humans.

No matter how much contrarians try to cloak reality, the evidence is not going
away.

### Widespread scientific consensus

Scientists worldwide agree that global warming is happening, and that human
activity causes it.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

IPCC5-cover.png)

Image: IPCC Assesment Report 5 Cover

The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), written by a panel of hundreds of
climate experts and scientists from member countries of the World
Meteorological Organization the United Nations Environmental Programme, plus a
team of external reviewers, states unambiguously:

> Human influence on the climate system is clear, and recent anthropogenic
emissions of green-house gases are the highest in history. […] Warming of the
climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed
changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

scientific-consensus.jpg)

Scientific consensus on climate change.  
Illustration: John Cook

The scientific consensus is clear. Building on two previous studies, a
landmark 2013 peer-reviewed study evaluated 10,306 scientists to confirm that
over 97 percent climate scientists agree, and over 97 percent of scientific
articles find that global warming is real and largely caused by humans.

A more recent peer-reviewed paper examined existing studies on consensus in
climate research, and concluded that the 97 percent estimate is robust.

This level of consensus is equivalent to the level of agreement among
scientists that smoking causes cancer – a statement that very few people, if
any, contest today.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

public-opinion-2016.png)

Yale Program on Climate Communication

The American public also increasingly agrees that global warming is happening.
A 2016 poll from Yale found that 70 percent of Americans believe global
warming is happening, while record low number of Americans (12 percent) say
the opposite.

A Gallup poll from 2017 showed that the number of Americans who worry “a great
deal” about global warming has increased from 37 percent in 2016 to 45 percent
in 2017. The acceptance of human-caused emissions as the cause of warming is
not keeping pace with those that believe it is happening, but it is at 53
percent.

There is no shortage of published research on the consensus of climate
scientists and climate science when it comes to human-caused global warming.
In addition to the references above, you can read about how the discussion on
consensus developed over time in these studies.

Many different scientific societies in the United States and numerous national
academies of science from around the world have also issued statements that
verify the scientific claims about human-caused warming (see below).

### Consensus and scientific uncertainty

Climate skeptics and deniers often misrepresent “scientific uncertainty” to
undermine climate science findings. Therefore, when it comes to scientific
consensus on global warming, it is important to clarify what type of
uncertainty exists, and what type does not: there is strong certainty on the
types of impacts that global warming is causing (or would be likely to cause
under a given scenario for emissions), but less certainty on the _exact timing
and intensity_ of these impacts.

For instance, on the issue of sea level rise, we know with certainty that it
will happen – it is already happening – and projections under different
scenarios give us a range of possible rise. We don’t know an exact value,
however, for future sea level rise, because in large part it is dependent on
the rate of future emissions, which is unknown.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2017/07/gw-

impacts-sea-level-rise-price-reduced-home-sale-sign.jpg?itok=sZkRZJ5w)

Image: David Harp

If emissions continue in a “business as usual” fashion, the sea level rise
will be closer to the higher range of projections. But if we significantly
reduce emissions, the rise will be closer to the lower levels of projections.

The same is true for how much warming will actually happen, or how much land-
based ice and glaciers will melt. All these things are already happening, but
future rates are not known because they, too, depend on the rate of future
emissions. What scientists can calculate quite confidently is a narrow range
of outcomes within a given scenario—meaning the likely highest and lowest
values if we continue on a certain path of emissions. This information is
critical to making smart collective choices and for planning for the future.

Uncertainties are not a reason to delay action on climate change. Quite the
contrary: those uncertainties are really a consequence of our collective
choices, and a risk we must prepare for.

You can think about it like car insurance: everyone hopes they won’t be in a
car accident but have accident insurance anyway, even though the likelihood is
very low.

Climate adaptation and climate risk reduction are “insurance” against the
effects of climate change, which in contrast are NOT low-probability events,
but highly likely and predicted with high levels of certainty under specific
conditions. Being prepared for these scenarios is simply smart planning.
Nobody wants to be caught unaware and unprepared.

### Consensus worldwide

Many scientific societies and academies have released statements and studies
that highlight the overwhelming consensus on climate change science.

**American Association for the Advancement of Science:** AAAS Reaffirms the
Reality of Human-Caused Climate Change

“Observations throughout the world make it clear that climate change is
occurring, and rigorous scientific research concludes that the greenhouse
gases emitted by human activities are the primary driver. This conclusion is
based on multiple independent lines of evidence and the vast body of peer-
reviewed science.” (June 2016)

**American Chemical Society** : Statement on Global Climate Change

“The Earth’s climate is changing in response to increasing concentrations of
greenhouse gases (GHGs) and particulate matter in the atmosphere, largely as
the result of human activities. … Unmitigated climate change will lead to
increases in extreme weather events and will cause significant sea level rise,
causing property damage and population displacement. It also will continue to
degrade ecosystems and natural resources, affecting food and water
availability and human health, further burdening economies and societies.
Continued uncontrolled GHG emissions will accelerate and compound the effects
and risks of climate change well into the future.” (2016)

**American Geophysical Union** : Human-induced Climate Change Requires Urgent
Action.

"Extensive, independent observations confirm the reality of global warming.
These observations show large-scale increases in air and sea temperatures, sea
level, and atmospheric water vapor; they document decreases in the extent of
mountain glaciers, snow cover, permafrost, and Arctic sea ice. These changes
are broadly consistent with long-understood physics and predictions of how the
climate system is expected to respond to human-caused increases in greenhouse
gases. The changes are inconsistent with explanations of climate change that
rely on known natural influences.”(December 2003, revised and reaffirmed
December 2007, February 2012, August 2013)

**American Meteorological Society:** Climate Change: An Information Statement
of the American Meteorological Society

"It is clear from extensive scientific evidence that the dominant cause of the
rapid change in climate of the past half century is human-induced increases in
the amount of atmospheric greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide (CO2),
chlorofluorocarbons, methane, and nitrous oxide.” (August 2012)

**American Physical Society** : Statement on Earth’s Changing Climate

"While natural sources of climate variability are significant, multiple lines
of evidence indicate that human influences have had an increasingly dominant
effect on global climate warming observed since the mid-twentieth century.
Although the magnitudes of future effects are uncertain, human influences on
the climate are growing." (November 2015)

**Geological Society of America** : Position Statement on Climate Change

"Scientific advances have greatly reduced previous uncertainties about recent
global warming. Ground-station measurements have shown a warming trend of
~0.85 °C since 1880, a trend consistent with (1) retreat of northern
hemisphere snow and Arctic sea ice; (2) greater heat storage in the ocean; (3)
retreat of most mountain glaciers; (4) an ongoing rise in global sea level;
and (5) proxy reconstructions of temperature change over past centuries from
archives that include ice cores, tree rings, lake sediments, boreholes, cave
deposits, and corals." (October 2006; revised April 2010, March 2013, April
2015).

**Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change:** Synthesis Report Summary for
Policymakers

“Human influence on the climate system is clear, and recent anthropogenic
emissions of green-house gases are the highest in history. Recent climate
changes have had widespread impacts on human and natural systems. “Warming of
the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed
changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean
have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, and sea level has
risen.” (2014)

**International academies joint statement:** Global response to climate change

“The world’s climate is changing, and the impacts are already being observed.
Changing agricultural conditions, ocean warming and acidification, rising sea
levels, and increased frequency and intensity of many extreme weather events
are impacting infrastructure, environmental assets and human health.” (2018,
African Academy of Sciences and the national academies of science of the
United Kingdom, Australia, Bangladesh, Botswana, Canada, India, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Pakistan, New Zealand, Cyprus, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
South Africa, Scotland, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Zambia, Malaysia, Cameroon).

**U.S. Global Change Research Program:** Highlights of the Findings of the
U.S. Global Change Research Program Climate Science Special Report

“Based on extensive evidence, … it is extremely likely that human activities,
especially emissions of greenhouse gases, are the dominant cause of the
observed warming since the mid-20th century. For the warming over the last
century, there is no convincing alternative explanation supported by the
extent of the observational evidence.

“In addition to warming, many other aspects of global climate are changing,
primarily in response to human activities. Thousands of studies conducted by
researchers around the world have documented changes in surface, atmospheric,
and oceanic temperatures; melting glaciers; diminishing snow cover; shrinking
sea ice; rising sea levels; ocean acidification; and increasing atmospheric
water vapor.” (November 2017)

**U.S. National Academy of Sciences** : Understanding and Responding to
Climate Change

"The scientific understanding of climate change is now sufficiently clear to
begin taking steps to prepare for climate change and to slow it." (2008)

Last revised date: January 9, 2018

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

                
                                      * $25
                      * $50
                      * $100
                      * $250
                      * $1000
                      * Other
                

Donate

                
                                      * $25
                      * $50
                      * $100
                      * $250
                      * $1000
                      * Other
                

Donate

## Share

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                

## Related Content

                
                                      * The Science Connecting Extreme Weather to Climate Change (2018)
                

## From our blogs

                
                                      * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
                      * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
                      * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019
                

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Take Action

                
                                      * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)
                

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

                
                                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                      * __
                
                      * About Us
                        * UCS Leadership & Experts
                        * Funding & Financials
                        * History & Accomplishments
                        * Jobs & Internships
                        * News
                      * Issues
                        * Clean Energy
                        * Clean Vehicles
                        * Food & Agriculture
                        * Global Warming
                        * Nuclear Power
                        * Nuclear Weapons
                      * Our Podcast
                        * Got Science?
                      * Publications
                      * Reports & Analysis
                      * Center for Science and Democracy
                      * Action Center
                      * Privacy Policy
                      * State Disclosures
                      * Our Blogs
                        * The Equation
                        * All Things Nuclear
                      * Site Map
                      * Contact Us
                      * UCS Store
                
                      * Ways to Give
                        * Donate
                        * Give Monthly
                        * Planned Gifts
                      * How to Help
                        * Become a Member
                        * Take Action
                        * Subscribe
                
                      * A **Normal Font Size**
                      * A **Larger Font Size**
                      * A **Largest Font Size**
                

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

