

Skip to main content

**Smithsonian Institution**

Language __Search Smithsonian Ocean

Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Flickr Follow us on
Tumbr

Donate

# Smithsonian Ocean

## Main Menu

                
                                      * Ocean Life
                        * Marine Mammals
                        * Sharks & Rays
                        * Reptiles
                        * Seabirds
                        * Fish
                        * Invertebrates
                        * Plankton
                        * Plants & Algae
                      * Ecosystems
                        * Coral Reefs
                        * Deep Sea
                        * Coasts & Shallow Water
                        * Poles
                        * Census of Marine Life
                      * Planet Ocean
                        * Tides & Currents
                        * Waves, Storms & Tsunamis
                        * The Seafloor
                        * Temperature & Chemistry
                      * Through Time
                        * Ancient Seas
                        * Extinctions
                        * Evolution
                        * The Anthropocene
                      * Conservation
                        * Fishing
                        * Pollution
                        * Habitat Destruction
                        * Invasive Species
                        * Acidification
                        * Climate Change
                        * Gulf Oil Spill
                        * Solutions & Success Stories
                        * Get Involved
                      * Human Connections
                        * Books, Film & The Arts
                        * Recreation
                        * Seafood
                        * Exploration
                        * History & Cultures
                        * Careers
                      * At The Museum
                      * Educators
                

Menu

![On average, Arctic sea ice has decreased by four percent per decade since

the late

1970s.](/sites/default/files/styles/overview_hero/public/ExtremeIce_IcelandDSC_0052_full_1.jpg?itok=lWDKnCgP)
**Credit:** James Balog/Extreme Ice Survey

# Sea Level Rise

Sections

                
                                      * Introduction
                      * History of Sea Level Rise
                      * Why is it Rising?
                      * Modern Sea Level
                      * Impacts
                      * Regional Case Studies
                      * Future Sea Level & Adaptation
                      * Additional Resources
                

## Breadcrumb

                
                                      1. Home
                      2. Through Time
                      3. Ancient Seas
                      4. Sea Level Rise
                

## Introduction

__

by The Ocean Portal Team

Reviewed by Dr. Joshua K. Willis, NASA-JPL, Dr. Andrew Kemp, Tufts University,
and Dr. Benjamin H. Strauss, Climate Central

Contents

                
                                      * ## History of Sea Level Rise
                
                        * ### Last Glacial Period
                
                        * ### Sea Level on the Rise
                
                      * ## Why is it Rising?
                
                        * ### Thermal Expansion
                
                        * ### Melting Ice
                
                        * ### Other Contributions
                
                      * ## Modern Sea Level
                
                        * ### Measuring Global Sea Level
                
                        * ### Changing Regional and Local Sea Levels
                
                      * ## Impacts
                
                        * ### Storms and Flooding
                
                        * ### Changing Coastlines
                
                        * ### Saltwater Intrusion
                
                        * ### There's No Place Like Home
                
                      * ## Regional Case Studies
                
                        * ### Florida and the U.S. Gulf Coast
                
                        * ### Island Nations
                
                        * ### Alaska
                
                        * ### River Deltas
                
                      * ## Future Sea Level & Adaptation
                
                        * ### Reducing Emissions
                
                        * ### Holding Back the Sea
                
                        * ### Moving Inland
                
                      * ## Additional Resources
                

The ocean never stops moving. When you visit the beach, waves roll in and
recede and the tides rise and fall. These are small daily changes that balance
out over time.

But over the past century, the average height of the sea has risen more
consistently—less than a centimeter every year, but those small additions add
up. Today, sea level is 5 to 8 inches (13-20 centimeters) higher on average
than it was in 1900. That's a pretty big change: for the previous 2,000 years,
sea level hadn't changed much at all. The rate of sea level rise has also
increased over time. Between 1900 and 1990 studies show that sea level rose
between **1.2 millimeters** and **1.7 millimeters** per year on average. By
2000, that rate had increased to about 3.2 millimeters per year and the **rate
in 2016 is estimated at 3.4 millimeters per year**. Sea level is expected to
rise even more quickly by the end of the century.

**Scientists agree** that the changes in climate that we are seeing today are
largely caused by human activity, and it's climate change that drives sea
level rise. Sea level started rising in the late 1800s, soon after we started
burning coal, gas and other fossil fuels for energy. When burned, these high-
energy fuel sources send carbon dioxide up into the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide
absorbs heat from the sun and traps it, warming the atmosphere and the planet.

As the planet gets warmer, sea level rises for two reasons. First, warmer
temperatures cause ice on land like glaciers and ice sheets to melt, and the
meltwater flows into the ocean to increase sea level. Second, warm water
expands and takes up more space than colder water, increasing the volume of
water in the sea.

Sea level rise will hit the coasts the hardest. Over the coming centuries,
land that is today home to between **470 and 760 million coastal residents
will be inundated** by sea level rise associated with a 4 degree Celsius
warming that will occur if we fail to curb the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. **Much of this population lives in cities**. Sea level rise
already makes storms more dangerous, causing more flooding and damage in areas
crowded with people. And it will affect different parts of the world
differently, with some parts of the planet being particularly hard hit.

![This image is a helper image for making the video

responsive.](/themes/custom/a_clean_ocean/images/16x9.png)

NASAJPL Edu

## History of Sea Level Rise

Almost all of the water on Earth is stored in two places: in the oceans
(currently 97 percent of all water) and in glaciers (currently about 2.7
percent). How much water is in the oceans—and thus how high sea level
is—largely depends on how much water is trapped in glacial ice.

Throughout our planet's history, sea level has risen and fallen dramatically.
At times, there was **no ice at the poles** and the ocean was hundreds of feet
higher than it is now; at other times, ice covered the planet and sea level
was hundreds of feet lower. These changes are part of Earth's natural glacial
cycles and have occurred over millions of years. Scientists use **sediment and
ice cores to learn more about sea level** before the advent of tide gauges and
satellites.

### Last Glacial Period

![World map during last ice

age](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/the_world___ice_age_borders_only__by_jaysimons-d7igsuv-

small.jpg?itok=izGtgRhw) This map depicts the Earth during the last ice age,
specifically the Late Glacial Maximum (roughly 14,000 BCE) when the climate
began to warm substantially. With so much of the planet's water tied up in
ice, global sea level was more than 400 feet lower than it is today. The
artist worked with climatologists and glaciologists to make the map as
accurate as possible. (© Martin Vargic)

Earth's most recent glacial period peaked about 26,500 years ago. At that
time, around 10 million square miles (26 million square kilometers) of ice
covered the Earth. The Laurentide ice sheet covered Canada and the American
Midwest, stretching over Minnesota and Wisconsin south to New York and the
Rocky Mountains. Across the Atlantic, ice blanketed Iceland and stretched down
over the British Isles and northern Europe, including Germany and Poland. The
Patagonian ice sheet crept north from Antarctica to cover parts of Chile and
Argentina. The climate was colder and drier globally; rain was scarce, but
pockets of rainforest survived in the tropics. With so much of the planet's
water tied up in ice, global **sea level was more than 400 feet lower than it
is today**.

Low sea level meant that some land masses that are currently submerged were
accessible to people. One of the best known is the Bering Land Bridge, which
connected Alaska to Siberia. The first people to reach the Americas **migrated
across the land bridge and settled here**. Land animals also made the journey
over the bridge in both directions to colonize new continents. As the world's
glaciers and ice sheets melted during the following millennia, the Bering Land
Bridge was flooded and disappeared beneath the ocean's surface, cutting off
the migration route.

### Sea Level on the Rise

![Measurements of carbon dioxide in atmosphere since

1958](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/co2_data_mlo.png?itok=N9zPvFNB)
The amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere has been measured at
Mauna Loa Observatory on Hawaii since the 1950's. There has been a steady rise
in carbon dioxide since the measurements began, and you can see the rise and
fall on a yearly basis due to plants growing and absorbing CO2 every spring
and summer. In 2015 the annual **growth rate jumped by 3.05 parts per
million** , the largest year-to-year increase in their 56 years of
measurements. (Scripps Institution of Oceanography & NOAA)

Over the past 20,000 years or so, sea level has climbed some 400 feet (120
meters). As the climate warmed as part of a natural cycle, ice melted and
glaciers retreated until ice sheets remained only at the poles and at the
peaks of mountains. Early on, the sea rose rapidly, sometimes at rates greater
than 10 feet (3 meters) per century, and then continued to grow **in spurts of
rapid sea level rise** until about 7,000 years ago. Then, the climate
stabilized and sea level rise slowed, holding largely steady for most of the
last 2,000 years, based on records from corals and sediment cores. Now,
however, sea level is on the rise again, **rising faster now than it has in
the past 6,000 years**. The oldest tide gauges and coastal sediment preserved
beneath swamps and marshes show that sea level began to rise around 1850,
which is right around the time people started burning coal to propel steam
engine trains, and it hasn't stopped since. The climate likely started warming
as a part of a natural cycle, but the accelerated warming in the last two
hundred years or so is due to **a rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide**. The
resulting rise in sea level is **likely twice what we would have seen without
the increase in greenhouse gasses** due to human activities.

Today, global sea level is 5-8 inches (13-20 cm) higher on average than it was
in 1900. Between 1900 and 2000, global sea level **rose between 0.05 inches
(1.2 millimeters)** and **0.07 inches (1.7 millimeters)** per year on average.
In the 1990s, that rate jumped to around 3.2 millimeters per year. In 2016 the
rate was estimated to be 3.4 millimeters per year, and it is expected to jump
higher by the end of the century. Scientists with the Intergovernmental
Project on Climate Change predict that global sea level will rise between 0.3
and 1 meter by 2100. Eventually, sea level is expected to **rise around 2.3
meters for every degree** (°C) that climate change warms the planet, and Earth
has warmed by 1°C already. What scientists don't know is how long it will take
for sea level to catch up to the temperature increase. Whether it takes
another 200 or 2000 years largely depends on how quickly the ice sheets melt.
Even if global warming were to stop today, sea level would continue to rise.

## Why is it Rising?

Global warming associated with human activities causes sea level to rise in
several ways.

### Thermal Expansion

One property of water is that warm water takes up more space than cold water.
So **as the ocean warms from climate change** , seawater expands to fill a
greater volume and takes up more space. This is called thermal expansion, and
it is responsible for one-third of sea level rise to date.

The idea that water expands when heated seems strange, but it is a property of
most objects that occurs at the molecular level. When water molecules are
heated, they absorb energy. That energy causes the molecules and atoms to move
around more and, in the process, take up more space. If you heat up a cup of
water, the small molecular expansions don't add up to a difference we can
detect by eye. But when you have vast numbers of water molecules, like in the
ocean, the tiny expansions add up to something we can see.

Thermal expansion is an ongoing contributor to sea level rise as long as ocean
water continues to increase in temperature.

### Melting Ice

![An iceberg calves from Antarctica's Pine Island

Glacier](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/Pine_Island_Glacier_1000-with-

dates.jpg?itok=zjz0rWk9)Pine Island Glacier, in the Antarctic, is changing
quickly due to warming water. In 2013 satellites **captured the calving** of a
large iceberg from the glacier. The iceberg was estimated to be 35 by 20
kilometers (22 by 12 miles) wide. (NASA Earth Observatory)

Glaciers and ice sheets, large land-based formations of ice, are melting as
global temperatures rise. That meltwater drains into the sea, increasing the
ocean's water volume and global sea level. Melting ice has caused about two-
thirds of the rise in sea level to date, one-third from land ice in Greenland
and Antarctica and one third from melting ice on mountains.

Ice sheets and glaciers in Greenland and Antarctica **melt three ways** : from
above due to warming air, from the sides as they break off into the sea, and
from below due to warming ocean water where the ice extends over the sea.
Because of this, the rate of ice melt varies from place to place as conditions
change. The **Arctic is warming more quickly than the Antarctic** , which
explains why the ice there is thinning more quickly. However, recent research
suggests that the **melting of Antarctica’s ice shelves may be unstoppable**
—although the process may take centuries.

It wasn't until 2008 that scientists grasped the extent to which warm water
melting glaciers from below accelerates ice melt. Many glaciers and ice sheets
extend into the ocean at their coastal edge, and the floating ice is called an
ice shelf. Ice shelves support ice sheets and glaciers by holding the ice on
land. But as ocean temperatures increase, warm water laps at the ice shelves,
weakening them and causing them to calve glaciers into the sea. This both
accelerates ice melting and destabilizes land-based glaciers and ice sheets.
This destabilization and acceleration has already been observed at some
Greenland glaciers like **Jakobshavn Isbrae** , which is speeding into the sea
faster than any other glacier on Earth. **Pine Island Glacier** , another
fast- paced glacier in the Antarctic, is also changing quickly. The 5-year
NASA mission **Oceans Melting Greenland** (OMG), launched in April 2015, seeks
to better understand how ocean water melts ice from below. Like this one,
**new discoveries about sea level change are made all the time**.

In the future, the melting of ice sheets will dominate sea level rise. Warming
has already caused major changes in the **ice sheets** , continental masses of
ice which hold a greater volume of ice than glaciers and ice caps combined.
These changes are irreversible in the short term, says NASA's Eric Rignot, and
it would take centuries to reverse the trail of ice retreat. In addition to
polar ice, the **melting of mountain glaciers** , like those in the Andes and
Himalayas, has caused an equal amount of sea level rise to date. However,
because mountain glaciers include only one percent of all land ice, polar ice
will eventually greatly surpass their contributions to global sea-level rise.

### Other Contributions

![A map of sea level change in cm from 1993 to 2008.

](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/ssh_trend_map1.gif?itok=4Er9GDJ-)
This map shows satellite data of changes in sea level rise from 1998 to 2003.
The yellow and red colors indicate areas of rising sea level and the green and
blue colors show areas of falling sea level. This shows how in some areas sea
level will fall, although the majority of regions are facing rising seas.
(NASA)

There are other small contributions to sea level rise. Some ice sheets are so
massive that they alter the Earth's gravitational pull. As ice caps melt, both
**the gravitation pull on Earth** and **the planet's rotational spin will
change** , affecting local sea level in complicated ways. Sea levels may rise
in some places, and drop in others. Greenland's ice sheets currently pull on
the surrounding ocean, creating a slight bump in the ocean in that area of the
world. When the ice on Greenland melts and that pull is lost the sea level in
places like Iceland and Norway will actually drop. But that water will have to
go somewhere. The ocean water will redistribute so that across the globe by
Japan and Hawaii sea level will rise more than the global average.

Other human impacts can decrease sea level rise, such as building dams and
artificial reservoirs to store water. When people use wells to pump water from
underground reservoirs, that water eventually reaches the ocean. But none of
these are capable of influencing sea level to the same extent as thermal
expansion and the melting of large glaciers and ice sheets.

## Modern Sea Level

### Measuring Global Sea Level

![A diagram showing how NOAA uses satellites to measure sea level

](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/jason%203.png?itok=ohZRA2NV)Satellites
like JASON-1, -2 and -3 use precise radars to bounce signals off the ocean's
surface to determine the height of the ocean, or sea level. (NOAA/STAR)

Global sea level is the height of the ocean's surface averaged throughout the
world, and is what is often discussed in the news. Historically, it has been
challenging to measure because the ocean's surface isn't flat; it changes
daily or hourly based on winds, tides, and currents. Up until 1993, tide
gauges measured global sea level. **Tide gauges** are usually placed on piers,
and they continuously record the height of the water level compared to a
stable reference point on land. There are around 2,000 tide gauges around the
world run by around 200 countries. Some have been **recording sea level data
since the 1800s** —and a few for **even longer**.

But thanks to satellites, scientists have gotten a better handle on global sea
level and how it has changed over time. Satellites take much more
comprehensive measurements. In 1992, NASA launched **TOPEX/Poseidon** , the
first of a series of satellites that measure sea level rise from space. It was
followed by **Jason-1** and **OSTM/Jason-2,** and most recently **Jason-3**
which was launched successfully on Jan 17, 2016. These satellites use precise
radars to bounce signals off the ocean's surface to determine the height of
the ocean. "The instruments are so sensitive that if they were mounted on a
commercial jetliner flying at 40,000 feet, they could detect the bump caused
by a dime lying flat on the ground," says Michael Freilich, Director of NASA's
Earth Science program. With this information, NASA scientists calculate the
average change in height almost everywhere across the globe once every 10
days.

In 2002, NASA launched the **GRACE satellites** , which track both ocean and
ice mass by measuring changes in the Earth's gravitational field. The paired
satellites orbit the Earth together and are spaced roughly 200 kilometers
apart. Ice and water moving around the Earth exert different gravitational
forces on the GRACE satellites. The satellites can sense the miniscule changes
in the distance between one another caused by the change in gravitation force,
which they measure and use to track water and ice mass change. It's thanks to
GRACE that we know where the water flowing into the ocean came from. According
to GRACE, melting of ice in Greenland increased sea level by 0.74 mm/year and
melting in Antarctica by 0.25 mm/year since 2002.

### Changing Regional and Local Sea Levels

Although sea level is rising globally, in some places it is rising more
quickly than others, and in some places, sea level is even falling. This type
of local- and regional-scale sea level change is what is most important when
talking about the impacts of sea level on people and communities and how to
plan for and manage those impacts.

Different places will **experience varying consequences** of sea level change
for many reasons:

                
                                      * Some coastal areas are positioned high above sea level—such as Scotland, Iceland, and some parts of Alaska—while others are much closer to, or even below, sea level, such as New Orleans, Louisiana and much of the eastern United States. Coasts are constantly moving and changing, with inputs from tectonic plates.
                      * Local geology can make land more resistant or prone to becoming saturated with encroaching seawater and eroding away. 
                      * When ice sheets melted at the end of the last ice age, a great weight was removed from some areas. To understand what has been happening since it helps to think of a person (like an ice sheet) sitting on an air mattress (the land). When the person stands up (the ice melts), the part of the mattress underneath and close to the person springs back up; but the parts of the mattress far from the person sink back down. The same rising and sinking are still happening all over the world, even thousands of years after continental ice sheets have disappeared. This is called **glacial isostatic adjustment**.
                      * Prevailing winds and ocean currents can push water towards or away from the coast.
                

Additional factors such as rainfall, vegetation, ice cover, groundwater
extraction, coastal development, and oil and gas drilling can affect how well
a region can handle rising sea levels.

See the **"Regional Case Studies"** section for examples of places already
facing the consequences of rapid sea level change to demonstrate how it varies
around the world.

## Impacts

As sea level rises, ocean waves won’t roll onshore and submerge houses and
communities all at once like in a summer blockbuster. The first signs of sea
level rise will be increased damage from hurricanes and other storms and even
high tides. Minor and major flooding will become more frequent. Coastlines
will erode and creep backward almost imperceptibly. In fact, all of these
impacts are already happening.

### Storms and Flooding

![A satellite image of Hurricane Sandy as it passed over Cuba and Jamaica on

October 25,

2012.](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/hurricane-

sandy.jpeg?itok=AkCLihzZ)A satellite image of Hurricane Sandy as it passed
over Cuba and Jamaica on October 25, 2012. (NOAA/NASA/GSFC/SuomiNPP)

As the waterline creeps up along coasts, storms and flooding will happen more
frequently and dramatically. Think of the ocean as the **launching pad for
storms and floods** : the closer the sea is to human communities, the easier
it is for floods to reach homes, roads and towns. Flooding over roads, which
is **already becoming more common in some places during high tides** , can
cause traffic jams and block emergency vehicles from reaching flooded areas.

Imperceptibly to us, **flooding is already becoming more common** along the
eastern United States. **A 2014 Reuters analysis** found that, before 1971,
water reached flood levels no more than five days every year (on average) in
several U.S. east coast cities. Since 2001, however, that number has risen to
20 days or more (on average). At this point, each of these floods is a
relatively minor event, maybe closing a few roads, some home damage or causing
businesses to close for a period of time. But as they become more frequent,
these inconveniences will add up and make people's lives harder, not to
mention cost money because of damages.

Likewise, flooding during storms—sometimes called **storm surges** —will reach
farther inland as sea level rises. During hurricanes and other large storms
(like Nor’easters), strong winds push water beyond the normal high tide mark;
beach houses are often built on stilts to protect against these storm surges.
They are likely to get worse as sea level rises due to increased flooding
danger across the board. Additionally, as the ocean warms from climate change,
it will provide more energy to hurricanes, potentially making them stronger.
Over the next century, **hurricanes are estimated to grow between 2 and 11
percent stronger on average** , according to NOAA. Combined, these are the
"one-two punch of rising seas," **say researchers at Columbia University** ,
increasing the reach and power of storm surges.

Storm surges already present the biggest danger to human communities whenever
a hurricane hits. During Hurricane Katrina in 2005, storm surges of 10 to 28
feet destroyed buildings in Louisiana and Mississippi, flooded parts of New
Orleans, and killed (directly or indirectly) around 1,200 people. In 2012,
**9-foot storm surges** caused by **Hurricane Sandy** flooded parts of New
York City's subway system and destroyed homes along the New Jersey coast. As
sea level rises, dangerous storm surges will become more frequent and
powerful.

The strength of any given storm can't currently be directly linked to climate
change. But as sea level rises, bigger floods will become more frequent.

### Changing Coastlines

![The grasses and animals living in marshes help to filter water and stabilize

shorelines, along with providing habitat for a variety of mammals, fish,

shellfish and amphibians and a haven for migratory waterfowl.

](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/wetlands1.jpg?itok=vP6ndo98)The
grasses and animals living in marshes help to filter water and stabilize
shorelines, along with providing habitat for a variety of mammals, fish,
shellfish and amphibians and a haven for migratory waterfowl. (Eve Cundiff,
Flickr)

Sea level rise will reshape coastlines as incoming water floods dry areas and
erodes coastal features like beaches, cliffs and dunes. **This already occurs
during big storms like Hurricanes Katrina and Isaac** , and encroaching sea
level will cause more drastic changes. As waves reach further inland, they can
inundate wetlands and kill the marsh grass that holds the sediment in place.
Without grass as an anchor, sediment and mud can be pulled to sea or pushed
further inland. **Saltwater marshes are actually quite resilient** and capable
of moving up and inland when threatened by sea level rise if they are given
the space. But many coasts have physical barriers that would impede this
adaptation.

The effects on sandy beaches will depend on how they are developed. **Sandy
beaches constantly change** as waves, currents and tides carry sand and
sediment to and from the shore. When sea level rises on an undeveloped beach,
natural processes push the beachfront towards the land. However, there are
many homes and businesses behind the beach that will prevent the beach from
moving inland. **According to California Sea Grant** , nearly 60 percent of
California’s sandy shoreline is not able to migrate landward because it is
bordered by man-made structures. Additionally, seawalls and other offshore
structures may **interfere with the natural systems** that manage beach
erosion. **Barrier islands** —small islands made of sand that run parallel to
the coast and act as barriers for the coast during storms and surges—will also
be impacted by sea level rise.

### Saltwater Intrusion

Sea level rise is not just a problem of water, it is also a problem of salt.
Imagine if salt water flooded a farmer's field, or a coastal forest. Not only
does the area have to survive flooding, but also a drenching in salt water
that can kill plants and irreversibly alter soil chemistry. Saltwater flooding
can mean death for these ecosystems. Already scientists have seen stands of "
**ghost forests** " where once-healthy trees were killed by saltwater
flooding, and farmers' fields are being converted to tidal marsh and salt
flats.

This isn't just an effect of flooding. Salty ocean water can also flow
underground into groundwater reservoirs, which are used for drinking water. It
can also flow into the water table below the surface of the land, making the
soil **too salty for trees and plants to grow**. This is called saltwater
intrusion. Saltwater intrusion can also affect estuaries and freshwater areas
that fisheries and coastal communities rely upon.

The challenge will be human adaptation to these kinds of changes. This is
particularly difficult when the saltwater intrusion affects drinking water
supplies. Saltwater intrusion has long been an issue in managing coastal
aquifers that hold freshwater. If the land surrounding an aquifer pokes out
abutting the ocean, the freshwater will typically stop the saltwater from
intruding due to its relatively higher elevation. But saltwater can slowly
seep in over time and contaminate freshwater when that elevation (and pressure
from above) changes. This pressure change happens when freshwater is extracted
from the ground. Climate change will **increase the occurrence of droughts** ,
and instances of saltwater intrusion will occur more often as storm surges and
floods deposit saltwater onto land, and more **freshwater is removed from
aquifers**.

### There's No Place Like Home

![An adult leatherback turtle makes its way back to shore from the ocean.

](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/leatherback-

turtle.jpg?itok=ZQYoe6fF) An adult leatherback turtle makes its way back to
shore from the ocean. (Brian Skerry)

Not only humans, but other animals that rely on low-lying habitats will be
impacted by sea level rise. Many birds use coasts and coastal ecosystems for
breeding, laying eggs, finding food, or simply as a place to live. Sea turtles
lay their eggs on beaches, returning to the same location every year. When
beaches erode, or are covered by rising seas their options become more and
more limited. Physical barriers that humans are considering to stop the rising
seas, like sea walls, completely **impede the turtles from coming ashore** to
build nests and lay eggs.

Species that are only found on islands are especially vulnerable, as their
range is limited and they tend to already be vulnerable to extinction. With
sea level rise animals like **seabirds may not be able to react quickly
enough** to changes and their only homes may be inundated.

Saltwater intrusion will mean that coastal plant and tree species that can’t
handle salt water may die off, and a change in species biodiversity may occur.
Along New York's Long Island Sound, for example, **tidal marsh plants have
moved into previously forested areas** flooded by rising sea level. This is
natural ecological adaptation, wherein organisms that are better suited to
regular saltwater flooding can now thrive in the area. Over time, a diverse
and healthy marsh ecosystem may develop in its place.

## Regional Case Studies

Below are some examples of places already facing the consequences of rapid sea
level change to demonstrate how it varies around the world.

### Florida and the U.S. Gulf Coast

![Flooding in Florida from a "King

tide."](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/23175397142_f4212108c1_k.jpg?itok=COjspVp2)Flooding
in Florida from a "King tide." (Florida Sea Grant)

A few times a year, when the pull of the sun and the moon align to join
forces, **coasts are hit with extra-high tides called King Tides**. While King
Tides are normal, their recent impacts are not. Thanks to sea level rise, King
Tides reach higher and further inland now than they did 20 years ago,
**causing flooding in Miami and along Florida's coast**. To some, **it's a
preview** of how sea level rise will cause more frequent and higher flooding
on coastlines around the world. It's also a staging ground for **how to
protect against rising seas** ; already, **new pumps** are restraining the
ever-higher King Tides—for now.

Not only King Tides, but **everyday tides are also already causing nuisance
flooding**. Climate Central calculated that “roughly three-quarters of the
tidal flood days now occurring in towns along the East Coast would not be
happening in the absence of the rise in the sea level caused by human
emissions.” (See “Storms and Flooding” below.)

Florida is the U.S. state facing the gravest consequences from sea level rise.
According to NASA, **three feet of water will ultimately inundate land along
Florida's coast** based only on the warming humans have caused so far.

Sea level is threatening Florida more profoundly than elsewhere for two main
reasons. First, its elevation is very low; like many areas along the U.S. Gulf
Coast, much of the land sits within a few feet of high tide, ensuring that a
small change in sea level is noticeable. The second is that Florida sits on a
bed of limestone, which is a very porous kind of rock. Saltwater readily
infiltrates and erodes the limestone, driving flooding. Seawater is also
likely to **push its way into freshwater systems and drinking water
reservoirs** in these areas.

### Island Nations

![Cabinet ministers from the Maldives sign a declaration to fight climate

change –

underwater!](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/Reuters_Maldives1-754959_full_1.jpg?itok=Yl0BGAA3)
Cabinet ministers from the Maldives sign a declaration to fight climate change
– underwater! (Reuters)

Small island nations, including the **Maldives** , **Kiribati** and **Tuvalu**
, are already grappling with the effects of sea level rise. The "52 [small
island] nations, home to over 62 million people, emit less than one per cent
of global greenhouse gases, yet they suffer disproportionately from the
climate change that global emissions cause," says Achim Steiner, executive
director of the United Nations Environment Programme.

The people of each island nation face their own unique challenges, but some
common themes emerge. As sea level rises, they face increased flooding and
erosion of their shorelines, and sources of fresh water and agricultural land
become unusable when seawater seeps in.

The Maldives is the lowest country on the planet. The average height of its
1,200 islands, which spread across 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) in the
Indian Ocean, is only four feet (1.2 meters) above sea level. Already, ever-
higher waves encroaching on the shores of the lowest islands erode beaches and
there is nowhere for residents to retreat to when a tropical cyclone or a
tsunami wave approaches. Residents have even been forced to move as the
**world's first climate change refugees**.

Some strategies may buy some time—at least for some islands. Islands can rise
as **coral reefs grow upward** and sand is added to beaches. Dikes and
seawalls can hold the ocean back. But ultimately, many people will abandon
their lifestyles and livelihoods on **threatened islands as encroaching waves
force them to move elsewhere**.

![This image is a helper image for making the video

responsive.](/themes/custom/a_clean_ocean/images/16x9.png)

LYON 1961

### Alaska

![The Portage Glacier near Anchorage, Alaska has retreated so much that it is
no longer visible from the visitor center built for its viewing in 1986.

](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/9621148051_a5e850dd36_k.jpg?itok=fJrWH_AJ)The
Portage Glacier near Anchorage, Alaska has retreated so much that it is no
longer visible from the visitor center built for its viewing in 1986. (U.S.
EPA)

Alaska is a perfect demonstration of variation in regional sea level change:
in some places, sea level is rising, and in others it is falling. Along the
southern coast of Alaska, the **land is rising two-to-four-times faster than
the sea** thanks to the region's geology (featuring a collision of tectonic
plates and glacial rebound, both causing the land to rise). But along the
Bering Sea and the Arctic Ocean, other impacts from climate change are already
affecting Alaskan communities in the form of increased storm surges, thawing
permafrost, saltwater intrusion and coastal erosion. Furthermore, sea ice is
now less protective of the coast because so much of it has melted. The result
is that storms are stronger, flooding is more frequent, and coastlines are
eroding along parts of Alaska's coast.

After enduring flooding and erosion, so far six Alaskan communities have
**voted to resettle elsewhere** and **160 others are threatened** , according
to the Army Corps of Engineers. However, these towns don't yet have a place to
land. These are just the first of millions of climate change refugees expected
to see their homes go underwater in the next century.

### River Deltas

![A sediment plume from the mouth of the Mississippi River into the Gulf.

](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/mississippi_sed_lrg.jpg?itok=1z5tC2pJ)
A sediment plume snakes from the mouth of the Mississippi River. The brown
water of the Mississippi mixes into the blue water of the Gulf of Mexico.
(Liam Gumley, Space Science and Engineering Center, University of Wisconsin-
Madison and the MODIS science team)

Areas where big rivers flow into the sea are particularly susceptible to sea
level rise. These are low-lying areas to begin with, and their landforms are
constantly in flux from water flow and sediment carried from land.
Additionally, because of their historical importance as ports and locations
near cities, governments have built a great deal of infrastructure around
these deltas to keep them stable. Ironically, this could be their downfall. In
attempting to preserve the current state of deltas, seawalls and other
structures may prevent natural processes that would help them adapt to rising
sea level.

Additionally, millions of people rely on the fertile farmland near river
deltas for food and livelihood. Flooding as sea level rises could displace
millions of people and lead to food shortages. For example, **it's estimated**
that sea level rise of less than two feet (0.6 meters) will affect 3.8 million
people that rely on food from the Nile River delta, and sea level rise of five
feet (1.5 meters) will flood out around **17 million people in Bangladesh**.

## Future Sea Level & Adaptation

Predicting future sea level rise is a difficult task because scientists don't
know how quickly the planet will respond to the warming climate.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is the international United
Nations group tasked with summarizing climate change research every few years.
**Their 2013 report** projected that sea level will rise by 2 to 3 feet by
2100 if we do not slow our carbon dioxide emissions by using less energy or
using renewable energy. That is enough to threaten coastal cities and flood
island nations. Even if we reduce our emissions, the report predicts that by
2100 sea level will rise by 1-2 feet, which is enough to cause much coastal
flooding and erosion. Some scientists consider these estimates to be
conservative, and expect greater sea level rise. The **U.S. National Climate
Assessment** , for example, estimates that sea level will rise between 2 and 6
feet by 2100.

Sea level rise is a reality we will have to face. What can we do to minimize
the damage and prepare for what comes?

### Reducing Emissions

![Burning fossil fuels, such as coal, oil and natural gas, spews almost 7

billion metric tons of carbon dioxide

annually.](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/iStock_000008562349Small_power_plant_1.jpg?itok=uQ5zeft7)Burning
fossil fuels, such as coal, oil and natural gas, spews almost 7 billion metric
tons of carbon dioxide annually. (iStock)

The best way to minimize future sea level rise is to cut our fossil fuel use
and reduce carbon emissions. Even though **some sea level rise is inevitable**
, we have time to reduce how much will occur. There is **some debate** , but
according to one study every 1°C of warming will cause sea level to rise by
about 2.3 meters. So the sooner we can slow our warming trend, the easier it
will be for future generations to adapt.

### Holding Back the Sea

![Sea walls must be maintained consistently and will need to be built higher

and higher as sea level rises. This type of man-made barrier also has

implications for the natural

coastline.](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/14074810550_3850eee95c_k.jpg?itok=yrYX91EH)
Sea walls must be maintained consistently and will need to be built higher and
higher as sea level rises. This type of man-made barrier also has implications
for the natural coastline. (Falcon Photography, Flickr)

Can walls hold the water back? Some seem to think so, at least in the short-
term. Coastal barriers have been used for thousands of years, dating as far
back as the ancient Roman Empire. Whether to make man-made harbors for
shipping needs or simple walls in order to stop erosion, humans have attempted
to engineer coastlines for a long time.

The response to sea level rise is no different, and many communities plan to
build barriers in order to protect homes and cities from the rising tide. With
the predicted increase in storms (both their intensity and frequency) physical
walls can act to reduce flooding that is extremely costly— **more costly than
building the walls themselves** one study says. This type of adaptation will
likely increase as the costs of not building walls becomes more apparent over
time. Building barriers won’t reduce sea level rise or even completely remove
the impacts, **but could greatly reduce costs and buy coastal residents some
more time**.

Sea walls aren’t a one-and-done fix, however. They must be maintained
consistently, as waves and salt quickly erode concrete, and as sea level rises
they will need to be built higher and higher. This type of man-made barrier
also has implications for the natural coastline. They can render sandy beaches
useless for both humans and the animals that call it home—causing erosion and
disrupting the natural movement of sand and waves.

Some countries, like the Netherlands, have been dealing with these types of
water issues for centuries. The **Dutch have found success at adapting to
changing sea levels** by using involved water management systems, encouraging
the use of floating homes and generally incorporating adaptations into city
planning. New plans involve **“Room for the River,” which involve adaptations
that allow for flooding** , rather then simply trying to stop the water with
dams and dikes.

### Moving Inland

Sea level has changed and coastlines shifted throughout human history, and
people adapted by moving somewhere else. Some people use this history of human
adaptation as an excuse to avoid thinking about or acting on climate change
and sea level rise.

In one sense, they're right: People have always adapted. The difference this
time around, however, is that our coastlines are lined with the homes of
millions of people, and the cities, power plants and ports they rely upon.
This time around, it won't be easy to pick up and move inland without massive
effort and reconstruction. **Concerns over property values** and **rising
insurance rates** (or the unavailability of any insurance) are already ever
present as flooding events occur more often and in areas that haven’t had
flooding historically.

Over the next century, people will be forced to abandon their homes along the
coasts as higher tides and increased flooding make life difficult. Many
cities, states and countries are already incorporating sea level rise and
shifting coastlines into their planning and policy documents. Not only people,
but animals will have to move and adapt. Scientists are already working to
help **Laysan albatrosses establish colonies on higher ground**.

## Additional Resources

NASA Climate page  
NASA - Visualization of regional patterns of sea level change  
Surging Seas - Climate Central  
NASA Images of Change  
NASA Climate Time Machine  
Tide gauge history  
Fifth Assessment Report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

_News Articles_ :  
Rising Waters: How Fast and How Far Will Sea Levels Rise?  
Rising Sea Level Will Slow Earth's Rotation  
3.2 Millimeters: A Troubling Rise in Sea Level  
Pacific Islands Take Steps to Counter Rising Sea Levels

_Scientific Papers_ :  
Links between climate and sea levels for the past three million years - Kurt
Lambeck, Tezer M. Esat and Emma-Kate Potter  
Sea-Level Rise from the Late 19th to the Early 21st Century – John Church and
Neil White  
Temperature-driven global sea-level variability in the Common Era – Robert
Kopp, Andrew Kemp, et al.  
Probabilistic reanalysis of twentieth-century sea-level rise – Carling C. Hay,
Eric Morrow, Robert E. Kopp and Jerry X. Mitrovica  
The multimillennial sea-level commitment of global warming – Anders Levermann,
Peter U. Clark, et al.

Topics: **Ancient Seas** **Temperature & Chemistry** **Ice** **Climate
Change** **The Anthropocene**

Tags: **Sea level** **Glaciers** **Climate Change** **Ice**

April 2018

## Smithsonian Institution

Smithsonian Ocean

Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Flickr Follow us on
Tumbr

Contact Us

### Explore

                
                                      * Ocean Life
                      * Ecosystems
                      * Planet Ocean
                      * Through Time
                      * Conservation
                      * Human Connections
                      * At The Museum
                      * About
                      * Media Archive
                      * Terms of Use
                      * Privacy
                

### Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History

Donate

                
                                      * Ocean Life
                        * Marine Mammals
                        * Sharks & Rays
                        * Reptiles
                        * Seabirds
                        * Fish
                        * Invertebrates
                        * Plankton
                        * Plants & Algae
                      * Ecosystems
                        * Coral Reefs
                        * Deep Sea
                        * Coasts & Shallow Water
                        * Poles
                        * Census of Marine Life
                      * Planet Ocean
                        * Tides & Currents
                        * Waves, Storms & Tsunamis
                        * The Seafloor
                        * Temperature & Chemistry
                      * Through Time
                        * Ancient Seas
                        * Extinctions
                        * Evolution
                        * The Anthropocene
                      * Conservation
                        * Fishing
                        * Pollution
                        * Habitat Destruction
                        * Invasive Species
                        * Acidification
                        * Climate Change
                        * Gulf Oil Spill
                        * Solutions & Success Stories
                        * Get Involved
                      * Human Connections
                        * Books, Film & The Arts
                        * Recreation
                        * Seafood
                        * Exploration
                        * History & Cultures
                        * Careers
                      * At The Museum
                      * Educators
                

#### Search Smithsonian Ocean

Cancel

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

