  
  
_Ocean on-pagers: Do we know enough of Oceans?_ **How the oceans influence
climate**

* * *

> **The oceans influence climate over long and short time-scales.** On the
longest time-scale of geologic time, the shape and location of the continents
helps to determine the oceans' circulation patterns. Since continental plates
drift at about 5 cm per year and mountain ranges rise by about 1 mm, it
usually takes millions of years for new land formations to change the oceans.
Patterns of ocean circulation and up-welling can also change much more
rapidly, resulting in climate variations and fluctuations on a human time-
scale. Records of global and, in particular, regional climate show periods
lasting from years to centuries during which the climate was systematically
different from earlier and later periods. Scientists believe that this
behaviour is related to changes in the way the oceans store and transport
heat, although the precise causes of these changes are not always clear.

>

> **The oceans and the atmosphere are tightly linked and together form the
most dynamic component of the climate system.** Changes in external factors
such the sun's energy, the distribution of various plant species, or the
emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere can alter the temperature and
circulation patterns of the atmosphere-ocean system. Because the atmosphere
and oceans are turbulent, they can also generate their own internal
fluctuations. Short-term fluctuations in wind or temperature (that is,
weather) can directly influence the currents and temperature of the underlying
ocean, while oceanic fluctuations can magnify, diminish, or modify atmospheric
fluctuations.

>

> **The oceans play a critical role in storing heat** and carbon). When the
earth's surface cools or is heated by the sun, the temperature change is
greater - and faster - over the land than over the oceans. Because it is a
fluid, the ocean diffuses the effects of a temperature change for great
distances via vertical mixing and convective movements. The solid land cannot,
so the sun's heat penetrates only the thin, upper crust. One consequence of
the ocean's ability to absorb more heat is that when an area of ocean becomes
warmer or cooler than usual, it takes much longer for that area to revert to
"normal" than it would for a land area. This also explains why "maritime"
climates tend to be less extreme than "continental" ones, with smaller day-
night and winter-summer differences.

>

> **The ocean's waters are constantly being moved about by powerful
currents.** Surface currents are largely wind-driven, although the rotation of
the earth, the presence of continents, and the oceans' internal dynamics also
have a strong influence. Deep-ocean flow (and, to a lesser extent, surface
flow) is driven by density differences produced by heating and cooling and by
precipitation and evaporation (cool saline water is denser than warm fresh-
water). The behaviour of the atmosphere strongly affects these density
differences. For example, clouds can cool the sea by blocking the warming rays
of the sun or reduce surface salinity by bringing rain. The wind can influence
evaporation rates by blowing more strongly or more weakly.

>

> **These currents influence the climate by transporting heat.** Horizontal
currents, particularly those moving north or south, can carry warmed or cooled
water as far as several thousand kilometres. The displaced water can then warm
or cool the air and, indirectly, the land over which this air blows. For
example, water from the tropical and subtropical Atlantic (including some from
the Gulf of Mexico) moves north through the Atlantic in a current popularly
(if misleadingly) called the "Gulf Stream". There it bathes the shores of
Western Europe, producing a climate that is surprisingly mild for that
latitude. In addition to currents, up-wellings of cold water in places where
the wind blows surface water away can also affect climate. Thus San Francisco,
influenced by coastal up-welling, is hardly warmer than Dublin, which is
influenced by the Gulf Stream, despite being over 1,600 km further south.

>

> **Currents involved in "deep-water formation" are particularly important for
climate.** In winter, surface cooling causes water to become more dense.
(While fresh-water that is cooled starts to expand at temperatures below 4 C,
salt-water continues to compress all the way down to its freezing point of -2
C.) In areas where evaporation exceeds precipitation, the resulting rise in
salinity also increases density. When the surface water becomes denser than
the underlying water, "convective overturning" occurs and the dense surface
water mixes downwards. In certain places this downward mixing can occasionally
extend all the way to the bottom, even in deep oceans. The dense, deep water
thus formed spreads out over the whole ocean. As a result, when downward
mixing takes place at high latitudes it creates a circulation pattern in which
warm water from tropical and subtropical regions moves poleward, surrenders
heat to the atmosphere, cools and sinks, and flows back towards the equator.
The net result is a transport of heat poleward.

>

> **An apparently small change in just one aspect of the ocean's behaviour can
produce major climate variations over large areas of the earth.** The areas of
cold-water formation are one known example of this possibly wide-spread
phenomenon. Although more research is needed, there is some agreement among
oceanographers that, for the entire area north of 30 N latitude, the ocean's
poleward transport of heat is the equivalent of about 15 watts per square
metre of the earth's surface (W/m2). This can be compared with some 200 W/m2
from direct sunshine, and about 6 W/m2 for what climate change models predict
will happen if the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide doubles. Recent
observations, ocean core records, and some modelling results indicate that
North Atlantic deep-water formation and its associated ocean heat flow
fluctuate substantially over time-scales ranging from years to millennia. The
system is vulnerable because even a relatively small decrease in surface
salinity prevents water - no matter how cold it is - from sinking. This could
occur if there is a flood of fresh-water run-off from the Arctic due to global
warming.

>

> * * *

>

> Source: Climate Change Factsheets of Information Unit on Climate Change
(IUCC)-UNEP, 1993

* * *

* * *

![ ](ocn-return.gif) | Return to **Oceans**  
Comments and suggestions to - oceans@gdrc.org  
---|--- _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200 _[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_ [2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200 _[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]: circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]: Financial Times_ [*]: required
  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

