

﻿

Log In / Join

Hi,

Log Out

![What to Expect Logo](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/redesign/wte-new-

logo.svg) Search

  * ![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/mobile-profile-icon-new.svg) Log In / Join 

  * Getting Pregnant 

    * Fertility 
    * Ovulation 
    * Preparing for Pregnancy 
  * Pregnancy 

    * Week By Week 
    * Symptoms 
    * Baby Names 
    * Baby Shower 
    * Complications 
    * Due Date Calculator 
    * Labor & Delivery 
    * Screenings & Tests 
    * Signs of Labor 
  * First Year 

    * Month By Month 
    * Milestones 
    * Breastfeeding 
    * Postpartum Health 
    * Childproofing 
    * Newborn 
    * Vaccinations 
  * Toddler 

    * Month By Month 
    * Milestones 
    * Child Care 
    * Feeding 
    * Growth 
    * Potty Training 
    * Sleep 
    * Vaccinations 
  * Family 

    * Finances 
    * Celebrity Parents 
    * Kids' Health 
    * Relationships 
  * Baby Products 

    * Strollers 
    * Maternity 
    * Car Seats 
    * Monitors 
    * Baby Carrier 
    * Baby Furniture 
    * Nursing & Feeding 
  * Registry 

  * Community 

    * Featured & Popular 
    * Birth Month Groups 
    * Getting Pregnant 
    * Pregnancy 
    * First Year 
    * Family 
    * Health 
    * Stages 
    * International 
    * US Local 
    * All Groups A-Z 
  * News 

Pregnancy > Fetal Health

# Fetal Heartbeat: The Development of Baby's Circulatory System

![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/WTE-editors-

Image-300x300.jpg?width=75)

by What to Expect Editors

![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/gray-tick.png) Reviewed
April 18, 2019

![fetal circulatory system](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/fetal-

heartbeat-development-722x406.jpg?width=574)

Getty Images

That telltale thump of a baby-to-be’s heart is one of the most exciting sounds
expecting parents can hear. Here, all you need to know about how your baby
grows this essential system.

Since you found out you were pregnant, one of the first milestones you've
likely eagerly been awaiting is hearing the thump, thump of your baby's
heartbeat. It's one of the most reassuring sounds there is. And though it
probably will sound the same to you from checkup to checkup, there are big
changes happening to the heart and circulatory system every week!

## When your baby's heart begins developing

Even though at 4 weeks pregnant that sweet, sweet heartbeat hasn't yet
arrived, a distinct blood vessel has formed inside your embryo, which will
soon develop into your baby's heart and circulatory (blood) system. In the
early stages, the heart resembles a tube that twists and divides, eventually
forming the heart and valves (which open and close to release blood from the
heart to the body). In fact, by week 5, the heart tube begins to beat
spontaneously, though you can't hear it. During those first few weeks,
precursor blood vessels also begin to form in the embryo.

## When you'll hear baby's heartbeat for the first time

By 6 weeks, your baby's heart -- now beating 110 times a minute -- has four
hollow chambers, each with an entrance and an exit to allow blood to flow in
and out of each chamber. In just two more weeks, that number will rise to
150-170 beats a minute _._ That 's about twice as fast as yours!

With all of this growth, the chances are strong that you'll be able to hear
your baby's heartbeat for the very first time around week 9 or week 10 of
pregnancy. It will be about 170 beats per minutes by this time, a rate that
will slow from here on out. Your doctor or midwife will place a handheld
ultrasound device called a Doppler on your belly to amplify the telltale
sound.

More on Fetal Development

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby's Nervous System and Brain

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby’s Bones and Skeletal System

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby's Hair, Skin & Nails

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Fetal Development: Baby’s Digestive System

Fetal Development: Baby's Nervous System and Brain

Fetal Development: Baby’s Bones and Skeletal System

Fetal Development: Baby's Hair, Skin & Nails

Fetal Development: Baby’s Digestive System

Can't hear it yet? Don't worry. It just means that your shy guy or gal is
hiding in the corner of your uterus or has his or her back facing out, making
it hard for the Doppler to find its target. In a few weeks (or at your next
visit), the miraculous sound of your baby's heartbeat is certain to be audible
for your listening pleasure. And your practitioner will check to make sure
everything is okay, so feel free to ask any questions if you're concerned.

## Ultrasound & congenital heart defects

Sometime between 6 weeks and 9 weeks of pregnancy, your practitioner (and/or a
trained sonographer) will perform your first trimester ultrasound. It will not
only confirm your pregnancy and estimated due date (along with how many babies
you're carrying and the placement of the fetus) but also check that the heart
is beating.

During your second trimester ultrasound, or 20-week anatomy scan, your doctor
will check the structure of baby's heart and whether any problems (known as
congenital heart defects) can be detected. About 36,000 babies (or 9 of every
1,000 infants) are born every year with a congenital heart defect, making this
the most common type of major birth disorder. Although there is no medicine
that can cure a heart defect in utero, and some defects can't be detected
until after birth, a diagnosis during pregnancy helps doctors decide where to
deliver your baby (usually in a large medical center, where pediatric cardiac
care is available immediately after birth). Sometimes the issue needs to be
handled with surgery right after birth, while other defects may need to be
fixed at an older age or treated with medications. If your practitioner
detects a fetal heart rhythm problem, she may prescribe medication to decrease
the odds that your baby will be born early.

The good news is that the majority of congenital heart defects can be repaired
and managed if detected early and treated promptly. Kids with congenital heart
disease need to visit a cardiologist periodically throughout childhood and
their adult lives.

## You can hear baby's heartbeat with a stethoscope!

Exciting circulatory developments continue at 12 weeks, when baby-to-be's bone
marrow begins busily producing blood cells. By 17 weeks, the fetal brain
begins to regulate the heartbeat in preparation for supporting baby in the
outside world. (Up until this point, the heart has been beating
spontaneously.) In three more weeks, by around week 20, you can hear your
baby's heartbeat with a stethoscope.

If your doc needs a better listen (and a view), she may recommend that you get
a fetal echocardiogram, a special ultrasound that evaluates the fetal heart,
between 18 and 24 weeks. (If you have a family history of congenital heart
defects, or if you personally have diabetes, phenylketonuria or autoimmune
disease, make sure you get one.)

By now, baby's heart is beating at about 140 beats per minute. By the close of
week 25, capillaries (the smallest blood vessels) are forming and filling with
blood. Capillaries move oxygenated blood via the heart's arteries to tissues
throughout baby's body and then feed deoxygenated blood back to the lungs -
making these teeny-tiny blood vessels a central component of the circulatory
system.

## Baby's heart at birth

Baby's circulatory system will continue to slowly and steadily grow, so that
by 40 weeks it's ready for its debut outside the womb.

While the fetal circulatory system develops rapidly throughout pregnancy, it
actually functions quite differently in utero than it does once baby is born.
Before birth, baby's lungs aren't yet functioning, since baby doesn't breathe
in utero. Until your baby is born and takes those first independent breaths,
her developing circulatory system relies on the umbilical cord for a steady
supply of oxygen- and nutrient-rich blood. Umbilical arteries and veins
transport what baby needs from you to her, then carry unoxygenated blood and
waste products back to you for removal.

A few other differences: The fetal heart has three shunts -- or shortcuts --
that direct blood away from the lungs (since they simply aren't needed in
utero) and the liver. Just like you, your baby has a pulmonary artery
(bringing blood from the heart to the lungs) and aorta (bringing blood from
the heart to the body). However these are connected by another blood vessel
(the ductus arteriosus), which also serves to shunt blood away from the lungs
in utero. Finally, your little one has a for-the-womb-only opening between the
upper chambers of the heart (a patent foramen ovale), which again shunts blood
away from the lungs.

Once baby is born, all of these fetal differences go away completely (or start
to go away). When the umbilical cord is cut, baby's lungs take in air, the
fetal circulation system is switched off, the shunts begin to close. And all
systems are go for baby.

## How to keep baby's heart healthy

A lot is developing and changing when your baby's in the womb. While certain
things are out of your control that can impact the development of your baby's
heart -- like genetic abnormalities -- there are steps you can take to help
ensure your baby's ticker is as healthy as possible:

  * Taking folic acid before and during pregnancy appears to help prevent congenital heart disease in babies.
  * If you are a smoker, quit ASAP: Researchers estimate that maternal smoking during the first trimester may account for up to 2 percent of all heart defects.
  * If you have type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes, keep your blood sugar under control during pregnancy, since diabetes is associated with an increased risk of heart defects.
  * Don't take Accutane (for acne), which can also cause fetal heart defects.
  * Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs.

Even if you take every precaution and do everything your practitioner
recommends, your baby may still be born with a congenital heart defect. This
is _not_ your fault. There are many factors -- most out of your control --
that can cause heart defects, and doctors are just starting to learn what some
of them are. The good news is, with early detection, your baby can get the
treatment she needs to increase the odds that she'll live a long, healthy
life.

From the What to Expect editorial team and Heidi Murkoff, author of What to
Expect When You're Expecting. Health information on this site is based on
peer-reviewed medical journals and highly respected health organizations and
institutions including ACOG (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists), CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and AAP
(American Academy of Pediatrics), as well as the What to Expect books by Heidi
Murkoff.

View Sources

>   * _What to Expect When You're Expecting_ , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff and
Sharon Mazel.

>

>   * WhatToExpect.com, 4 Weeks Pregnant.

>

>   * WhatToExpect.com, First Year Congenital Heart Defects, January 2019.

>

>   * WhatToExpect.com, Ask Heidi: Tips for Quitting Smoking When You're
Trying to Get Pregnant, May 2017.

>

>   * WhatToExpect.com, Gestational Diabetes During Pregnancy, March 2019.

>

>   * PeerJ, What is the "normal" fetal heart rate? June 2013.

>

>   * Mayo Clinic, Fetal Ultrasound.

>

>   * Johns Hopkins Medicine, Fetal Heart Monitoring, 2019.

>

>   * _Anatomy and Physiology II_ , Development of Blood Vessels and Fetal
Circulation.

>

>   * Standford Children's Health, Fetal Circulation, 2019.

>

>   * Cleveland Clinic, Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO), January 2019.

>

>   * Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Folic Acid, April 2018.

>

>   * National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine,
Isotretinoin, March 2019.

>

>

Related Topics

Fetal Health

Pregnancy

Pregnancy Groups

### Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Week

1

Week

2

Week

3

Week

4

Week

5

Week

6

Week

7

Week

8

Week

9

Week

10

Week

11

Week

12

Week

13

Week

14

Week

15

Week

16

Week

17

Week

18

Week

19

Week

20

Week

21

Week

22

Week

23

Week

24

Week

25

Week

26

Week

27

Week

28

Week

29

Week

30

Week

31

Week

32

Week

33

Week

34

Week

35

Week

36

Week

37

Week

38

Week

39

Week

40

Week

41

Week

42

## ![](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-

placeholder.svg) Trending On What to Expect

  * Weirdest Pregnancy Symptoms

  * ![Moms Tell Us What the Few Days With Baby Are Really Like ](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Moms Tell Us What the Few Days With Baby Are Really Like

  *     * ### ⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled.

Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our
partners.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

  * ![Allergies During Pregnancy](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Allergies During Pregnancy

  * ![Can Pregnancy-Related Depression Be Prevented?](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Can Pregnancy-Related Depression Be Prevented?

  * ![Best Maternity Leggings](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### Best Maternity Leggings

  * ![8 Tricks for Getting Your Baby to Move in Utero](//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms//redesign/lazy-load-img-placeholder.svg)

### 8 Tricks for Getting Your Baby to Move in Utero

Follow Us On

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)
![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)
![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)
![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

Find advice, support, and good company (and some stuff just for fun).

* * *

  * What to Expect Apps
  * Popular Topics
  * About Us
  * Contact Us
  * Advertise With Us
  * About Heidi Murkoff
  * Accessibility

  * What to Expect Foundation

  * What to Expect Awards
  * What to Expect Bookstore
  * Advertising Policy
  * Help
  * AdChoices ![](https://c.evidon.com/pub/icong1.png)
  * Feedback

* * *

* * *

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our team of
experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical
information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed
What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This site complies with the HONcode
standard for trustworthy health information. This educational content is not
medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use
and privacy policy. © 2019 Everyday Health, Inc

A property of ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAD/ACwAAAAAAQABAAACADs=)

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=973422942732185&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

