

![Phys.org](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/logo-

header.png)

Topics

            
                            * Week's top
                * Latest news
                * Unread news
                * Subscribe
            

### Science X Account

__

__

Remember me

Sign In

Click here to sign in with or

Forget Password?

Not a member? **Sign up**

Learn more

            
                            * Nanotechnology
                * Physics
                * Earth
                * Astronomy & Space
                * Technology
                * Chemistry
                * Biology
                * Other Sciences
            
                *         * share this!
            
                * Share
            
                * Twit
            
                * Share
            
                * Email
            
                1. Home
                2. Technology
                3. Energy & Green Tech
            
                *         *         * * * *
            

December 11, 2006 feature

# Why a hydrogen economy doesn't make sense

, Phys.org

![Why a hydrogen economy doesn't make

sense](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2006/HydrogenChart.jpg)
This chart compares the useful transport energy requirements for a vehicle
powered from a hydrogen process (left) vs. electricity (right). Image Credit:
Ulf Bossel.

In a recent study, fuel cell expert Ulf Bossel explains that a hydrogen
economy is a wasteful economy. The large amount of energy required to isolate
hydrogen from natural compounds (water, natural gas, biomass), package the
light gas by compression or liquefaction, transfer the energy carrier to the
user, plus the energy lost when it is converted to useful electricity with
fuel cells, leaves around 25% for practical use — an unacceptable value to run
an economy in a sustainable future. Only niche applications like submarines
and spacecraft might use hydrogen.

“More energy is needed to isolate hydrogen from natural compounds than can
ever be recovered from its use,” Bossel explains to _PhysOrg.com_. “Therefore,
making the new chemical energy carrier form natural gas would not make sense,
as it would increase the gas consumption and the emission of CO 2. Instead,
the dwindling fossil fuel reserves must be replaced by energy from renewable
sources.”

While scientists from around the world have been piecing together the
technology, Bossel has taken a broader look at how realistic the use of
hydrogen for carrying energy would be. His overall energy analysis of a
hydrogen economy demonstrates that high energy losses inevitably resulting
from the laws of physics mean that a hydrogen economy will never make sense.

“The advantages of hydrogen praised by journalists (non-toxic, burns to water,
abundance of hydrogen in the Universe, etc.) are misleading, because the
production of hydrogen depends on the availability of energy and water, both
of which are increasingly rare and may become political issues, as much as oil
and natural gas are today,” says Bossel.

“There is a lot of money in the field now,” he continues. “I think that it was
a mistake to start with a ‘Presidential Initiative’ rather with a thorough
analysis like this one. Huge sums of money were committed too soon, and now
even good scientists prostitute themselves to obtain research money for their
students or laboratories—otherwise, they risk being fired. But the laws of
physics are eternal and cannot be changed with additional research, venture
capital or majority votes.”

Even though many scientists, including Bossel, predict that the technology to
establish a hydrogen economy is within reach, its implementation will never
make economic sense, Bossel argues.

“In the market place, hydrogen would have to compete with its own source of
energy, i.e. with ("green") electricity from the grid,” he says. “For this
reason, creating a new energy carrier is a no-win solution. We have to solve
an energy problem not an energy carrier problem."

**A wasteful process**

In his study, Bossel analyzes a variety of methods for synthesizing, storing
and delivering hydrogen, since no single method has yet proven superior. To
start, hydrogen is not naturally occurring, but must be synthesized.

“Ultimately, hydrogen has to be made from renewable electricity by
electrolysis of water in the beginning,” Bossel explains, “and then its energy
content is converted back to electricity with fuel cells when it’s recombined
with oxygen to water. Separating hydrogen from water by electrolysis requires
massive amounts of electrical energy and substantial amounts of water.”

Also, hydrogen is not a source of energy, but only a carrier of energy. As a
carrier, it plays a role similar to that of water in a hydraulic heating
system or electrons in a copper wire. When delivering hydrogen, whether by
truck or pipeline, the energy costs are several times that for established
energy carriers like natural gas or gasoline. Even the most efficient fuel
cells cannot recover these losses, Bossel found. For comparison, the "wind-to-
wheel" efficiency is at least three times greater for electric cars than for
hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.

Another headache is storage. When storing liquid hydrogen, some gas must be
allowed to evaporate for safety reasons—meaning that after two weeks, a car
would lose half of its fuel, even when not being driven. Also, Bossel found
that the output-input efficiency cannot be much above 30%, while advanced
batteries have a cycle efficiency of above 80%. In every situation, Bossel
found, the energy input outweighs the energy delivered by a factor of three to
four.

“About four renewable power plants have to be erected to deliver the output of
one plant to stationary or mobile consumers via hydrogen and fuel cells,” he
writes. “Three of these plants generate energy to cover the parasitic losses
of the hydrogen economy while only one of them is producing useful energy.”

This fact, he shows, cannot be changed with improvements in technology.
Rather, the one-quarter efficiency is based on necessary processes of a
hydrogen economy and the properties of hydrogen itself, e.g. its low density
and extremely low boiling point, which increase the energy cost of compression
or liquefaction and the investment costs of storage.

**The alternative: An electron economy**

Economically, the wasteful hydrogen process translates to electricity from
hydrogen and fuel cells costing at least four times as much as electricity
from the grid. In fact, electricity would be much more efficiently used if it
were sent directly to the appliances instead. If the original electricity
could be directly supplied by wires, as much as 90% could be used in
applications.

“The two key issues of a secure and sustainable energy future are harvesting
energy from renewable sources and finding the highest energy efficiency from
source to service,” he says. “Among these possibilities, biomethane [which is
already being used to fuel cars in some areas] is an important, but only
limited part of the energy equation. Electricity from renewable sources will
play the dominant role.”

To Bossel, this means focusing on the establishment of an efficient “electron
economy.” In an electron economy, most energy would be distributed with
highest efficiency by electricity and the shortest route in an existing
infrastructure could be taken. The efficiency of an electron economy is not
affected by any wasteful conversions from physical to chemical and from
chemical to physical energy. In contrast, a hydrogen economy is based on two
such conversions (electrolysis and fuel cells or hydrogen engines).

“An electron economy can offer the shortest, most efficient and most
economical way of transporting the sustainable ‘green’ energy to the
consumer,” he says. “With the exception of biomass and some solar or
geothermal heat, wind, water, solar, geothermal, heat from waste incineration,
etc. become available as electricity. Electricity could provide power for
cars, comfortable temperature in buildings, heat, light, communication, etc.

“In a sustainable energy future, electricity will become the prime energy
carrier. We now have to focus our research on electricity storage, electric
cars and the modernization of the existing electricity infrastructure.”

Citation: Bossel, Ulf. “Does a Hydrogen Economy Make Sense?” _Proceedings of
the IEEE_. Vol. 94, No. 10, October 2006.

_By Lisa Zyga, Copyright 2006 Physorg.com_

* * *

Explore further

Estimation of technology level required for low-cost renewable hydrogen
production

* * *

**Citation** : Why a hydrogen economy doesn't make sense (2006, December 11)
retrieved 6 June 2019 from https://phys.org/news/2006-12-hydrogen-economy-
doesnt.html

This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the
purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the
written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

15 shares

            
                            * Facebook
            
                * Twitter
            
                * Email
            

Feedback to editors

            
                            * Featured
                * Last Comments
                * Popular
            

#### Polarization-encryption based data storage in 3-D Janus plasmonic helical

nanoapertures

12 hours ago

0

#### Researchers find a way to produce free-standing films of perovskite

oxides

12 hours ago

0

#### Student gives possible explanation for female mating preferences that

decrease male survival chances

12 hours ago

0

#### Study shows penguins attract seabirds when they corral fish

Jun 05, 2019

0

#### Researchers discover bacterial diversity in Justinianic Plague

Jun 05, 2019

0

* * *

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Could climate change make Siberia habitable for humans?

2 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Planck finds no new evidence for cosmic anomalies

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Under the surface: Understanding the (ultra-small) structure of silicon

nanocrystals

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study confirms banded iron formations originated from oxidized iron

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Google's challenge to game consoles to kick off in November

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### The deep learning dive: how cells regulate division

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Argentine fossils take oak and beech family history far into Southern

Hemisphere

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Unusual Japanese plant inspires recalculation of equation used to model

leaf arrangement patterns

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Is sex primarily a strategy against transmissible cancer?

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Decoding Beethoven's music style using data science

7 hours ago

* * *

### Relevant PhysicsForums posts

#### Heat transfer between double window panes

Jun 05, 2019

#### What machinery can these parts be used in?

Jun 04, 2019

#### Vertical wind turbine with two concentric rotors

Jun 03, 2019

#### Holding on to your hat, I mean roof

Jun 01, 2019

#### Remarkable New Marine Propulsion Systems

May 30, 2019

#### Use of a Water-Cooled Diesel Generator as an Off-Grid CHP System

May 28, 2019

More from General Engineering

* * *

##

            
                            * ## Related Stories
            

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Estimation of technology level required for low-cost renewable hydrogen

production

Feb 01, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Hydrogen trains are coming – can they get rid of diesel for good?

Jan 30, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### A powerful catalyst for electrolysis of water that could help harness

renewable energy

Jan 28, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Proton transport 'highway' may pave way to better high-power batteries

Jan 28, 2019

##### Emissions targets for transport sector can't be met using natural gas

alone

Jan 28, 2019

##### Maximizing the potential of MXenes

Jan 31, 2019

            
                            * ## Recommended for you
            

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### China's quest for clean, limitless energy heats up

Apr 28, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Dutchman ends 'world's longest electric car trip' in Australia

Apr 07, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Global energy demand to soar one third by 2040: BP

Feb 14, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Scientists find way to help fuel cells work better, stay clean in the

cold

Jan 30, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Pushing lithium ion batteries to the next performance level

Dec 13, 2018

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Researchers achieve highest certified efficiency of organic solar cells

to date

Nov 27, 2018

## User comments

**EVangel**

Oct 20, 2007

Thanks from the electric vehicle community for this concise report debunking
the hydrogen hype now being used to avoid the inevitable mass production of
battery electric vehicles.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Biotele**

Dec 24, 2007

This article does not take into account hydrogen production from Aluminum.

Aluminum is not only a cheap, easy and safe method to produce hydrogen but
also acts as the storage medium.

You can make Hydrogen ON DEMAND from aluminum at home, right now, easily and
safely, by following these steps

www.instructables...NERATOR/

0

Report Block

* * *

**Szechuane**

Feb 14, 2008

This isnt the whole truth. The reason we will, and should, convert water into
hydrogen dispite the costs is that a battery powered car isnt capable of
riding 300 miles on one charge. Moreover, when it runs out it takes a while to
recharge those batteries.

Hydrogen doesnt have these problems. Next to the fact that a fuel cell is
better for the envoirement then any batterypack hydrogen is easier to refill
and with preassurising one can store much more energy on board of a vehicle
then batteries.  
Reforming methanol into hydrogen first even increases its efficiency to your
car from 22% for a standard engine to 37% for all processes needed to power
your car with hydrogen as its fuel. (This includes your fuel cel and engine
but leaves out transport.)

Batteries have better efficiency but hydrogen can increase preformance. I
personally think we will use hydrogen in the future but that we can still
argue about ;)

0

Report Block

* * *

**dswlim**

Jul 12, 2008

It is nice to hear a different perspective, but I agree that the story is not
the entire truth. Half truth at best.

Admittedly there are still many technological challenges ahead of the for the
"hydrogen" future, but the author fails to point out practically what is the
"electron" economy. What is the best way to store "electrons?" Despite its
great efficiency, battery has an array of its own problems. Its disposal issue
has improved appreciably in past decades, but it is still an pain, not to
mention other issues. Other "green" technologies attempting to store energy in
one form or the other are still in development and non-commercializable stage.

Everyone working in renewable energy pretty much knows that there is no mono-
technology future, but a multi-technology supported energy infrastructure in
the future. Hydrogen, regardless of where it comes from, provides a reasonable
approach to be part of the solution. Whatever the "electron" approach refers
to will also be part of this future, not the only solution.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Cyril**

Jul 27, 2008

You need to be extremely optimistic about future hydrogen breakhtroughs to
make long distance quick refill hydrogen transportation possible.

Hydrogen has such a low volumetric energy density that it simply cannot be a
practical solution to long distance travel. Refilling is also slow; hydrogen
needs to be compressed because liquefaction takes too much energy. But
compression takes time. You can't speed it up easily because hydrogen is very
dangerous, plus it embrittles conventional materials. So you need expensive
exotic materials. It's unlikely that this will ever be cheaper than simple
batteries.

With a similar amount of optimism on the EV side, we can expect ultra caps and
super high density nano batteries that go much further and recharge even
quicker than the optimistic hydrogen case.

Hydrogen is almost a total waste. Bossel is correct to think there are niche
applications, and also correct that it's impact on revolutionizing our energy
infrastructure is unlikely to be anything more than negligible.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Aeronomer**

Dec 10, 2008

Hey, up yours too. What an enlightened discussion. =-)

0

Report Block

* * *

**ElectronDonor**

Dec 17, 2008

50litres of H2O contains 50 _2/18 = 5.556Kg of H2.  
HHV hydrogen is 141.9MJ/Kg  
Therefore energy content of H2 from 50litres of H2O = 141.99MJ/Kg _ 5.556 Kg =
788Mj or 219KWh.  
A medium size/performance battery electric vehicle (BEV) needs about
250Wh/mile and achieves about 80% tank to wheel efficiency.  
A typical car travels about 10,000 miles per year.  
Therefore if all the energy contained in the hydrogen from 50 litres of water,
i.e. 219,000Wh could be utilised at the same efficiency as BEVs use it then,
at best this would give about 219,000/250 or approximately 880 miles range.  
A typical car travels about 10,000 miles per year and at best a H2 powered car
would be less than 50% tank to wheel efficient using fuel cells and far less
using internal combustion so range will be less than 500miles.

All I can say regarding Wooly's posting is that if "50 litres of water would
run a car for a year" he's either discovered some new laws of Physics, he
doesn't do very much driving (

0

Report Block

* * *

**ElectronDonor**

Dec 17, 2008

Cont'd: last para of previous posting should be:

All I can say regarding Wooly's posting is that if "50 litres of water would
run a car for a year" he's either discovered some new laws of Physics, he
doesn't do very much driving ( less than 5% of typical westerner) or he
doesn't really know what he is talking about, I'll leave the decision up to
the readers.

0

Report Block

* * *

**monosodiumg**

Feb 28, 2009

The above arguments for and against seem to focus on hydrogen as a fuel for
cars, as does the articles detail. However the article´s titular claim is that
a hydrogen economy does not make sense. There´s a big gap there between what
is claimed and what is demonstrated. Certainly hydrogen as a fuel for cars is
very doubtful for reasons others have explained however road transportation
accounts for only about 50% of oil use and oil provides only 40% of global
energy so there unsuitability of hydrogen as a road transport fuel deals only
with 20% of global energy use. Maritime transportation accounts for 3-6% of
global CO2 emmissions (depending on whose figures you use). The objections
cited for the road transport fuel cases do not apply to the maritime fuel
case. Volumetric and mass energy densities issues are insignificant issues
given the low ration of fuel volume and mass to cargo volume and mass. For the
same distance between refueling stops is also not an issue. Safety is easily
covered as there is already a well developed culture for handling dangerous
materials. A partial but significant chunk of infrastruture is effectively
already in place: major shipping ports often also have nearby refineries which
often have hydrogen production and handling capabilities. Hydrogen as a
maritime fuel could be an easy seed from which a wider hydrogen infratructure
suitable for energy generation could be developed. From my window I can see
bulk carriers refuelling to my left, a refinery and a dirty cool-fired
generator to my right and a continent with all the land and sunshine you could
want for hydrogen production just a few miles away across the water.

0

Report Block

* * *

**apocryphal_doom**

Mar 21, 2009

This article makes some very questionable assumptions in its analysis.

1) All of the energy used to electrolyze water must come from electricity
generated on the grid, and electrolysis is the way all hydrogen will be
produced.

False. The majority probably will, but chemicals like titanium dioxide reduce
that energy when exposed to sunlight, a technology which is being patented as
I type. Furthermore, electrolysis is not required for all methods of hydrogen
generation, though the remainder generate carbon dioxide. The article claims
Mr. Bossel evaluated many ways of producing hydrogen, but I don't see any
evidence of this in his other remarks. And last, hydrogen can be generated
with solar cells on site.

2) Hydrogen must be transported long distances in pipes to its destination
refuel station.

Hydrogen is being generated onsite by electrolysis in Iceland. The only things
we need to generate hydrogen are electricity, water, and possibly organic
compunds, all of which are easily shipped with today's infrastructure.

3) Hydrogen must be stored as a compressed gas or liquid.

This is the least likely method of easy hydrogen storage in the future,
although it's what we use today. Hydrogen will likely be stored bonded to
metals, carbon nanostructures, or ammonia borane, which is easy since it is
such a small atom that it takes almost no room in bonded form. The only
trouble is getting it to bond and unbond at will, but this is much closer
today than in the past. See http://www.rsc.or..._up.asp.

4) People will wait hours to recharge their pure electric car or external,
replaceable battery packs will become commonplace.

Yeah, and the world is flat. And if you believe that, I've got some magic
beans to sell you.

0

Report Block

* * *

**apocryphal_doom**

Mar 21, 2009

On the web link, it won't function unless you remove the period at the end.

0

Report Block

* * *

**apocryphal_doom**

Mar 21, 2009

Oh, never mond, it doesn't like it. Instead, go to fuelcellworks.com's fuel
cell news page, and find "Hydrogen storage steps up a gear." That will take
you to the page.

0

Report Block

* * *

Please sign in to add a comment. Registration is free, and takes less than a
minute. Read more

Sign in

Forgot Password  
Registration

##### What do you think about this particular story?

Your feedback will go directly to Science X editors.

Your message to the editors

Your email (only if you want to be contacted back)

Send Feedback

Thank you for taking your time to send in your valued opinion to Science X
editors.

You can be assured our editors closely monitor every feedback sent and will
take appropriate actions. Your opinions are important to us.

We do not guarantee individual replies due to extremely high volume of
correspondence.

###### E-mail the story

##### Why a hydrogen economy doesn't make sense

Your friend's email

Your email

I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more

Your name

###### Note

Your email address is used **only** to let the recipient know who sent the
email. Neither your address nor the recipient's address will be used for any
other purpose. The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message
and is not retained by Phys.org in any form.

Your message

Send

#### Newsletter sign up

Get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox. You can unsubscribe
at any time and we'll never share your details to third parties.

Subscribe

More information Privacy policy

![Medical

Xpress](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/MedicalXpress.svg)

### Medical Xpress

Medical Xpress covers all medical research advances and health news

![Tech

Xplore](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/techexploer.svg)

### Tech Xplore

Tech Xplore covers the latest engineering, electronics and technology advances

![ScienceX](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/ScienceX.svg)

### ScienceX

Science X Network offers the most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the
web

## Newsletters

Subscribe

Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow
you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox

## Follow us

            
                            *         *         *         *         * Top
                * Home
                * Search
                * Mobile version
                * Help
                * FAQ
                * About
                * Contact
                * Science X Account
                * Sponsored Account
                * Archive
                * News wire
                * Android app
                * iOS app
                * RSS feeds
                * Push notification
            

(C) Phys.org 2003 - 2019 powered by Science X Network

Privacy policy Terms of use

#### Your Privacy

This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our
services, and provide content from third parties. By using our site, you
acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy and Terms of
Use.

Ok More Information

#### E-mail newsletter

Subscribe

#### Follow us

            
                            *         *         *         * It appears that you are currently using **Ad Blocking software**. What are the consequences?  ×
            

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-5dNhPAnM9r0yY.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

