

Open main menu

![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Search

# Opinion

            
                            * Read in another language 
                * Watch this page 
                * Edit
            

For other uses, see Opinion (disambiguation).

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2c/SF_Chinatown_soapboxing_p1060705.jpg/220px-

SF_Chinatown_soapboxing_p1060705.jpg)

"Soapboxing" in Chinatown, San Francisco

An **opinion** is a judgment, viewpoint, or statement that is not conclusive.

## Contents

##

DefinitionEdit

A given opinion may deal with subjective matters in which there is no
conclusive finding, or it may deal with facts which are sought to be disputed
by the logical fallacy that one is entitled to their opinions.

Distinguishing fact from opinion is that facts are verifiable, i.e. can be
agreed to by the consensus of experts. An example is: "United States of
America was involved in the Vietnam War," versus "United States of America was
right to get involved in the Vietnam War". An opinion may be supported by
facts and principles, in which case it becomes an argument.

Different people may draw opposing conclusions (opinions) even if they agree
on the same set of facts. Opinions rarely change without new arguments being
presented. It can be reasoned that one opinion is better supported by the
facts than another, by analyzing the supporting arguments.[1]

In casual use, the term _opinion_ may be the result of a person's perspective,
understanding, particular feelings, beliefs, and desires. The term may also
refer to unsubstantiated information, in contrast to knowledge and fact.

Though not hard fact, collective opinions or professional opinions are defined
as meeting a higher standard to substantiate the opinion.

##

EpistemologyEdit

In economics, other social sciences and philosophy, analysis of social
phenomena based on one's own opinion(s) is referred to as normative analysis
(what _ought_ to be), as opposed to positive analysis, which is based on
scientific observation (what materially _is_ or is empirically demonstrable).

Historically, the distinction of demonstrated knowledge and opinion was
articulated by Ancient Greek philosophers. Today, Plato's analogy of the
divided line is a well-known illustration of the distinction between knowledge
and opinion, or knowledge and belief, in customary terminology of contemporary
philosophy. Opinions can be persuasive, but only the assertions they are based
on can be said to be true or false.

##

Collective and professional opinionsEdit

This section **possibly containsoriginal research**. Please improve it by
verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting
only of original research should be removed. _( December 2009)_ _(Learn how
and when to remove this template message)_

* * *

### Public opinionEdit

In contemporary usage, public opinion is the aggregate of individual attitudes
or beliefs held by a population (e.g., a city, state, or country), while
consumer opinion is the similar aggregate collected as part of marketing
research (e.g., opinions of users of a particular product or service).
Typically, because the process of gathering opinions from all individuals are
difficult, expensive, or impossible to obtain, public opinion (or consumer
opinion) is estimated using survey sampling (e.g., with a representative
sample of a population).

### Group opinionEdit

In some social sciences, especially political science and psychology, group
opinion refers to the aggregation of opinions collected from a group of
subjects, such as members of a jury, legislature, committee, or other
collective decision-making body. In these situations, researchers are often
interested in questions related to social choice, conformity, and group
polarization.

### Scientific opinionEdit

"Scientific opinion" may reflect opinions on scientific concerns as
articulated by one or more scientists, published in scholarly journals or
respected textbooks, both of which entail peer-review and rigorous
professional editing. It may also refer to opinions published by professional,
academic, or governmental organizations about scientific findings and their
possible implications.

A related—but not identical—term, scientific consensus, is the prevailing view
on a scientific topic within the scientific community, such as the scientific
opinion on climate change.

Scientific opinion(s) can be "partial, temporally contingent, conflicting, and
uncertain"[2] so that there may be no accepted consensus for a particular
situation. In other circumstances, a particular scientific opinion may be at
odds with consensus.[2]

Scientific literacy, also called public understanding of science, is an
educational goal[3] concerned with providing the public with the necessary
tools to benefit from scientific opinion.

### Legal opinionEdit

A "legal opinion" or "closing opinion" is a type of professional opinion,
usually contained in a formal legal-opinion letter, given by an attorney to a
client or a third party. Most legal opinions are given in connection with
business transactions. The opinion expresses the attorney's professional
judgment regarding the legal matters addressed. The opinion can be "clean" or
"reasoned".[4] A legal opinion is not a guarantee that a court will reach any
particular result.[5] However, a mistaken or incomplete legal opinion may be
grounds for a professional malpractice claim against the attorney, pursuant to
which the attorney may be required to pay the claimant damages incurred as a
result of relying on the faulty opinion.

### Judicial opinionEdit

A "judicial opinion" or "opinion of the court" is an opinion of a judge or
group of judges that accompanies and explains an order or ruling in a
controversy before the court. A judicial option generally lays out the facts
that the court recognized as being established, the legal principles the court
is bound by, and the application of the relevant principles to the recognized
facts. The goal is to demonstrate the rationale the court used in reaching its
decision.[6] Judges in the United States are usually required to provide a
well-reasoned basis for their decisions and the contents of their judicial
opinions may contain the grounds for appealing and reversing of their decision
by a higher court. Judicial opinions are discussed further in the articles on
common law and precedent.

### Editorial opinionEdit

An "editorial opinion" is the evaluation of a topic by a newspaper as conveyed
on its editorial page.

##

See alsoEdit

            
                            * Doxa
                * Editorial
                * Epistemology
                * Justified true belief
                * Opinion poll
                * Perspective (cognitive)
                * Soapbox
                * Speaker's Corner
                * Truthiness
            

##

NotesEdit

            
                            1. **^** Damer, T. Edward (2008). _Attacking Faulty Reasoning: A Practical Guide to Fallacy-free Arguments_. Cengage Learning. pp. 14–15. ISBN 978-0-495-09506-4.
                2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Brian Wynne (1991). "Knowledges in Context". _Science, Technology & Human Values_. **16** (1): 111–121. doi:10.1177/016224399101600108. JSTOR 690044.
                3. **^** Laugksch, R.C. (2000). "Scientific literacy: A conceptual overview". _Science Education_. **84** (1): 71–94. doi:10.1002/(sici)1098-237x(200001)84:1<71::aid-sce6>3.0.co;2-c.
                4. **^** Thompson, Robert. "Real Estate Opinion Letters: Introduction". _americanbar.org_. Retrieved  2 June 2016.
                5. **^** "American Bar Association Committee on Legal Opinions, Legal Opinion Principles, 53 Bus. Law. 831 (1998)" (PDF). Abanet.org. Retrieved 2013-02-18.
                6. **^** "O.S. Kerr, How to Read a Judicial Opinion: A Guide for New Law Students" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-02-18.
            

##

External linksEdit

## Look up _**opinion**_ in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

## Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Opinion**_.

## Wikiquote has quotations related to: _**Opinion**_

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1&mobile=1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opinion&oldid=899337657"

Last edited on 29 May 2019, at 11:27

## ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.

            
                            * Terms of Use
                * Privacy
                * Desktop
            

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

