

![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header_nasem.png)
![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header_nap.png)
![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header-mobile.png)
![National Academies Press: OpenBook](/read/img/openbook-header-print.png)
Login Register Cart Help

# Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-Duty Vehicles (2011)

## **Chapter:** 2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption

Get This Book

Visit NAP.edu/10766 to get more information about this book, to buy it in
print, or to download it as a free PDF.

# Looking for other ways to read this?

![cover image](https://www.nap.edu/cover/12924/450)

## IN ADDITION TO READING ONLINE, THIS TITLE IS AVAILABLE IN THESE FORMATS:

PDF FREE Download Paperback $60.00 Add to Cart Ebook $47.99 Add to Cart

MyNAP members **SAVE 10%** off online.  
Not a MyNAP member yet? Register for a free account to start saving and
receiving special member only perks.

No thanks. I’ll keep reading

            
                            * Contents
                *         * Chapter
                *         * Page of 218
                *         * Original Pages Text Pages
                *         *         * Get This Book
            

« Previous: 1 Introduction

Page 12 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

## **2**

**Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption**

### **INTRODUCTION**

This chapter provides an overview of the various elements that determine fuel
consumption in a light-duty vehicle (LDV). The primary concern here is with
power trains that convert hydrocarbon fuel into mechanical energy using an
internal combustion engine and which propel a vehicle though a drive train
that may be a combination of a mechanical transmission and electrical machines
(hybrid propulsion). A brief overview is given here of spark-ignition (SI) and
compression-ignition (CI) engines as well as hybrids that combine electric
drive with an internal combustion engine; these topics are discussed in detail
in Chapters 4 through 6. The amount of fuel consumed depends on the engine,
the type of fuel used, and the efficiency with which the output of the engine
is transmitted to the wheels. This fuel energy is used to overcome (1) rolling
resistance primarily due to flexing of the tires, (2) aerodynamic drag as the
vehicle motion is resisted by air, and (3) inertia and hill-climbing forces
that resist vehicle acceleration, as well as engine and drive line losses.
Although modeling is discussed in detail in later chapters (Chapters 8 and 9),
a simple model to describe tractive energy requirements and vehicle energy
losses is given here as well to understand fuel consumption fundamentals. Also
included is a brief discussion of customer expectations, since performance,
utility, and comfort as well as fuel consumption are primary objectives in
designing a vehicle.

Fuel efficiency is a historical goal of automotive engineering. As early as
1918, General Motors Company automotive pioneer Charles Kettering was
predicting the demise of the internal combustion engine within 5 years because
of its wasteful use of fuel energy: "[T]he good Lord has tolerated this
foolishness of throwing away 90 percent of the energy in the fuel long enough"
(Kettering, 1918). And indeed, in the 1920s through the 1950s peak
efficiencies went from 10 percent to as much as 40 percent, with improvements
in fuels, combustion system design, friction reduction, and more precise
manufacturing processes. Engines became more powerful, and vehicles became
heavier, bigger, and faster. However, by the late 1950s, fuel economy had
become important, leading to the first large wave of foreign imports. In the
wake of the 1973 oil crisis, the issue of energy security arose, and Congress
passed the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 as a means of reducing
the country's dependence on imported oil. The act established the Corporate
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) program, which required automobile manufacturers
to increase the average fuel economy of passenger cars sold in the United
States in 1990 to a standard of 27.5 miles per gallon (mpg) and allowed the
U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) to set appropriate standards for light
trucks. The standards are administered in DOT by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA) on the basis of U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) city-highway dynamometer test procedures.

### **FUEL CONSUMPTION AND FUEL ECONOMY**

Before proceeding, it is necessary to define the terms _fuel_ _economy_ and
_fuel consumption_ ; these two terms are widely used, but very often
interchangeably and incorrectly, which can generate confusion and incorrect
interpretations:

            
                            * _Fuel economy_ is a measure of how far a vehicle will travel with a gallon of fuel; it is expressed in miles per gallon. This is a popular measure used for a long time by consumers in the United States; it is used also by vehicle manufacturers and regulators, mostly to communicate with the public. As a metric, fuel economy actually measures distance traveled per unit of fuel.
            
                * _Fuel consumption_ is the inverse of fuel economy. It is the amount of fuel consumed in driving a given distance. It is measured in the United States in gallons per 100 miles, and in liters per 100 kilometers in Europe and elsewhere throughout the world. Fuel consumption is a fundamental engineering measure that is directly related to fuel consumed per 100 miles and is useful because it can be employed as a direct measure of volumetric fuel savings. It is actually fuel consumption
            

Page 13 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

that is used in the CAFE standard to calculate the fleet average fuel economy
(the sales weighted average) for the city and highway cycles. The details of
this calculation are shown in Appendix E. Fuel consumption is also the
appropriate metric for determining the yearly fuel savings if one goes from a
vehicle with a given fuel consumption to one with a lower fuel consumption.

Because fuel economy and fuel consumption are reciprocal, each of the two
metrics can be computed in a straight-forward manner if the other is known. In
mathematical terms, if fuel economy is X and fuel consumption is Y, their
relationship is expressed by XY = 1. This relationship is not linear, as
illustrated by Figure 2.1, in which fuel consumption is shown in units of
gallons per 100 miles, and fuel economy is shown in units of miles per gallon.
Also shown in the figure is the decreasing influence on fuel savings that
accompanies increasing the fuel economy of high-mpg vehicles. Each bar
represents an increase of fuel economy by 100 percent or the corresponding
decrease in fuel consumption by 50 percent. The data on the graph show the
resulting decrease in fuel consumption per 100 miles and the total fuel saved
in driving 10,000 miles. The dramatic decrease in the impact of increasing
miles per gallon by 100 percent for a high-mpg vehicle is most visible in the
case of increasing the miles per gallon rating from 40 mpg to 80 mpg, where
the total fuel saved in driving 10,000 miles is only 125 gallons, compared to
500 gallons for a change from 10 mpg to 20 mpg. Likewise, it is instructive to
compare the same absolute value of fuel economy changes--for example, 10-20
mpg and 40-50 mpg. The 40-50 mpg fuel saved in driving 10,000 miles would be
50 gallons, as compared to the 500 gallons in going from 10-20 mpg. Appendix E
discusses further implications of the relationship between fuel consumption
and fuel economy for various fuel economy values, and particularly for those
greater than 40 mpg.

Figure 2.2 illustrates the relationship between the percentage of fuel
consumption decrease and that of fuel economy increase. Figures 2.1 and 2.2
illustrate that the amount of fuel saved by converting to a more economical
vehicle depends on where one is on the curve.

Because of the nonlinear relationship in Figure 2.1, consumers can have
difficulty using fuel economy as a measure of fuel efficiency in judging the
benefits of replacing the most inefficient vehicles (Larrick and Soll, 2008).
Larrick and Soll further conducted three experiments to test whether people
reason in a linear but incorrect manner about fuel economy. These experimental
studies demonstrated a systemic misunderstanding of fuel economy as a measure
of fuel efficiency. Using linear reasoning about fuel economy leads people to
undervalue small improvements (1-4 mpg) in lower-fuel-economy (15-30 mpg
range) vehicles where there are large decreases in fuel consumption (Larrick
and Soll, 2008) in this range, as shown in Figure 2.1. Fischer (2009) further
discusses the potential benefits of utilizing a metric based on fuel
consumption as a means to aid consumers in calculating fuel and cost savings
resulting from improved vehicle fuel efficiency.

Throughout this report, fuel consumption is used as the metric owing to its
fundamental characteristic and its suitability for judging fuel savings by
consumers. In cases where the committee has used fuel economy data from the

![FIGURE 2.1 Relationship between fuel consumption \(FC\) and fuel economy

\(FE\) illustrating the decreasing reward of improving fuel economy \(miles

per gallon \[mpg\]\) for high-mile-per-gallon vehicles. The width of each

rectangle represents a 50 percent decrease in FC or a 100 percent increase in

FE. The number within the rectangle is the decrease in FC per 100 miles, and

the number to the right of the rectangle is the total fuel saved over 10,000

miles by the corresponding 50 percent decrease in

FC.](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g13001.jpg)

FIGURE 2.1 Relationship between fuel consumption (FC) and fuel economy (FE)
illustrating the decreasing reward of improving fuel economy (miles per gallon
[mpg]) for high-mile-per-gallon vehicles. The width of each rectangle
represents a 50 percent decrease in FC or a 100 percent increase in FE. The
number within the rectangle is the decrease in FC per 100 miles, and the
number to the right of the rectangle is the total fuel saved over 10,000 miles
by the corresponding 50 percent decrease in FC.

Page 14 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![FIGURE 2.2 Percent decrease in fuel consumption \(FC\) as a function of

percent increase in fuel economy \(FE\), illustrating the decreasing benefit

of improving the fuel economy of vehicles with an already high fuel

economy.](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g14001.jpg)

FIGURE 2.2 Percent decrease in fuel consumption (FC) as a function of percent
increase in fuel economy (FE), illustrating the decreasing benefit of
improving the fuel economy of vehicles with an already high fuel economy.

literature, the data were converted to fuel consumption, using the curve of
either Figure 2.1 or 2.2 for changes in fuel economy. Because of this, the
committee recommends that the fuel economy information sticker on new cars and
trucks should include fuel consumption data in addition to the fuel economy
data so that consumers can be familiar with this fundamental metric since fuel
consumption difference between two vehicles relates directly to fuel savings.
The fuel consumption metric is also more directly related to overall emissions
of carbon dioxide than is the fuel economy metric.

### **ENGINES**

Motor vehicles have been powered by gasoline, diesel, steam, gas turbine, and
Stirling engines as well as by electric and hydraulic motors. This discussion
of engines is limited to power plants involving the combustion of a fuel
inside a chamber that results in the expansion of the air/fuel mixture to
produce mechanical work. These internal combustion engines are of two types:
gasoline spark-ignition and diesel compression-ignition. The discussion also
addresses alternative power trains, including hybrid electrics.

#### **Basic Engine Types**

Gasoline engines, which operate on a relatively volatile fuel, also go by the
name Otto cycle engines (after the person who is credited with building the
first working four-stroke internal combustion engine). In these engines, a
spark plug is used to ignite the air/fuel mixture. Over the years, variations
of the conventional operating cycle of gasoline engines have been proposed. A
recently popular variation is the Atkinson cycle, which relies on changes in
valve timing to improve efficiency at the expense of lower peak power
capability. Since in all cases the air/fuel mixture is ignited by a spark,
this report refers to gasoline engines as spark-ignition engines.

Diesel engines--which operate on "diesel" fuels, named after inventor Rudolf
Diesel--rely on compression heating of the air/fuel mixture to achieve
ignition. This report uses the generic term compression-ignition engines to
refer to diesel engines.

The distinction between these two types of engines is changing with the
development of engines having some of the characteristics of both the Otto and
the diesel cycles. Although technologies to implement homogeneous charge
compression ignition (HCCI) will most likely not be available until beyond the
time horizon of this report, the use of a homogeneous mixture in a diesel
cycle confers the characteristic of the Otto cycle. Likewise the present
widespread use of direct injection in gasoline engines confers some of the
characteristics of the diesel cycle. Both types of engines are moving in a
direction to utilize the best features of both cycles' high efficiency and low
particulate emissions.

In a conventional vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine, either
SI or CI, most of the energy in the fuel goes to the exhaust and to the
coolant (radiator), with about a quarter of the energy doing mechanical work
to propel the vehicle. This is partially due to the fact that both engine
types have thermodynamic limitations, but it is also because in a given drive
schedule the engine has to provide power over a range of speeds and loads; it
rarely operates at its most efficient point.

This is illustrated by Figure 2.3, which shows what is known as an engine
efficiency map for an SI engine. It plots the engine efficiency as functions
of torque and speed. The plot in Figure 2.3 represents the engine efficiency
contours in units of brake-specific fuel consumption (grams per kilowatt-hour)
and relates torque in units of brake mean effective pressure (kilopascals).
For best efficiency, the engine should operate over the narrow range indicated
by the roughly round contour in the middle; this is also referred to later in
the chapter as the maximum engine brake thermal efficiency (ηb,max). In
conventional vehicles, however, the engine needs to cover

Page 15 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![FIGURE 2.3 An example of an engine efficiency map for a spark-ignition

engine. SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Heywood \(1988\). Copyright

1988 by the McGraw-Hill Companies,

Inc.](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g15001.jpg)

FIGURE 2.3 An example of an engine efficiency map for a spark-ignition engine.
SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Heywood (1988). Copyright 1988 by the
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.

the entire range of torque and speeds, and so, on average, the efficiency is
lower. One way to improve efficiency is to use a smaller engine and to use a
turbocharger to increase its power output back to its original level. This
reduces friction in both SI and CI engines as well as pumping losses.1
Increasing the number of gear ratios in the transmission also enables the
engine to operate closer to the maximum engine brake thermal efficiency. Other
methods to expand the high-efficiency operating region of the engine,
particularly in the lower torque region, are discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. As
discussed in Chapter 6, part of the reason that hybrid electric vehicles show
lower fuel consumption is that they permit the internal combustion engine to
operate at more efficient speed-load points.

Computer control, first introduced to meet the air/fuel mixture ratio
requirements for reduced emissions in both CI and SI engines, now allows the
dynamic optimization of engine operations, including precise air/fuel mixture
control, spark timing, fuel injection, and valve timing. The monitoring of
engine and emission control parameters by the onboard diagnostic system
identifies emission control system malfunctions.

A more recent development in propulsion systems is to add one or two
electrical machines and a battery to create a hybrid vehicle. Such vehicles
can permit the internal combustion engine to shut down when the vehicle is
stopped and allow brake energy to be recovered and stored for later use.
Hybrid systems also enable the engine to be downsized and to operate at more
efficient operating points. Although there were hybrid vehicles in production
in the 1920s, they could not compete with conventional internal combustion
engines. What has changed is the greater need to reduce fuel consumption and
the developments in controls, batteries, and electric drives. Hybrids are
discussed in Chapter 6, but it is safe to say that the long-term future of
motor vehicle propulsion may likely include advanced combustion engines,
combustion engine-electric hybrids, electric plug-in hybrids, hydrogen fuel
cell electric hybrids, battery electrics, and more. The challenge of the next
generation of propulsion systems depends not only on the development of the
propulsion technology but also on the associated fuel or energy
infrastructure. The large capital investment in manufacturing capacity, the
motor vehicle fleet, and the associated fuel infrastructure all constrain the
rate of transition to new technologies.

#### **Combustion-Related Traits of SI Versus CI Engines**

The combustion process within internal combustion engines is critical for
understanding the performance of SI versus CI engines. SI-engine combustion
occurs mainly by turbulent flame propagation, and as turbulence intensity

1

|

"Pumping loss" refers to the energy dissipated through fluid friction and
pressure gradients developed from the air flow through the engine. A more
detailed explanation is provided in Chapter 4 of this report.

---|--- 

Page 16 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

tends to scale with engine speed, the combustion interval in the crank-angle
domain remains relatively constant throughout the speed range (at constant
intake-manifold pressure and engines having a conventional throttle). Thus,
combustion characteristics have little effect on the ability of this type of
engine to operate successfully at high speeds. Therefore, this type of engine
tends to have high power density (e.g., horsepower per cubic inch or kilowatts
per liter) compared to its CI counterpart. CI engine combustion is governed
largely by means of the processes of spray atomization, vaporization,
turbulent diffusion, and molecular diffusion. Therefore, CI combustion, in
comparison with SI combustion, is less impacted by engine speed. As engine
speed increases, the combustion interval in the crank-angle domain also
increases and thus delays the end of combustion. This late end of combustion
delays burnout of the particulates that are the last to form, subjecting these
particulates to thermal quenching. The consequence of this quenching process
is that particulate emissions become problematic at engine speeds well below
those associated with peak power in SI engines. This ultimately limits the
power density (i.e., power per unit of displacement) of CI diesel engines.

While power density gets much attention, torque density in many ways is more
relevant. Thermal auto ignition in SI engines is the process that limits
torque density and fuel efficiency potential. Typically at low to moderate
engine speeds and high loads, this process yields combustion of any fuel/air
mixture not yet consumed by the desired flame-propagation process. This type
of combustion is typically referred to as engine knock, or simply knock. If
this process occurs prior to spark ignition, it is referred to as pre-
ignition. (This is typically observed at high power settings.) Knock and pre-
ignition are to be avoided, as they both lead to very high rates of combustion
pressure and ultimately to component failure. While approaches such as
turbocharging and direct injection of SI engines alter this picture somewhat,
the fundamentals remain. CI diesel engines, however, are not knock limited and
have excellent torque characteristics at low engine speed. In the European
market, the popularity of turbocharged CI diesel engines in light-duty vehicle
segments is not only driven by the economics of fuel economy but also by the
"fun-to-drive" element. That is, at equal engine displacement, the
turbocharged diesel tends to deliver superior vehicle launch performance as
compared with that of its naturally aspirated SI engine counterpart.

### **FUELS**

The fuels and the SI and CI engines that use them have co-evolved in the past
100 years in response to improved technology and customer demands. Engine
efficiencies have improved due to better fuels, and refineries are able to
provide the fuels demanded by modern engines at a lower cost. Thus, the
potential for fuel economy improvement may depend on fuel attributes as well
as on engine technology. Implementing certain engine technologies may require
changes in fuel properties, and vice versa. Although the committee charge is
not to assess alternative liquid fuels (such as ethanol or coal-derived
liquids) that might replace gasoline or diesel fuels, it is within the
committee charge to consider fuels and the properties of fuels as they pertain
to implementing the fuel economy technologies discussed within this report.

Early engines burned coal and vegetable oils, but their use was very limited
until the discovery and exploitation of inexpensive petroleum. The lighter,
more volatile fraction of petroleum, called gasoline, was relatively easy to
burn and met the early needs of the SI engine. A heavier, less volatile
fraction, called distillate, which was slower to burn, met the early needs of
the CI engine. The power and efficiency of early SI engines were limited by
the low compression ratios required for resistance to pre-ignition or
knocking. This limitation had been addressed by adding a lead additive
commonly known as tetraethyl lead. With the need to remove lead because of its
detrimental effect on catalytic aftertreatment (and the negative environmental
and human impacts of lead), knock resistance was provided by further changing
the organic composition of the fuel and initially by reducing the compression
ratio and hence the octane requirement of the engine. Subsequently, a better
understanding of engine combustion and better engine design and control
allowed increasing the compression ratios back to and eventually higher than
the pre-lead-removal levels. The recent reduction of fuel sulfur levels to
less than 15 parts per million (ppm) levels enabled more effective and durable
exhaust aftertreatment devices on both SI and CI engines.

The main properties that affect fuel consumption in engines are shown in Table
2.1. The table shows that, on a volume basis, diesel has a higher energy
content, called heat of combustion, and higher carbon content than gasoline;
thus, on a per gallon basis diesel produces almost 15 percent more CO2.
However, on a weight basis the heat of combustion of diesel and gasoline is
about the same, and so is the carbon content. One needs to keep in mind that
this difference in energy content is one of the reasons why CI engines have
lower fuel consumption when measured in terms of gallons rather than in terms
of weight. Processing crude oil into fuels for vehicles is a complex process
that uses hydrogen to break

TABLE 2.1 Properties of Fuels

|

Lower Heat of Combustion (Btu/gal)

|

Lower Heat of Combustion (Btu/lb)

|

Density (lb/gal)

|

Carbon Content (g/gal)

|

Carbon Content (g/lb)

---|---|---|---|---|--- 

Gasoline

|

116,100

|

18,690

|

6.21

|

2,421

|

392

Diesel

|

128,500

|

18,400

|

6.98

|

2,778

|

392

Ethanol (E85)

|

76,300

|

11,580

|

6.59

|

1,560

|

237

SOURCE: After GREET Program, Argonne National Laboratory,
http://www.transportation.anl.gov/modeling_simulation/GREET/.

Page 17 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

down heavy hydrocarbons into lighter fractions. This is commonly called
cracking. Diesel fuel requires less "molecular manipulation" for the
conversion of crude oil into useful fuel. So if one wants to minimize the
barrels of crude oil used per 100 miles, diesel would be a better choice than
gasoline.

Ethanol as a fuel for SI engines is receiving much attention as a means of
reducing dependence on imported petroleum and also of producing less
greenhouse gas (GHG). Today ethanol is blended with gasoline at about 10
percent. Proponents of ethanol would like to see the greater availability of a
fuel called E85, which is a blend of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent
gasoline. The use of 100 percent ethanol is widespread in Brazil, but it is
unlikely to be used in the United States because engines have difficulty
starting in cold weather with this fuel.

The effectiveness of ethanol in reducing GHG is a controversial subject that
is not addressed here, since it generally does not affect the technologies
discussed in this report. It is interesting to note that in a very early
period of gasoline shortage, it was touted as a fuel of the future (Foljambe,
1916).

Ethanol has about 65 percent of the heat of combustion of gasoline, so the
fuel consumption is roughly 50 percent higher as measured in gallons per 100
miles. Ethanol has a higher octane rating than that of gasoline, and this is
often cited as an advantage. Normally high octane enables increases in the
compression ratio and hence efficiency. To take advantage of this form of
efficiency increase, the engine would need to be redesigned to accommodate an
increased combustion ratio. For technical reasons the improvement with ethanol
is very small. Also, during any transition period, vehicles that run on 85 to
100 percent ethanol must also run on gasoline, and since the compression ratio
cannot be changed after the engine is built, the higher octane rating of
ethanol fuel has not led to gains in efficiency. A way to enable this
efficiency increase is to modify the SI engine so that selective ethanol
injection is allowed. This technology is being developed and is further
discussed in Chapter 4 of this report.

### **FUEL ECONOMY TESTING AND REGULATIONS**

The regulation of vehicle fuel economy requires a reproducible test standard.
The test currently uses a driving cycle or test schedule originally developed
for emissions regulation, which simulated urban-commute driving in Los Angeles
in the late 1960s and the early 1970s. This cycle is variously referred to as
the LA-4, the urban dynamometer driving schedule (UDDS), and the city cycle.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) later added a second cycle to
better capture somewhat higher-speed driving: this cycle is known as the
highway fuel economy test (HWFET) driving schedule, or the highway cycle. The
combination of these two test cycles (weighted using a 55 percent city cycle
and 45 percent highway cycle split) is known as the Federal Test Procedure
(FTP). This report focuses on fuel consumption data that reflect legal
compliance with the CAFE requirements and thus do not include EPA's
adjustments for its labeling program, as described below. Also discussed below
are some technologies--such as those that reduce air- conditioning power
demands or requirements--that improve on-road fuel economy but are not
directly captured in the FTP.

Compliance with the NHTSA's CAFE regulation depends on the city and highway
vehicle dynamometer tests developed and conducted by the EPA for its exhaust
emission regulatory program. The results of the two tests are combined
(harmonic mean) with a weighting of 55 percent city and 45 percent highway
driving. Manufacturers self-certify their vehicles using preproduction
prototypes representative of classes of vehicles and engines. The EPA then
conducts tests in its laboratories of 10 to 15 percent of the vehicles to
verify what the manufacturers report. For its labeling program, the EPA
adjusts the compliance values of fuel economy in an attempt to better reflect
what vehicle owners actually experience. The certification tests yield fuel
consumption (gallons per 100 miles) that is about 25 percent better (less
than) EPA- estimated real-world fuel economy. Analysis of the 2009 EPA fuel
economy data set for more than 1,000 vehicle models yields a model-averaged
difference of about 30 percent.

The certification test fails to capture the full array of driving conditions
encountered during vehicle operations. Box 2.1 provides some of the reasons
why the certification test does not reflect actual driving. Beginning with
model year 2008, the EPA began collecting data on three additional test cycles
to capture the effect of higher speed and acceleration, air-conditioner use,
and cold weather. These data are part of air pollution emission compliance
testing but not fuel economy or proposed greenhouse gas compliance. However,
the results from these three test cycles will be used with the two FTP cycles
to report the fuel economy on the vehicle label. Table 2.2 summarizes the
characteristics of the five test schedules. This additional information guides
the selection of a correction factor, but an understanding of fuel consumption
based on actual in-use measurement is lacking.

The unfortunate consequence of the disparity between the official CAFE (and
proposed greenhouse gas regulation) certification tests and how vehicles are
driven in use is that manufacturers have a diminished incentive to design
vehicles to deliver real-world improvements in fuel economy if such
improvements are not captured by the official test. Some examples of vehicle
design improvements that are not completely represented in the official CAFE
test are more efficient air conditioning; cabin heat load reduction through
heat-resistant glazing and heat-reflective paints; more efficient power
steering; efficient engine and drive train operation at all speeds,
accelerations, and road grades; and reduced drag to include the effect of
wind. The certification tests give no incentive to provide information to the
driver that would improve operational efficiency or to reward control
strategies that compensate for driver characteristics that increase fuel
consumption.

Page 18 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

**BOX 2.1**

**Shortcomings of Fuel Economy** **Certification Test**

            
                            * _Dynamometer test schedules._ The UDDS and HWFET test schedule (driving cycles) were adopted in 1975 to match driving conditions and dynamometer limitations of that period. Maximum speed (56.7 mph) and acceleration (3.3 mph/sec, or 0-60 mph in 18.2 sec) are well below typical driving. The 55 percent city and 45 percent highway split may not match actual driving. Recent estimates indicate that a weighting of 57 percent highway and 43 percent city is a better reflection of current driving patterns in a number of geographic areas.
            
                * _Test vehicles._ The preproduction prototypes do not match the full range of vehicles actually sold.
            
                * _Driver behavior._ The unsteady driving characteristic of many drivers increases fuel consumption.
            
                * _Fuel._ The test fuel does not match current pump fuel.
            
                * _Air conditioning._ Air conditioning is turned off during the certification test. In addition to overestimating mileage, there is no regulatory incentive for manufacturers to increase air-conditioning efficiency. However, there is substantial market incentive for original equipment manufacturers both to increase air-conditioning efficiency and to reduce the sunlight-driven heating load for customer comfort benefits.
            
                * _Hills._ There are no hills in the EPA certification testing.
            
                * _Vehicle maintenance._ Failure to maintain vehicles degrades fuel economy.
            
                * _Tires and tire pressure._ Test tires and pressures do not generally match in-use vehicle operation.
            
                * _Wind._ There is no wind in the EPA certification testing.
            
                * _Cold start._ There is no cold start in the EPA CAFE certification testing.
            
                * _Turns._ There is no turning in the EPA certification testing.
            

* * *

The measurement of the fuel economy of hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and battery
electric vehicles presents additional difficulties in that their performance
on the city versus highway driving cycles differs from that of conventional
vehicles. Regenerative braking provides a greater gain in city driving than in
highway driving. Plug-in hybrids present an additional complexity in measuring
fuel economy since this requires accounting of the energy derived from the
grid. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) is currently developing
recommendations for measuring the emissions and fuel economy of hybrid-
electric vehicles, including plug-in and battery electric vehicles. General
Motors Company recently claimed that its Chevrolet Volt extended-range
electric vehicle achieved city fuel economy of at least 230 miles per gallon,
based on development testing using a draft EPA federal fuel economy
methodology for the labeling of plug-in electric vehicles (General Motors
Company press release, August 11, 2009).

### **CUSTOMER EXPECTATIONS**

The objective of this study is to evaluate technologies that reduce fuel
consumption without significantly reducing customer satisfaction. Although
each vehicle manufacturer has a proprietary way of defining very precisely how
its vehicle must perform, it is assumed here that the following parameters
will remain essentially constant as the technologies that reduce fuel
consumption are considered:

            
                            * Interior passenger volume;
            
                * Trunk space, except for hybrids, where trunk space may be compromised;
            
                * Acceleration, which is measured in a variety of tests, such as time to accelerate from 0 to 60 mph, 0 to 30, 55 to 65 (passing), 30 to 45, entrance ramp to highway, etc.;
            

TABLE 2.2 Test Schedules Used in the United States for Mileage Certification

Driving Schedule Attributes

|

Test Schedule

---|--- 

Urban (UDDS)

|

Highway (HWFET)

|

High Speed (US06)

|

Air Conditioning (SC03)

|

Cold Temperature UDDS

Trip type

|

Low speeds in stop-and-go urban traffic

|

Free-flow traffic at highway speeds

|

Higher speeds; harder acceleration and braking

|

Air conditioning use under hot ambient conditions

|

City test with colder outside temperature

Top speed

|

56.7 mph

|

59.9 mph

|

80.3 mph

|

54.8 mph

|

56.7 mph

Average speed

|

19.6 mph

|

48.2 mph

|

48 mph

|

21.4 mph

|

19.6 mph

Maximum acceleration

|

3.3 mph/sec

|

3.2 mph/sec

|

8.40 mph/sec

|

5.1 mph/sec

|

3.3 mph/sec

Simulated distance

|

7.45 mi.

|

10.3 mi.

|

8 mi.

|

3.58

|

7.45 mi.

Time

|

22.8 min

|

12.75 min

|

10 min

|

10 min

|

22.8 min

Stops

|

17

|

None

|

5

|

5

|

17

Idling time

|

18% of time

|

None

|

7% of time

|

19% of time

|

18% of time

Lab temperature

|

68-86°F

|

|

|

95°F

|

20°F

Vehicle air conditioning

|

Off

|

Off

|

Off

|

On

|

Off

SOURCE: After http://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/fe_test_schedules.shtml.

Page 19 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

TABLE 2.3 Average Characteristics of Light-Duty Vehicles for Four Model Years

|

1975

|

1987

|

1998

|

2008

---|---|---|---|--- 

Adjusted fuel economy (mpg)

|

13.1

|

22

|

20.1

|

20.8

Weight

|

4,060

|

3,220

|

3,744

|

4,117

Horsepower

|

137

|

118

|

171

|

222

0 to 60 acceleration time (sec)

|

14.1

|

13.1

|

10.9

|

9.6

Power/weight (hp/ton)

|

67.5

|

73.3

|

91.3

|

107.9

SOURCE: EPA (2008).

            
                            * Safety and crashworthiness; and
            
                * Noise and vibration.
            

These assumptions are very important. It is obvious that reducing vehicle size
will reduce fuel consumption. Also, the reduction of vehicle acceleration
capability allows the use of a smaller, lower-power engine that operates
closer to its best efficiency. These are not options that will be considered.

As shown in Table 2.3, in the past 20 or so years, the net result of
improvements in engines and fuels has been increased vehicle mass and greater
acceleration capability while fuel economy has remained constant (EPA, 2008).
Presumably this tradeoff between mass, acceleration, and fuel consumption was
driven by customer demand. Mass increases are directly related to increased
size, the shift from passenger cars to trucks, the addition of safety
equipment such as airbags, and the increased accessory content. Note that
although the CAFE standards for light-duty passenger cars have been for 27.5
mpg since 1990, the fleet average remains much lower through 2008 due to lower
CAFE standards for light-duty pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles (SUVs),
and passenger vans.

### **TRACTIVE FORCE AND TRACTIVE ENERGY**

The mechanical work produced by the power plant is used to propel the vehicle
and to power the accessories. As discussed by Sovran and Blaser (2006), the
concepts of tractive force and tractive energy are useful for understanding
the role of vehicle mass, rolling resistance, and aerodynamic drag. These
concepts also help evaluate the effectiveness of regenerative braking in
reducing the power plant energy that is required. The analysis focuses on test
schedules and neglects the effects of wind and hill climbing. The
instantaneous tractive force ( _F_ _TR_ ) required to propel a vehicle is

![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g19001.jpg)

(2.1)

where _R_ is the rolling resistance, _D_ is the aerodynamic drag with _C_ _D_
representing the aerodynamic drag coefficient, _M_ is the vehicle mass, _V_ is
the velocity, _dV/dt_ is the rate of change of velocity (i.e., acceleration or
deceleration), _A_ is the frontal area, _r_ _o_ is the tire rolling resistance
coefficient, _g_ is the gravitational constant, _I_ _w_ is the polar moment of
inertia of the four tire/wheel/axle rotating assemblies, _r_ _w_ is its
effective rolling radius, and _ρ_ is the density of air. This form of the
tractive force is calculated at the wheels of the vehicle and therefore does
not consider the components within the vehicle system such as the power train
(i.e., rotational inertia of engine components and internal friction).

The tractive energy required to travel an incremental distance _dS_ is _F_
_TR_ _Vdt_ , and its integral over all portions of a driving schedule in which
_F_ _TR_ > 0 (i.e., constant-speed driving and accelerations) is the total
tractive-energy requirement, _E_ _TR_. For each of the EPA driving schedules,
Sovran and Blaser (2006) calculated tractive energy for a large number of
vehicles covering a broad range of parameter sets ( _r_ _0_ , _C_ _D_ , _A_ ,
_M_ ) representing the spectrum of current vehicles. They then fitted the data
with a linear equation of the following form:

![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g19002.jpg)

(2.2)

where _S_ is the total distance traveled in a driving schedule, and _α_ , _β_
, and _γ_ are specific but different constants for the UDDS and HWFET
schedules. Sovran and Blaser (2006) also identified that a combination of five
UDDS and three HWFET schedules very closely reproduces the EPA combined fuel
consumption of 55 percent UDDS plus 45 percent HWFET, and provided its values
of _α_ , _β_ , and _γ_.

The same approach was used for those portions of a driving schedule in which
_F_ _TR_ < 0 (i.e., decelerations), where the power plant is not required to
provide energy for propulsion. In this case the rolling resistance and
aerodynamic drag retard vehicle motion, but their effect is not sufficient to
follow the driving cycle deceleration, and so some form of wheel braking is
required. When a vehicle reaches the end of a schedule and becomes stationary,
all the kinetic energy of its mass that was acquired when _F_ _TR_ > 0 has to
have been removed. Consequently the decrease in kinetic energy produced by
wheel braking is

![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g19003.jpg)

(2.3)

The coefficients _α ′_ and _β ′_ are also specific to the test schedule and
are given in the reference. Two observations are of interest: (1) _γ_ is the
same for both motoring and braking as it relates to the kinetic energy of the
vehicle; (2) since the energy used in rolling resistance is _r_ _0_ _M g S_ ,
the sum of _α_ and _α ′_ is equal to _g_.

Sovran and Blaser (2006) considered 2,500 vehicles from the EPA database for
2004 and found that their equations fitted the tractive energy for both the
UDDS and HWFET schedules with an _r_ = 0.999, and the braking energy with an

Page 20 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

_r_ = 0.99, where _r_ represents the correlation coefficient based on least
squares fit of the data.

To illustrate the dependence of tractive and braking energy on vehicle
parameters, Sovran and Blaser (2006) used the following three sets of
parameters. Fundamentally the energy needed by the vehicle is a function of
the rolling resistance, the mass, and the aerodynamic drag times frontal area.
By combining the last three into the results shown in Table 2.4, Sovran and
Blaser (2006) covered the entire fleet in 2004. The "high" vehicle has a high
rolling resistance, and high aerodynamic drag relative to its mass. This would
be typical of a truck or an SUV. The "low" vehicle requires low tractive
energy and would be typical for a future vehicle. These three vehicles cover
the entire spectrum in vehicle design.

The data shown in Table 2.5 were calculated using these values. The low
vehicle has a tractive energy requirement that is roughly two-thirds that of
the high vehicle. It should also be noted that as the vehicle design becomes
more efficient (i.e., the low vehicle), the fraction of energy required to
overcome the inertia increases. As expected, for both driving schedules the
_normalized_ tractive energy, _ETR_ / _MS_ , decreases with reduced rolling
and aerodynamic resistances. What is more significant, however, is that at
each level, the _actual tractive_ energy is strongly dependent on vehicle
mass, through its influence on the rolling and inertia components. This gives
mass reduction high priority in efforts to reduce vehicle fuel consumption.

TABLE 2.4 Vehicle Characteristics

Vehicle

|

ro

|

CdA/M

---|---|--- 

High

|

0.012

|

0.00065

Mid

|

0.009

|

0.0005

Low

|

0.006

|

0.0003

SOURCE: Based on Sovran and Blaser (2006).

TABLE 2.5 Estimated Energy Requirements for the Three Sovran and Blaser
(2006)Vehicles in Table 2.4 for the UDDS and HWFET Schedules

|

ETR/MS (Normalized)

|

Rolling Resistance (%)

|

Aerodynamic Drag (%)

|

Inertia (%)

|

Braking/Tractive (%)

---|---|---|---|---|--- 

UDDS

|

|

|

|

|

Vehicle

|

|

|

|

|

High

|

0.32

|

28

|

22

|

50

|

36

Mid

|

0.28

|

24

|

19

|

57

|

45

Low

|

0.24

|

19

|

14

|

68

|

58

HWFET

|

|

|

|

|

Vehicle

|

|

|

|

|

High

|

0.34

|

32

|

56

|

13

|

6

Mid

|

0.27

|

30

|

54

|

16

|

10

Low

|

0.19

|

29

|

47

|

24

|

18

#### **Effect of Driving Schedule**

It is evident from Table 2.5 that inertia is the dominant component on the
UDDS schedule, while aerodynamic drag is dominant on the HWFET. The larger any
component, the greater the impact of its reduction on tractive energy.

On the UDDS schedule, the magnitude of required braking energy relative to
tractive energy is large at all three vehicle levels, increasing as the
magnitude of the rolling and aerodynamic resistances decreases. The high
values are due to the many decelerations that the schedule contains. The
braking energy magnitudes for HWFET are small because of its limited number of
decelerations.

In vehicles with conventional power trains, the wheel-braking force is
frictional in nature, and so all the vehicle kinetic energy removed is
dissipated as heat. However, in hybrid vehicles with regenerative-braking
capability, some of the braking energy can be captured and then recycled for
propulsion in segments of a schedule where _FTR_ > 0. This reduces the _power
plant_ energy required to provide the _ETR_ necessary for propulsion, thereby
reducing fuel consumption. The significant increase in normalized tractive
energy ( _ETR_ / _MS_ ) with decreasing rolling and aerodynamic resistances
makes reduction of these resistances even _more_ effective in reducing fuel
consumption in hybrids with regenerative braking than in conventional
vehicles. The relatively small values of braking-to-tractive energy on the
HWFET indicate that the fuel consumption reduction capability of regenerative
braking is minimal on that schedule. As a result, hybrid power trains only
offer significant fuel consumption reductions on the UDDS cycle. However, as
pointed out in Chapter 6, hybridization permits engine downsizing and engine
operation in more efficient regions, and this applies to the HWFET schedule
also.

#### **Effect of Drive Train**

Given the tractive energy requirements (plus idling and accessories), the next
step is to represent the efficiency of the power train. The power delivered to
the output shaft of the engine is termed the _brake output power,_ and should
not be confused with the _braking energy_ mentioned in the previous section.
The brake output power, _Pb_ , of an engine is the difference between its
indicated power, _Pi_ , and power required for pumping, _Pp_ ; friction, _Pf_
; and engine auxiliaries, _Pa_ (e.g., fuel, oil, and water pumps).

![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g20001.jpg)

(2.4)

Brake thermal efficiency is the ratio of brake power output to the energy rate
into the system (the mass flow rate of fuel times its energy density).

![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g20002.jpg)

(2.5)

Page 21 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

The brake thermal efficiency is _η_ _b_ , while _η_ _i_ is the indicated
thermal efficiency, and _H_ _f_ is the lower heating value of the fuel. This
equation provides the means for relating pumping losses, engine friction, and
auxiliary load to the overall engine efficiency. Equations for fuel use during
braking and idling are not shown here but can be found in Sovran and Blaser
(2003), as can the equations for average schedule and maximum engine
efficiency.

Ultimately the fuel consumption is given by Equation 2.6:

![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21001.jpg)

(2.6)

where in addition to the terms defined earlier, _g*_ is the fuel consumption
over the driving schedule,
![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21002.jpg) and
![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21003.jpg) represent the fuel
consumed during idling and braking, _H_ _f_ is the fuel density of fuel,
![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21004.jpg) is the average drive
train efficiency for the schedule, _η_ _b,max_ is the maximum engine brake
thermal efficiency, ![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21005.jpg) is
the average engine brake thermal efficiency, and _E_ _Accessories_ is the
energy to power the accessories. The term _η_ _b,max_ is repeated in the
denominator to show that to minimize fuel consumption the fraction in the
denominator should be as large as possible. Thus things should be arranged so
that the average engine efficiency be as close to the maximum.

The principal term in Equation 2.6 is the bracketed term. Clearly fuel
consumption can be reduced by reducing _E_ _TR_ and _E_ _Accessories_. It can
also be reduced by increasing
![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21006.jpg). As stated earlier, this
can be done by down sizing the engine or by increasing the number of gears in
the transmission so that average engine brake thermal efficiency,
![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21007.jpg) , is increased. Equation
2.6 explains why reducing rolling resistance or aerodynamic drag without
changes in engine or transmission may not maximize the benefit, since it may
move ![](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g21008.jpg) farther from its
optimum point. In other words, changing to lower-rolling-resistance tires
without modifying the power train will not give the full benefit.

The tractive energy _E_ _TR_ can be precisely determined given just three
parameters, rolling resistance _r_ 0, the product of aero coefficient and
frontal area _C_ _D_ _A_ , and vehicle mass _M_. However, many of the other
terms in Equation 2.6 are difficult to evaluate analytically. This is
especially true of the engine efficiencies, which require detailed engine
maps. Thus converting the tractive energy into fuel consumption is best done
using a detailed step-by-step simulation. This simulation is usually carried
out by breaking down the test schedule into 1-second intervals, computing the
_E_ _TR_ for each interval using detailed engine maps along with transmission
characterizations, and adding up the interval values to get the totals for the
drive cycle analyzed. Such a simulation is frequently called a full system
simulation, FSS.

The discussion above on tractive energy highlights the fact that the effects
of the three principal aspects of vehicle design--vehicle mass, rolling
resistance, and aerodynamic drag--can be used to calculate precisely the
amount of energy needed to propel the vehicle for any kind of drive schedule.
Further, the equations developed highlight both the effect of the various
parameters involved and at the same time demonstrate the complexity of the
problem. Although the equations provide understanding, in the end estimating
the fuel consumption of a future vehicle must be determined by FSS modeling
and ultimately by constructing a demonstration vehicle.

### **DETAILED VEHICLE SIMULATION**

The committee obtained results of a study by Ricardo, Inc. (2008) for a
complete simulation for a 2007 Camry passenger car. This FSS is discussed
further in Chapter 8; one set of results is used here for illustration. Table
2.6 gives the specifications of the vehicle in terms of the parameters used in
the simulation.

First, the tractive energy and its components for this vehicle were calculated
to illustrate how these vary with different test schedules. Although the US06
cycle described in Table 2.2 is not yet used for fuel economy certification,
it is interesting to note how it affects the energy distribution. Table 2.7
shows the results. Energy to the wheels and rolling resistance increase from
the UDDS to the US06, with the total tractive energy requirement being almost
double that of the UDDS. The aero energy requirement increases from the UDDS
to the HWFET, but it is not much increased in going to the US06, in spite of
the higher peak speed. What is somewhat surprising is the amount of braking
energy for the UDDS and the US06 compared to the HWFET. This is where hybrids
excel.

For the highway, rolling resistance and aero dominate, and very little energy
is dissipated in the brakes. As expected, the aero is dominant for the US06,
where it is more than

TABLE 2.6 Specifications of Vehicle Simulated by Ricardo, Inc. (2008)

Mass

|

1,644 kg

---|--- 

CD

|

0.30

A

|

2.3 m2

TABLE 2.7 Energy Distribution for Various Schedules (in kilowatt-hours)

|

Total Tractive Energy

|

Total Rolling Resistance

|

Total Aerodynamic Drag

|

Braking Energy

|

Braking/Tractive (%)

---|---|---|---|---|--- 

Urban

|

1.250

|

0.440

|

0.310

|

0.500

|

40.00

Highway

|

1.760

|

0.610

|

1.000

|

0.150

|

8.52

US06

|

2.390

|

0.660

|

1.170

|

0.560

|

23.43

Page 22 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

half the total tractive energy. Note, though, that the US06 has a significant
amount of energy dissipated in the brakes.

As discussed earlier, some people will drive in a UDDS environment and some on
the highway. A vehicle optimized for one type of driving will not perform as
well for the other, and it is not possible to derive a schedule that fits all
driving conditions. Table 2.7 shows the impractically of developing a test
that duplicates the actual driving patterns.

Note that the data in Table 2.7 show the actual energy in kilowatt-hours used
to drive each schedule. The unit of total energy is used to allow for an
easier comparison between the schedules on the basis of energy distribution.
Since as shown in Table 2.2, the distances are 7.45 miles for the UDDS, 10.3
miles for the HWFET, and 8 miles for the US06, the energies should be divided
by distance to provide the energy required per mile.

An FSS provides a detailed breakdown of where the energy goes, something that
is not practical to do with real vehicles during a test schedule. Figure 2.4
illustrates the total energy distribution in the midsize car, visually
identifying where the energy goes.

Table 2.8 shows the fuel consumed for this vehicle for the UDDS, HWFET, and
US06 schedules. Efficiency is the ratio of tractive energy divided by "fuel
energy input." Clearly this gives a more succinct picture of the efficiency of
an internal combustion engine power train in converting fuel to propel a
vehicle and to power the accessories. Depending on the drive schedule, it
varies from 15 to 25 percent (including the energy to power accessories). This
range is significantly less than the peak efficiency _η_ _b,max_ discussed
earlier.

In addition to the specific operating characteristics of the particular
components, the computation of engine fuel consumption depends on the
following inputs: (1) the transmission gear at each instant during the driving
schedule and (2) the engine fuel consumption rate during braking and idling.
None of these details is available, so the data in Table 2.8 should be
considered as an illustrative example of the energy distribution in 2007
model-year vehicles with conventional SI power trains.

### **FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS**

**Finding 2.1:** Fuel consumption has been shown to be the fundamental metric
to judge fuel efficiency improvements from both an engineering and a
regulatory viewpoint. Fuel economy data cause consumers to undervalue small
increases (1-4 mpg) in fuel economy for vehicles in the 15- to 30-mpg range,
where large decreases in fuel consumption can be realized with small increases
in fuel economy. For example, consider the comparison of increasing the mpg
rating from 40 mpg to 50 mpg, where the total fuel saved in driving 10,000
miles is only 50 gallons, compared to 500 gallons for a change from 10 mpg to
20 mpg.

![FIGURE 2.4 Energy distribution obtained through full-system simulation for

UDDS \(top\), HWFET \(middle\), and US06 \(bottom\). SOURCE: Ricardo, Inc.

\(2008\).](/openbook/12924/xhtml/images/p2001de39g22001.jpg)

FIGURE 2.4 Energy distribution obtained through full-system simulation for
UDDS (top), HWFET (middle), and US06 (bottom). SOURCE: Ricardo, Inc. (2008).

TABLE 2.8 Results of Full System Simulation (energy values in kilowatt-hours)

|

Total Tractive Energy

|

Fuel Input Energy

|

Power Train Efficiency (%)

---|---|---|--- 

Urban

|

1.250

|

8.59

|

14.6

Highway

|

1.760

|

8.01

|

22.0

US06

|

2.390

|

9.66

|

24.7

Page 23 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

**Recommendation 2.1:** Because differences in the fuel consumption of
vehicles relate directly to fuel savings, the labeling on new cars and light-
duty trucks should include information on the gallons of fuel consumed per 100
miles traveled in addition to the already-supplied data on fuel economy so
that consumers can become familiar with fuel consumption as a fundamental
metric for calculating fuel savings.

**Finding 2.2:** Fuel consumption in this report is evaluated by means of the
two EPA schedules: UDDS and HWFET. In the opinion of the committee, the
schedules used to compute CAFE should be modified so that vehicle test data
better reflect actual fuel consumption. Excluding some driving conditions and
accessory loads in determining CAFE discourages the introduction of certain
technologies into the vehicle fleet. The three additional schedules recently
adopted by the EPA for vehicle labeling purposes --ones that capture the
effects of higher speed and acceleration, air-conditioner use, and cold
weather--represent a positive step forward, but further study is needed to
assess to what degree the new test procedures can fully characterize changes
in in-use vehicle fuel consumption.

**Recommendation 2.2:** The NHTSA and the EPA should review and revise fuel
economy test procedures so that they better reflect in-use vehicle operating
conditions and also better provide the proper incentives to manufacturers to
produce vehicles that reduce fuel consumption.

### **REFERENCES**

EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2008. Light-Duty Automotive
Technology and Fuel Economy Trends: 1975 Through 2008. EPA420-R-08-015.
September. Washington, D.C.

Fischer, C. 2009. Let's turn CAFE regulation on its head. Issue Brief No.
09-06. May. Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.

Foljambe, E.S. 1916. The automobile fuel situation. SAE Transactions, Vol. 11,
Pt. I.

General Motors Company. 2009. Chevy Volt gets 230 mpg city EPA rating. Press
release. August 11.

Heywood, J.B., 1988. Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals. McGraw-Hill, New
York.

Kettering, C.F. 1918. Modern aeronautic engines. SAE Transactions, Vol. 13,
Pt. II.

Larrick, R., and J. Soll. 2008. The mpg illusion. Science 320(5883):1593-1594.

Ricardo, Inc. 2008. A Study of Potential Effectiveness of Carbon Dioxide
Reducing Vehicle Technologies. Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. EPA420-R-08-004. Contract No. EP-C-06-003. Work Assignment No. 1-14.
Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Sovran, G., and D. Blaser. 2003. A contribution to understanding automotive
fuel economy and its limits. SAE Paper 2003-01-2070. SAE International,
Warrendale, Pa.

Sovran, G., and D. Blaser. 2006. Quantifying the potential impacts of
regenerative braking on a vehicle's tractive-fuel consumption for the US,
European and Japanese driving schedules. SAE Paper 2006-01-0664. SAE
International, Warrendale, Pa.

Page 12 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

12](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 13 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

13](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 14 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

14](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 15 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

15](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 16 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

16](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 17 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

17](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 18 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

18](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 19 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

19](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 20 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

20](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 21 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

21](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 22 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

22](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Page 23 Share Cite

**Suggested Citation:** "2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption." National
Research Council. 2011. _Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-
Duty Vehicles_. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:
10.17226/12924.

×

Save

Cancel

![Page

23](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Next: 3 Cost Estimation »

![The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and

Medicine](/images/hdr/logo-nasem-wht-lg.png) The National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine  
500 Fifth St., NW | Washington, DC 20001

(C) 2019 National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Terms of Use and Privacy Statement

Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-Duty Vehicles Get This Book

×

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAYAAAAfFcSJAAAAAXNSR0IArs4c6QAAAARnQU1BAACxjwv8YQUAAAAJcEhZcwAADsQAAA7EAZUrDhsAAAANSURBVBhXYzh8+PB/AAffA0nNPuCLAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)

Buy Paperback | $60.00 Buy Ebook | $47.99

MyNAP members save 10% online.  
Login or Register to save!

Download Free PDF

Various combinations of commercially available technologies could greatly
reduce fuel consumption in passenger cars, sport-utility vehicles, minivans,
and other light-duty vehicles without compromising vehicle performance or
safety. _Assessment of Technologies for Improving Light Duty Vehicle Fuel
Economy_ estimates the potential fuel savings and costs to consumers of
available technology combinations for three types of engines: spark-ignition
gasoline, compression-ignition diesel, and hybrid.

According to its estimates, adopting the full combination of improved
technologies in medium and large cars and pickup trucks with spark-ignition
engines could reduce fuel consumption by 29 percent at an additional cost of
$2,200 to the consumer. Replacing spark-ignition engines with diesel engines
and components would yield fuel savings of about 37 percent at an added cost
of approximately $5,900 per vehicle, and replacing spark-ignition engines with
hybrid engines and components would reduce fuel consumption by 43 percent at
an increase of $6,000 per vehicle.

The book focuses on fuel consumption--the amount of fuel consumed in a given
driving distance--because energy savings are directly related to the amount of
fuel used. In contrast, fuel economy measures how far a vehicle will travel
with a gallon of fuel. Because fuel consumption data indicate money saved on
fuel purchases and reductions in carbon dioxide emissions, the book finds that
vehicle stickers should provide consumers with fuel consumption data in
addition to fuel economy information.

## Contents

            
                            *         * Front Matter i–xiv
                * Summary 1–8
                * 1 Introduction 9–11
                * 2 Fundamentals of Fuel Consumption 12–23
                * 3 Cost Estimation 24–37
                * 4 Spark-Ignition Gasoline Engines 38–60
                * 5 Compression-Ignition Diesel Engines 61–83
                * 6 Hybrid Power Trains 84–98
                * 7 Non-Engine Technologies 99–117
                * 8 Modeling Improvements in Vehicle Fuel Consumption 118–137
                * 9 Application of Vehicle Technologies to Vehicle Classes 138–156
                * Appendixes 157–158
                * Appendix A: Committee Biographies 159–162
                * Appendix B: Statement of Task 163–164
                * Appendix C: List of Presentations at Public Committee Meetings 165–166
                * Appendix D: Select Acronyms 167–168
                * Appendix E: Comparison of Fuel Consumption and Fuel Economy 169–170
                * Appendix F: Review of Estimate of Retail Price Equivalent Markup Factors 171–176
                * Appendix G: Compression-Ignition Engine Replacement for Full-Size Pickup/SUV 177–180
                * Appendix H:Other NRC Assessments of Benefits, Costs, and Readiness of Fuel Economy Technologies 181–188
                * Appendix I: Results of Other Major Studies 189–207
                * Appendix J: Probabilities in Estimation of Fuel Consumption Benefits and Costs 208–209
                * Appendix K: Model Description and Results for the EEA-ICF Model 210–218
            
                1. ×
            

## Welcome to OpenBook!

You're looking at OpenBook, NAP.edu's online reading room since 1999. Based on
feedback from you, our users, we've made some improvements that make it easier
than ever to read thousands of publications on our website.

Do you want to take a quick tour of the OpenBook's features?

No Thanks Take a Tour »

            
                            2. ×
            

Show this book's **table of contents** , where you can jump to any chapter by
name.

« Back Next »

            
                            3. ×
            

...or use these buttons to go back to the **previous** chapter or skip to the
**next** one.

« Back Next »

            
                            4. ×
            

Jump up to the **previous** page or down to the **next** one. Also, you can
type in a page number and press `Enter` to go directly to that page in the
book.

« Back Next »

            
                            5. ×
            

Switch between the **Original Pages** , where you can read the report as it
appeared in print, and **Text Pages** for the web version, where you can
highlight and search the text.

« Back Next »

            
                            6. ×
            

To **search** the entire text of this book, type in your search term here and
press `Enter`.

« Back Next »

            
                            7. ×
            

**Share** a link to this book page on your preferred social network or via
email.

« Back Next »

            
                            8. ×
            

View our **suggested citation** for this chapter.

« Back Next »

            
                            9. ×
            

Ready to take your reading offline? Click here to **buy** this book in print
or **download** it as a free PDF, if available.

« Back Next »

Stay Connected!

### Get Email Updates

×

Do you enjoy reading reports from the Academies online **for free**? Sign up
for email notifications and we'll let you know about new publications in your
areas of interest when they're released.

Send me updates!

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [*]: required

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required

