

commerce.gov

noaa.gov

![Ocean Explorer Banner](/images/banner_oe_uw.jpg)

Home | About OER | Expeditions | Science and Technology | Data and Results |
Education | Multimedia | News

Ocean Exploration Facts | Weather and Climate

# **The ocean plays a fundamental role in shaping the climate zones we see on

land. Even areas hundreds of miles away from any coastline are still largely
influenced by the global ocean system.**

![Illustration of major ocean currents throughout the globe. Ocean currents

act as conveyer belts of warm and cold water, sending heat toward the polar

regions and helping tropical areas cool off.](climate.jpg)

Illustration of major ocean currents throughout the globe. Ocean currents act
as conveyer belts of warm and cold water, sending heat toward the polar
regions and helping tropical areas cool off.

The world's ocean is crucial to heating the planet. While land areas and the
atmosphere absorb some sunlight, the majority of the sun's radiation is
absorbed by the ocean. Particularly in the tropical waters around the equator,
the ocean acts a as massive, heat-retaining solar panel. Earth's atmosphere
also plays a part in this process, helping to retain heat that would otherwise
quickly radiate into space after sunset.

The ocean doesn't just store solar radiation; it also helps to distribute heat
around the globe. When water molecules are heated, they exchange freely with
the air in a process called evaporation. Ocean water is constantly
evaporating, increasing the temperature and humidity of the surrounding air to
form rain and storms that are then carried by trade winds, often vast
distances. In fact, almost all rain that falls on land starts off in the
ocean. The tropics are particularly rainy because heat absorption, and thus
ocean evaporation, is highest in this area.

Outside of Earth's equatorial areas, weather patterns are driven largely by
ocean currents. Currents are movements of ocean water in a continuous flow,
created largely by surface winds but also partly by temperature and salinity
gradients, Earth's rotation, and tides (the gravitational effects of the sun
and moon). Major current systems typically flow clockwise in the northern
hemisphere and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere, in circular
patterns that often trace the coastlines.

Ocean currents act much like a conveyer belt, transporting warm water and
precipitation from the equator toward the poles and cold water from the poles
back to the tropics. Thus, currents regulate global climate, helping to
counteract the uneven distribution of solar radiation reaching Earth's
surface. Without currents, regional temperatures would be more extreme—super
hot at the equator and frigid toward the poles—and much less of Earth's land
would be habitable.

## For More Information:

Multimedia Discovery Mission: The Water Cycle

Multimedia Discovery Mission: Ocean Currents

Investigating the Charleston Bump: Ocean Weather

Sign up for the Ocean Explorer E-mail Update List.

* * *

![Facebook](/siteart/facebook-footer.png) ![Twitter](/siteart/twitter-

footer.png) ![YouTube](/siteart/youtube-footer.png)
![Instagram](/siteart/instagram-footer.png) ![Flickr](/siteart/flickr-

footer.png) ![Live Video Mobile App](/siteart/mobile-icon-footer.png)

![NOAA Logo](/siteart/home/incl_media/noaa.gif) ![Commerce

Logo](/siteart/home/incl_media/doc.gif)

Email Updates | User Survey | Contact Us | Report Error | Privacy Policy |
Disclaimer | Site Info | Site Index  
Revised May 21, 2018 by the NOAA Ocean Explorer Webmaster  
Office of Ocean Exploration and Research | National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration |  
U.S. Department of Commerce  
http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/facts/climate.html

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

