

# Ozone depletion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Stratospheric phenomena of Earth

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ea/NASA_and_NOAA_Announce_Ozone_Hole_is_a_Double_Record_Breaker.png/290px-

NASA_and_NOAA_Announce_Ozone_Hole_is_a_Double_Record_Breaker.png)

Image of the largest Antarctic ozone hole ever recorded over the South Pole in
September 2006

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/46/Future_ozone_layer_concentrations.gif/220px-

Future_ozone_layer_concentrations.gif)

NASA projections of stratospheric ozone concentrations if chlorofluorocarbons
had not been banned

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f9/Atmosphere_layers-

en.svg/170px-Atmosphere_layers-en.svg.png)

Layers of the atmosphere (not to scale). The Earth's ozone layer is mainly
found in the lower portion of the stratosphere from approximately 20 to 30 km
(12 to 19 mi).

External audio![Atmospheric

ozone.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ec/Atmospheric_ozone.svg/210px-

Atmospheric_ozone.svg.png)

* * *

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e2/Nuvola_apps_arts.svg/16px-

Nuvola_apps_arts.svg.png) “Whatever Happened to the Ozone Hole?”,
_Distillations_ Podcast Episode 230, April 17, 2018, Science History Institute

**Ozone depletion** consists of two related events observed since the late
1970s: a steady lowering of about four percent in the total amount of ozone in
Earth's atmosphere (the ozone layer), and a much larger springtime decrease in
stratospheric ozone around Earth's polar regions.[1] The latter phenomenon is
referred to as the **ozone hole**. There are also springtime polar
tropospheric ozone depletion events in addition to these stratospheric events.

The main cause of ozone depletion and the ozone hole is manufactured
chemicals, especially manufactured halocarbon refrigerants, solvents,
propellants and foam-blowing agents (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), HCFCs,
halons), referred to as **ozone-depleting substances** ( **ODS** ). These
compounds are transported into the stratosphere by turbulent mixing after
being emitted from the surface, mixing much faster than the molecules can
settle.[2] Once in the stratosphere, they release halogen atoms through
photodissociation, which catalyze the breakdown of ozone (O3) into oxygen
(O2).[3] Both types of ozone depletion were observed to increase as emissions
of halocarbons increased.

Ozone depletion and the ozone hole have generated worldwide concern over
increased cancer risks and other negative effects. The ozone layer prevents
most harmful UVB wavelengths of ultraviolet light (UV light) from passing
through the Earth's atmosphere. These wavelengths cause skin cancer, sunburn
and cataracts, which were projected to increase dramatically as a result of
thinning ozone, as well as harming plants and animals. These concerns led to
the adoption of the Montreal Protocol in 1987, which bans the production of
CFCs, halons and other ozone-depleting chemicals.

The ban came into effect in 1989. Ozone levels stabilized by the mid-1990s and
began to recover in the 2000s. Recovery is projected to continue over the next
century, and the ozone hole is expected to reach pre-1980 levels by around
2075.[4] The Montreal Protocol is considered the most successful international
environmental agreement to date.[5][6]

## Contents

            
                            * 1 Ozone cycle overview
                * 2 Observations on ozone layer depletion
                  * 2.1 Compounds in the atmosphere
                    * 2.1.1 CFCs and related compounds in the atmosphere
                  * 2.2 Computer modeling
                * 3 Ozone hole and its causes
                  * 3.1 Interest in ozone layer depletion
                * 4 Consequences of ozone layer depletion
                  * 4.1 Increased UV
                  * 4.2 Biological effects
                    * 4.2.1 Basal and squamous cell carcinomas
                    * 4.2.2 Malignant melanoma
                    * 4.2.3 Cortical cataracts
                    * 4.2.4 Increased tropospheric ozone
                    * 4.2.5 Increased production of vitamin D
                    * 4.2.6 Effects on animals
                    * 4.2.7 Effects on crops
                * 5 Public policy
                  * 5.1 ODS requirements in the marine industry
                * 6 Prospects of ozone depletion
                * 7 Research history
                  * 7.1 Rowland–Molina hypothesis
                  * 7.2 Antarctic ozone hole
                  * 7.3 Arctic ozone hole
                  * 7.4 Tibet ozone hole
                  * 7.5 Potential depletion by storm clouds
                * 8 Ozone depletion and global warming
                * 9 Misconceptions
                  * 9.1 CFC weight
                  * 9.2 Percentage of man-made chlorine
                  * 9.3 First observation
                  * 9.4 Location of hole
                * 10 World Ozone Day
                * 11 See also
                * 12 References
                * 13 Further reading
                * 14 External links
            

## Ozone cycle overview[edit]

Three forms (or allotropes) of oxygen are involved in the ozone-oxygen cycle:
oxygen atoms (O or atomic oxygen), oxygen gas (O  
2 or diatomic oxygen), and ozone gas (O  
3 or triatomic oxygen). Ozone is formed in the stratosphere when oxygen
molecules photodissociate after absorbing ultraviolet photons. This converts a
single O  
2 into two atomic oxygen radicals. The atomic oxygen radicals then combine
with separate O  
2 molecules to create two O  
3 molecules. These ozone molecules absorb ultraviolet (UV) light, following
which ozone splits into a molecule of O  
2 and an oxygen atom. The oxygen atom then joins up with an oxygen molecule to
regenerate ozone. This is a continuing process that terminates when an oxygen
atom recombines with an ozone molecule to make two O  
2 molecules.

O + O  
3 → 2 O  
2

The total amount of ozone in the stratosphere is determined by a balance
between photochemical production and recombination.

Ozone can be destroyed by a number of free radical catalysts; the most
important are the hydroxyl radical (OH·), nitric oxide radical (NO·), chlorine
radical (Cl·) and bromine radical (Br·). The dot is a notation to indicate
that each species has an unpaired electron and is thus extremely reactive. All
of these have both natural and man-made sources; at the present time, most of
the OH· and NO· in the stratosphere is naturally occurring, but human activity
has drastically increased the levels of chlorine and bromine. These elements
are found in stable organic compounds, especially chlorofluorocarbons, which
can travel to the stratosphere without being destroyed in the troposphere due
to their low reactivity. Once in the stratosphere, the Cl and Br atoms are
released from the parent compounds by the action of ultraviolet light, e.g.

CFCl  
3 + electromagnetic radiation → Cl· + ·CFCl  
2

Ozone is a highly reactive molecule that easily reduces to the more stable
oxygen form with the assistance of a catalyst. Cl and Br atoms destroy ozone
molecules through a variety of catalytic cycles. In the simplest example of
such a cycle,[7] a chlorine atom reacts with an ozone molecule (O  
3), taking an oxygen atom to form chlorine monoxide (ClO) and leaving an
oxygen molecule (O  
2). The ClO can react with a second molecule of ozone, releasing the chlorine
atom and yielding two molecules of oxygen. The chemical shorthand for these
gas-phase reactions is:

            
                            * Cl· + O
            

3 → ClO + O  
2  
A chlorine atom removes an oxygen atom from an ozone molecule to make a ClO
molecule

            
                            * ClO + O
            

3 → Cl· + 2 O  
2  
This ClO can also remove an oxygen atom from another ozone molecule; the
chlorine is free to repeat this two-step cycle

The overall effect is a decrease in the amount of ozone, though the rate of
these processes can be decreased by the effects of null cycles. More
complicated mechanisms have also been discovered that lead to ozone
destruction in the lower stratosphere.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/28/Ozone_cycle.svg/370px-

Ozone_cycle.svg.png)

The ozone cycle

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7d/TOMS_Global_Ozone_65N-65S.png/370px-

TOMS_Global_Ozone_65N-65S.png)

Global monthly average total ozone amount

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/00/Min_ozone.jpg/370px-

Min_ozone.jpg)

Lowest value of ozone measured by TOMS each year in the ozone hole

A single chlorine atom would continuously destroy ozone (thus a catalyst) for
up to two years (the time scale for transport back down to the troposphere)
were it not for reactions that remove them from this cycle by forming
reservoir species such as hydrogen chloride (HCl) and chlorine nitrate (ClONO  
2). Bromine is even more efficient than chlorine at destroying ozone on a per
atom basis, but there is much less bromine in the atmosphere at present. Both
chlorine and bromine contribute significantly to overall ozone depletion.
Laboratory studies have also shown that fluorine and iodine atoms participate
in analogous catalytic cycles. However, fluorine atoms react rapidly with
water and methane to form strongly bound HF in the Earth's stratosphere, while
organic molecules containing iodine react so rapidly in the lower atmosphere
that they do not reach the stratosphere in significant quantities.

A single chlorine atom is able to react with an average of 100,000 ozone
molecules before it is removed from the catalytic cycle. This fact plus the
amount of chlorine released into the atmosphere yearly by chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) demonstrates the danger of CFCs
and HCFCs to the environment.[8][9]

## Observations on ozone layer depletion[edit]

The ozone hole is usually measured by reduction in the total _column ozone_
above a point on the Earth's surface. This is normally expressed in Dobson
units; abbreviated as "DU". The most prominent decrease in ozone has been in
the lower stratosphere. Marked decreases in column ozone in the Antarctic
spring and early summer compared to the early 1970s and before have been
observed using instruments such as the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer
(TOMS).[10]

Reductions of up to 70 percent in the ozone column observed in the austral
(southern hemispheric) spring over Antarctica and first reported in 1985
(Farman et al.) are continuing. Antarctic total column ozone in September and
October have continued to be 40–50 percent lower than pre-ozone-hole values
since the 1990s.[1] A gradual trend toward "healing" was reported in 2016.[11]
In 2017, NASA announced that the ozone hole was the weakest since 1988 because
of warm stratospheric conditions. It is expected to recover around 2070.[12]

The amount lost is more variable year-to-year in the Arctic than in the
Antarctic. The greatest Arctic declines are in the winter and spring, reaching
up to 30 percent when the stratosphere is coldest.

Reactions that take place on polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) play an
important role in enhancing ozone depletion.[13] PSCs form more readily in the
extreme cold of the Arctic and Antarctic stratosphere. This is why ozone holes
first formed, and are deeper, over Antarctica. Early models failed to take
PSCs into account and predicted a gradual global depletion, which is why the
sudden Antarctic ozone hole was such a surprise to many
scientists.[14][15][16]

It is more accurate to speak of ozone depletion in middle latitudes rather
than holes. Total column ozone declined below pre-1980 values between 1980 and
1996 for mid-latitudes. In the northern mid-latitudes, it then increased from
the minimum value by about two percent from 1996 to 2009 as regulations took
effect and the amount of chlorine in the stratosphere decreased. In the
Southern Hemisphere's mid-latitudes, total ozone remained constant over that
time period. There are no significant trends in the tropics, largely because
halogen-containing compounds have not had time to break down and release
chlorine and bromine atoms at tropical latitudes.[1][17]

Large volcanic eruptions have been shown to have substantial albeit uneven
ozone-depleting effects, as observed with the 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinotubo in
the Philippines.[18]

Ozone depletion also explains much of the observed reduction in stratospheric
and upper tropospheric temperatures.[19][20] The source of the warmth of the
stratosphere is the absorption of UV radiation by ozone, hence reduced ozone
leads to cooling. Some stratospheric cooling is also predicted from increases
in greenhouse gases such as CO  
2 and CFCs themselves; however, the ozone-induced cooling appears to be
dominant.[21]

Predictions of ozone levels remain difficult, but the precision of models'
predictions of observed values and the agreement among different modeling
techniques have increased steadily.[1] The World Meteorological Organization
Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project—Report No. 44 comes out strongly
in favor of the Montreal Protocol, but notes that a UNEP 1994 Assessment
overestimated ozone loss for the 1994–1997 period.[22]

### Compounds in the atmosphere[edit]

#### CFCs and related compounds in the atmosphere[edit]

Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other halogenated ozone depleting substances
(ODS) are mainly responsible for man-made chemical ozone depletion. The total
amount of effective halogens (chlorine and bromine) in the stratosphere can be
calculated and are known as the equivalent effective stratospheric chlorine
(EESC).[23]

CFCs were invented by Thomas Midgley, Jr. in the 1930s. They were used in air
conditioning and cooling units, as aerosol spray propellants prior to the
1970s, and in the cleaning processes of delicate electronic equipment. They
also occur as by-products of some chemical processes. No significant natural
sources have ever been identified for these compounds—their presence in the
atmosphere is due almost entirely to human manufacture. As mentioned above,
when such ozone-depleting chemicals reach the stratosphere, they are
dissociated by ultraviolet light to release chlorine atoms. The chlorine atoms
act as a catalyst, and each can break down tens of thousands of ozone
molecules before being removed from the stratosphere. Given the longevity of
CFC molecules, recovery times are measured in decades. It is calculated that a
CFC molecule takes an average of about five to seven years to go from the
ground level up to the upper atmosphere, and it can stay there for about a
century, destroying up to one hundred thousand ozone molecules during that
time.[24][ _verification needed_ ]

1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane, also known as CFC-113a, is one of four
man-made chemicals newly discovered in the atmosphere by a team at the
University of East Anglia. CFC-113a is the only known CFC whose abundance in
the atmosphere is still growing. Its source remains a mystery, but illegal
manufacturing is suspected by some. CFC-113a seems to have been accumulating
unabated since 1960. Between 2010 and 2012, emissions of the gas jumped by 45
percent.[25][26]

### Computer modeling[edit]

Scientists have attributed ozone depletion to the increase of man-made
(anthropogenic) halogen compounds from CFCs by combining observational data
with computer models. These complex chemistry transport models (e.g. SLIMCAT,
CLaMS—Chemical Lagrangian Model of the Stratosphere) work by combining
measurements of chemicals and meteorological fields with chemical reaction
rate constants. They identify key chemical reactions and transport processes
that bring CFC photolysis products into contact with ozone.

## Ozone hole and its causes[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Uars_ozone_waves.jpg/370px-

Uars_ozone_waves.jpg)

Ozone hole in North America during 1984 (abnormally warm reducing ozone
depletion) and 1997 (abnormally cold resulting in increased seasonal
depletion). Source: NASA[27]

The Antarctic ozone hole is an area of the Antarctic stratosphere in which the
recent ozone levels have dropped to as low as 33 percent of their pre-1975
values. The ozone hole occurs during the Antarctic spring, from September to
early December, as strong westerly winds start to circulate around the
continent and create an atmospheric container. Within this polar vortex, over
50 percent of the lower stratospheric ozone is destroyed during the Antarctic
spring.[28]

As explained above, the primary cause of ozone depletion is the presence of
chlorine-containing source gases (primarily CFCs and related halocarbons). In
the presence of UV light, these gases dissociate, releasing chlorine atoms,
which then go on to catalyze ozone destruction. The Cl-catalyzed ozone
depletion can take place in the gas phase, but it is dramatically enhanced in
the presence of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs).[29]

These polar stratospheric clouds form during winter, in the extreme cold.
Polar winters are dark, consisting of three months without solar radiation
(sunlight). The lack of sunlight contributes to a decrease in temperature and
the polar vortex traps and chills air. Temperatures hover around or below −80
°C. These low temperatures form cloud particles. There are three types of PSC
clouds—nitric acid trihydrate clouds, slowly cooling water-ice clouds, and
rapid cooling water-ice (nacerous) clouds—provide surfaces for chemical
reactions whose products will, in the spring lead to ozone destruction.[30]

The photochemical processes involved are complex but well understood. The key
observation is that, ordinarily, most of the chlorine in the stratosphere
resides in "reservoir" compounds, primarily chlorine nitrate (ClONO  
2) as well as stable end products such as HCl. The formation of end products
essentially remove Cl from the ozone depletion process. The former sequester
Cl, which can be later made available via absorption of light at shorter
wavelengths than 400 nm.[31] During the Antarctic winter and spring, however,
reactions on the surface of the polar stratospheric cloud particles convert
these "reservoir" compounds into reactive free radicals (Cl and ClO). The
process by which the clouds remove NO  
2 from the stratosphere by converting it to nitric acid in the PSC particles,
which then are lost by sedimentation is called denitrification. This prevents
newly formed ClO from being converted back into ClONO  
2. 

The role of sunlight in ozone depletion is the reason why the Antarctic ozone
depletion is greatest during spring. During winter, even though PSCs are at
their most abundant, there is no light over the pole to drive chemical
reactions. During the spring, however, the sun comes out, providing energy to
drive photochemical reactions and melt the polar stratospheric clouds,
releasing considerable ClO, which drives the hole mechanism. Further warming
temperatures near the end of spring break up the vortex around mid-December.
As warm, ozone and NO  
2-rich air flows in from lower latitudes, the PSCs are destroyed, the enhanced
ozone depletion process shuts down, and the ozone hole closes.[32]

Most of the ozone that is destroyed is in the lower stratosphere, in contrast
to the much smaller ozone depletion through homogeneous gas phase reactions,
which occurs primarily in the upper stratosphere.[33]

### Interest in ozone layer depletion[edit]

Public misconceptions and misunderstandings of complex issues like the ozone
depletion are common. The limited scientific knowledge of the public led to a
confusion with global warming[34] or the perception of global warming as a
subset of the "ozone hole".[35] In the beginning, classical green NGOs
refrained from using CFC depletion for campaigning, as they assumed the topic
was too complicated.[36] They became active much later, e.g. in Greenpeace's
support for a CFC-free fridge produced by the former East German company VEB
dkk Scharfenstein.[36][37]

The metaphors used in the CFC discussion (ozone shield, ozone hole) are not
"exact" in the scientific sense. The "ozone hole" is more of a _depression_ ,
less "a hole in the windshield". The ozone does not disappear through the
layer, nor is there a uniform "thinning" of the ozone layer. However they
resonated better with non-scientists and their concerns.[38] The ozone hole
was seen as a "hot issue" and imminent risk[39] as lay people feared severe
personal consequences such as skin cancer, cataracts, damage to plants, and
reduction of plankton populations in the ocean's photic zone. Not only on the
policy level, ozone regulation compared to climate change fared much better in
public opinion. Americans voluntarily switched away from aerosol sprays before
legislation was enforced, while climate change failed to achieve comparable
concern and public action.[38] The sudden recognition in 1985 that there was a
substantial "hole" was widely reported in the press. The especially rapid
ozone depletion in Antarctica had previously been dismissed as a measurement
error.[40] Scientific consensus was established after regulation.[36]

While the Antarctic ozone hole has a relatively small effect on global ozone,
the hole has generated a great deal of public interest because:

            
                            * Many have worried that ozone holes might start appearing over other areas of the globe, though to date the only other large-scale depletion is a smaller ozone "dimple" observed during the Arctic spring around the North Pole. Ozone at middle latitudes has declined, but by a much smaller extent (a decrease of about 4–5 percent).
                * If stratospheric conditions become more severe (cooler temperatures, more clouds, more active chlorine), global ozone may decrease at a greater pace. Standard global warming theory predicts that the stratosphere will cool.[41]
                * When the Antarctic ozone hole breaks up each year, the ozone-depleted air drifts out into nearby regions. Decreases in the ozone level of up to 10 percent have been reported in New Zealand in the month following the breakup of the Antarctic ozone hole,[42] with ultraviolet-B radiation intensities increasing by more than 15 percent since the 1970s.[43][44]
            

## Consequences of ozone layer depletion[edit]

Since the ozone layer absorbs UVB ultraviolet light from the sun, ozone layer
depletion increases surface UVB levels (all else equal), which could lead to
damage, including increase in skin cancer. This was the reason for the
Montreal Protocol. Although decreases in stratospheric ozone are well-tied to
CFCs and to increases in surface UVB, there is no direct observational
evidence linking ozone depletion to higher incidence of skin cancer and eye
damage in human beings. This is partly because UVA, which has also been
implicated in some forms of skin cancer, is not absorbed by ozone, and because
it is nearly impossible to control statistics for lifestyle changes over time.

### Increased UV[edit]

Ozone, while a minority constituent in Earth's atmosphere, is responsible for
most of the absorption of UVB radiation. The amount of UVB radiation that
penetrates through the ozone layer decreases exponentially with the slant-path
thickness and density of the layer. When stratospheric ozone levels decrease,
higher levels of UVB reach the Earth’s surface.[1][45] UV-driven phenolic
formation in tree rings has dated the start of ozone depletion in northern
latitudes to the late 1700s.[46]

In October 2008, the Ecuadorian Space Agency published a report called
HIPERION. The study used ground instruments in Ecuador and the last 28 years'
data from 12 satellites of several countries, and found that the UV radiation
reaching equatorial latitudes was far greater than expected, with the UV Index
climbing as high as 24 in Quito; the WHO considers 11 as an extreme index and
a great risk to health. The report concluded that depleted ozone levels around
the mid-latitudes of the planet are already endangering large populations in
these areas.[47] Later, the CONIDA, the Peruvian Space Agency, published its
own study, which yielded almost the same findings as the Ecuadorian study.

### Biological effects[edit]

The main public concern regarding the ozone hole has been the effects of
increased surface UV radiation on human health. So far, ozone depletion in
most locations has been typically a few percent and, as noted above, no direct
evidence of health damage is available in most latitudes. If the high levels
of depletion seen in the ozone hole were to be common across the globe, the
effects could be substantially more dramatic. As the ozone hole over
Antarctica has in some instances grown so large as to affect parts of
Australia, New Zealand, Chile, Argentina, and South Africa, environmentalists
have been concerned that the increase in surface UV could be significant.[48]

Ozone depletion would magnify all of the effects of UV on human health, both
positive (including production of vitamin D) and negative (including sunburn,
skin cancer, and cataracts). In addition, increased surface UV leads to
increased tropospheric ozone, which is a health risk to humans.

#### Basal and squamous cell carcinomas[edit]

The most common forms of skin cancer in humans, basal and squamous cell
carcinomas, have been strongly linked to UVB exposure. The mechanism by which
UVB induces these cancers is well understood—absorption of UVB radiation
causes the pyrimidine bases in the DNA molecule to form dimers, resulting in
transcription errors when the DNA replicates. These cancers are relatively
mild and rarely fatal, although the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma
sometimes requires extensive reconstructive surgery. By combining
epidemiological data with results of animal studies, scientists have estimated
that every one percent decrease in long-term stratospheric ozone would
increase the incidence of these cancers by two percent.[49]

#### Malignant melanoma[edit]

Another form of skin cancer, malignant melanoma, is much less common but far
more dangerous, being lethal in about 15–20 percent of the cases diagnosed.
The relationship between malignant melanoma and ultraviolet exposure is not
yet fully understood, but it appears that both UVB and UVA are involved.
Because of this uncertainty, it is difficult to estimate the effect of ozone
depletion on melanoma incidence. One study showed that a 10 percent increase
in UVB radiation was associated with a 19 percent increase in melanomas for
men and 16 percent for women.[50] A study of people in Punta Arenas, at the
southern tip of Chile, showed a 56 percent increase in melanoma and a 46
percent increase in nonmelanoma skin cancer over a period of seven years,
along with decreased ozone and increased UVB levels.[51]

#### Cortical cataracts[edit]

Epidemiological studies suggest an association between ocular cortical
cataracts and UVB exposure, using crude approximations of exposure and various
cataract assessment techniques. A detailed assessment of ocular exposure to
UVB was carried out in a study on Chesapeake Bay Watermen, where increases in
average annual ocular exposure were associated with increasing risk of
cortical opacity.[52] In this highly exposed group of predominantly white
males, the evidence linking cortical opacities to sunlight exposure was the
strongest to date. Based on these results, ozone depletion is predicted to
cause hundreds of thousands of additional cataracts by 2050.[53]

#### Increased tropospheric ozone[edit]

Increased surface UV leads to increased tropospheric ozone. Ground-level ozone
is generally recognized to be a health risk, as ozone is toxic due to its
strong oxidant properties. The risks are particularly high for young children,
the elderly, and those with asthma or other respiratory difficulties. At this
time, ozone at ground level is produced mainly by the action of UV radiation
on combustion gases from vehicle exhausts.[54]

#### Increased production of vitamin D[edit]

Vitamin D is produced in the skin by ultraviolet light. Thus, higher UVB
exposure raises human vitamin D in those deficient in it. Recent research
(primarily since the Montreal Protocol) shows that many humans have less than
optimal vitamin D levels. In particular, in the U.S. population, the lowest
quarter of vitamin D (<17.8 ng/ml) were found using information from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to be associated with an
increase in all-cause mortality in the general population.[55] While blood
level of vitamin D in excess of 100 ng/ml appear to raise blood calcium
excessively and to be associated with higher mortality, the body has
mechanisms that prevent sunlight from producing vitamin D in excess of the
body's requirements.[56]

#### Effects on animals[edit]

A November 2010 report by scientists at the Institute of Zoology in London
found that whales off the coast of California have shown a sharp rise in sun
damage, and these scientists "fear that the thinning ozone layer is to
blame".[57] The study photographed and took skin biopsies from over 150 whales
in the Gulf of California and found "widespread evidence of epidermal damage
commonly associated with acute and severe sunburn", having cells that form
when the DNA is damaged by UV radiation. The findings suggest "rising UV
levels as a result of ozone depletion are to blame for the observed skin
damage, in the same way that human skin cancer rates have been on the increase
in recent decades."[58]

#### Effects on crops[edit]

An increase of UV radiation would be expected to affect crops. A number of
economically important species of plants, such as rice, depend on
cyanobacteria residing on their roots for the retention of nitrogen.
Cyanobacteria are sensitive to UV radiation and would be affected by its
increase.[59] "Despite mechanisms to reduce or repair the effects of increased
ultraviolet radiation, plants have a limited ability to adapt to increased
levels of UVB, therefore plant growth can be directly affected by UVB
radiation."[60]

## Public policy[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/46/Future_ozone_layer_concentrations.gif/220px-

Future_ozone_layer_concentrations.gif)

NASA projections of stratospheric ozone concentrations if chlorofluorocarbons
had not been banned

The full extent of the damage that CFCs have caused to the ozone layer is not
known and will not be known for decades; however, marked decreases in column
ozone have already been observed. The Montreal and Vienna conventions were
installed long before a scientific consensus was established or important
uncertainties in the science field were being resolved.[36] The ozone case was
understood comparably well by lay persons as e.g. _Ozone shield_ or _ozone
hole_ were useful "easy-to-understand bridging metaphors".[38] Americans
voluntarily switched away from aerosol sprays, resulting in a 50 percent sales
loss even before legislation was enforced.[38]

After a 1976 report by the United States National Academy of Sciences
concluded that credible scientific evidence supported the ozone depletion
hypothesis[61] a few countries, including the United States, Canada, Sweden,
Denmark, and Norway, moved to eliminate the use of CFCs in aerosol spray
cans.[62] At the time this was widely regarded as a first step towards a more
comprehensive regulation policy, but progress in this direction slowed in
subsequent years, due to a combination of political factors (continued
resistance from the halocarbon industry and a general change in attitude
towards environmental regulation during the first two years of the Reagan
administration) and scientific developments (subsequent National Academy
assessments that indicated that the first estimates of the magnitude of ozone
depletion had been overly large). A critical DuPont manufacturing patent for
Freon was set to expire in 1979. The United States banned the use of CFCs in
aerosol cans in 1978.[62] The European Community rejected proposals to ban
CFCs in aerosol sprays, and in the U.S., CFCs continued to be used as
refrigerants and for cleaning circuit boards. Worldwide CFC production fell
sharply after the U.S. aerosol ban, but by 1986 had returned nearly to its
1976 level.[62] In 1993, DuPont Canada closed its CFC facility.[63]

The U.S. government's attitude began to change again in 1983, when William
Ruckelshaus replaced Anne M. Burford as Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. Under Ruckelshaus and his successor, Lee
Thomas, the EPA pushed for an international approach to halocarbon
regulations. In 1985 twenty nations, including most of the major CFC
producers, signed the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer,
which established a framework for negotiating international regulations on
ozone-depleting substances. That same year, the discovery of the Antarctic
ozone hole was announced, causing a revival in public attention to the issue.
In 1987, representatives from 43 nations signed the Montreal Protocol.
Meanwhile, the halocarbon industry shifted its position and started supporting
a protocol to limit CFC production. However, this shift was uneven with DuPont
acting more quickly than its European counterparts. DuPont may have feared
court action related to increased skin cancer, especially as the EPA had
published a study in 1986 claiming that an additional 40 million cases and
800,000 cancer deaths were to be expected in the U.S. in the next 88
years.[64] The EU shifted its position as well after Germany gave up its
defence of the CFC industry and started supporting moves towards regulation.
Government and industry in France and the UK tried to defend their CFC
producing industries even after the Montreal Protocol had been signed.[65]

At Montreal, the participants agreed to freeze production of CFCs at 1986
levels and to reduce production by 50 percent by 1999.[62] After a series of
scientific expeditions to the Antarctic produced convincing evidence that the
ozone hole was indeed caused by chlorine and bromine from manmade
organohalogens, the Montreal Protocol was strengthened at a 1990 meeting in
London. The participants agreed to phase out CFCs and halons entirely (aside
from a very small amount marked for certain "essential" uses, such as asthma
inhalers) by 2000 in non-Article 5 countries and by 2010 in Article 5 (less
developed) signatories.[66] At a 1992 meeting in Copenhagen, the phase-out
date was moved up to 1996.[66] At the same meeting, methyl bromide (MeBr), a
fumigant used primarily in agricultural production, was added to the list of
controlled substances. For all substances controlled under the protocol,
phaseout schedules were delayed for less developed ('Article 5(1)') countries,
and phaseout in these countries was supported by transfers of expertise,
technology, and money from non-Article 5(1) Parties to the Protocol.
Additionally, exemptions from the agreed schedules could be applied for under
the Essential Use Exemption (EUE) process for substances other than methyl
bromide and under the Critical Use Exemption (CUE) process for methyl
bromide.[67][68]

Civil society including especially NGOs, played critical roles at all stages
of policy development leading up to the Vienna Conference, the Montreal
Protocol, and in assessing compliance afterwards.[69][70][71][72] The major
companies claimed that no alternatives to HFC existed.[73] An ozone-safe
hydrocarbon refrigerant was developed at a Hamburg technological institute in
Germany, and in 1992 came to the attention of the non-governmental
organization (NGO) Greenpeace. Greenpeace was given the patent, called it
"Greenfreeze," and left the patent as open source.[74][75] The NGO then worked
successfully first with a small and struggling company to market an appliance
beginning in Europe, then Asia and later Latin America, receiving a 1997 UNEP
award.[76][77] By 1995, Germany had already made CFC refrigerators
illegal.[77] Since 2004, corporations like Coca-Cola, Carlsberg, and IKEA have
been forming a coalition to promote the ozone-safe Greenfreeze units.
Production spread to companies like Electrolux, Bosch, and LG, with sales
reaching some 300 million refrigerators by 2008.[76][78] In Latin America, a
domestic Argentinian company began Greenfreeze production in 2003, while the
giant Bosch in Brazil began a year later.[79][80] By 2013 it was being used by
some 700 million refrigerators, making up about 40 percent of the market.[73]
In the U.S., however, change has been much slower. To some extent, CFCs were
being replaced by the less damaging hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), although
concerns remain regarding HCFCs also. In some applications, hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs) were being used to replace CFCs. HFCs, which contain no chlorine or
bromine, do not contribute at all to ozone depletion although they are potent
greenhouse gases. The best known of these compounds is probably HFC-134a
(R-134a), which in the United States has largely replaced CFC-12 (R-12) in
automobile air conditioners. In laboratory analytics (a former "essential"
use) the ozone depleting substances can be replaced with various other
solvents.[81] Chemical companies like Du Pont, whose representatives even
disparaged Greenfreeze as "that German technology," maneuvered the EPA to
block the technology in the U.S. until 2011.[82][83][84][85] Ben & Jerry's of
Unilever and General Electric, spurred by Greenpeace, had expressed formal
interest in 2008 which figured in the EPA's final approval.[76][86]

More recently, policy experts have advocated for efforts to link ozone
protection efforts to climate protection efforts.[87][88] Many ODS are also
greenhouse gases, some thousands of times more powerful agents of radiative
forcing than carbon dioxide over the short and medium term. Thus policies
protecting the ozone layer have had benefits in mitigating climate change. In
fact, the reduction of the radiative forcing due to ODS probably masked the
true level of climate change effects of other greenhouse gases, and was
responsible for the "slow down" of global warming from the mid-90s.[89] Policy
decisions in one arena affect the costs and effectiveness of environmental
improvements in the other.

### ODS requirements in the marine industry[edit]

The IMO has amended MARPOL Annex VI Regulation 12 regarding ozone depleting
substances. As from July 1, 2010, all vessels where MARPOL Annex VI is
applicable should have a list of equipment using ozone depleting substances.
The list should include name of ODS, type and location of equipment, quantity
in kg and date. All changes since that date should be recorded in an ODS
Record book on board recording all intended or unintended releases to the
atmosphere. Furthermore, new ODS supply or landing to shore facilities should
be recorded as well.

## Prospects of ozone depletion[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4d/Ozone_hole_recovery.jpg/220px-

Ozone_hole_recovery.jpg)

Ozone levels stabilized in the 1990s following the Montreal Protocol, and have
started to recover. They are projected to reach pre-1980 levels before
2075.[4]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a3/TotalCl_NOAA-

HATS.png/220px-TotalCl_NOAA-HATS.png)

Ozone-depleting gas trends

Since the adoption and strengthening of the Montreal Protocol has led to
reductions in the emissions of CFCs, atmospheric concentrations of the most-
significant compounds have been declining. These substances are being
gradually removed from the atmosphere; since peaking in 1994, the Effective
Equivalent Chlorine (EECl) level in the atmosphere had dropped about 10
percent by 2008. The decrease in ozone-depleting chemicals has also been
significantly affected by a decrease in bromine-containing chemicals. The data
suggest that substantial natural sources exist for atmospheric methyl bromide
(CH  
3Br).[1] The phase-out of CFCs means that nitrous oxide (N  
2O), which is not covered by the Montreal Protocol, has become the most highly
emitted ozone-depleting substance and is expected to remain so throughout the
21st century.[90]

A 2005 IPCC review of ozone observations and model calculations concluded that
the global amount of ozone has now approximately stabilized. Although
considerable variability is expected from year to year, including in polar
regions where depletion is largest, the ozone layer is expected to begin to
recover in coming decades due to declining ozone-depleting substance
concentrations, assuming full compliance with the Montreal Protocol.[91]

The Antarctic ozone hole is expected to continue for decades. Ozone
concentrations in the lower stratosphere over Antarctica will increase by 5–10
percent by 2020 and return to pre-1980 levels by about 2060–2075. This is
10–25 years later than predicted in earlier assessments, because of revised
estimates of atmospheric concentrations of ozone-depleting substances,
including a larger predicted future usage in developing countries. Another
factor that may prolong ozone depletion is the drawdown of nitrogen oxides
from above the stratosphere due to changing wind patterns.[92] A gradual trend
toward "healing" was reported in 2016.[11]

## Research history[edit]

See also: Ozone–oxygen cycle

The basic physical and chemical processes that lead to the formation of an
ozone layer in the Earth's stratosphere were discovered by Sydney Chapman in
1930. Short-wavelength UV radiation splits an oxygen (O  
2) molecule into two oxygen (O) atoms, which then combine with other oxygen
molecules to form ozone. Ozone is removed when an oxygen atom and an ozone
molecule "recombine" to form two oxygen molecules, i.e. O + O  
3 → 2O  
2. In the 1950s, David Bates and Marcel Nicolet presented evidence that various free radicals, in particular hydroxyl (OH) and nitric oxide (NO), could catalyze this recombination reaction, reducing the overall amount of ozone. These free radicals were known to be present in the stratosphere, and so were regarded as part of the natural balance—it was estimated that in their absence, the ozone layer would be about twice as thick as it currently is. 

In 1970 Paul Crutzen pointed out that emissions of nitrous oxide (N  
2O), a stable, long-lived gas produced by soil bacteria, from the Earth's
surface could affect the amount of nitric oxide (NO) in the stratosphere.
Crutzen showed that nitrous oxide lives long enough to reach the stratosphere,
where it is converted into NO. Crutzen then noted that increasing use of
fertilizers might have led to an increase in nitrous oxide emissions over the
natural background, which would in turn result in an increase in the amount of
NO in the stratosphere. Thus human activity could affect the stratospheric
ozone layer. In the following year, Crutzen and (independently) Harold
Johnston suggested that NO emissions from supersonic passenger aircraft, which
would fly in the lower stratosphere, could also deplete the ozone layer.
However, more recent analysis in 1995 by David W. Fahey, an atmospheric
scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, found that
the drop in ozone would be from 1–2 percent if a fleet of 500 supersonic
passenger aircraft were operated.[93] This, Fahey expressed, would not be a
showstopper for advanced supersonic passenger aircraft development.[94]

### Rowland–Molina hypothesis[edit]

In 1974 Frank Sherwood Rowland, Chemistry Professor at the University of
California at Irvine, and his postdoctoral associate Mario J. Molina suggested
that long-lived organic halogen compounds, such as CFCs, might behave in a
similar fashion as Crutzen had proposed for nitrous oxide. James Lovelock had
recently discovered, during a cruise in the South Atlantic in 1971, that
almost all of the CFC compounds manufactured since their invention in 1930
were still present in the atmosphere. Molina and Rowland concluded that, like
N  
2O, the CFCs would reach the stratosphere where they would be dissociated by
UV light, releasing chlorine atoms. A year earlier, Richard Stolarski and
Ralph Cicerone at the University of Michigan had shown that Cl is even more
efficient than NO at catalyzing the destruction of ozone. Similar conclusions
were reached by Michael McElroy and Steven Wofsy at Harvard University.
Neither group, however, had realized that CFCs were a potentially large source
of stratospheric chlorine—instead, they had been investigating the possible
effects of HCl emissions from the Space Shuttle, which are very much smaller.

The Rowland–Molina hypothesis was strongly disputed by representatives of the
aerosol and halocarbon industries. The Chair of the Board of DuPont was quoted
as saying that ozone depletion theory is "a science fiction tale … a load of
rubbish … utter nonsense".[95] Robert Abplanalp, the President of Precision
Valve Corporation (and inventor of the first practical aerosol spray can
valve), wrote to the Chancellor of UC Irvine to complain about Rowland's
public statements.[96] Nevertheless, within three years most of the basic
assumptions made by Rowland and Molina were confirmed by laboratory
measurements and by direct observation in the stratosphere. The concentrations
of the source gases (CFCs and related compounds) and the chlorine reservoir
species (HCl and ClONO  
2) were measured throughout the stratosphere, and demonstrated that CFCs were
indeed the major source of stratospheric chlorine, and that nearly all of the
CFCs emitted would eventually reach the stratosphere. Even more convincing was
the measurement, by James G. Anderson and collaborators, of chlorine monoxide
(ClO) in the stratosphere. ClO is produced by the reaction of Cl with
ozone—its observation thus demonstrated that Cl radicals not only were present
in the stratosphere but also were actually involved in destroying ozone.
McElroy and Wofsy extended the work of Rowland and Molina by showing that
bromine atoms were even more effective catalysts for ozone loss than chlorine
atoms and argued that the brominated organic compounds known as halons, widely
used in fire extinguishers, were a potentially large source of stratospheric
bromine. In 1976 the United States National Academy of Sciences released a
report concluding that the ozone depletion hypothesis was strongly supported
by the scientific evidence. In response the United States, Canada and Norway
banned the use of CFCs in aerosol spray cans in 1978. Early estimates were
that, if CFC production continued at 1977 levels, the total atmospheric ozone
would after a century or so reach a steady state, 15 to 18 percent below
normal levels. By 1984, when better evidence on the speed of critical
reactions was available, this estimate was changed to 5 to 9 percent steady-
state depletion.[97]

Crutzen, Molina, and Rowland were awarded the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
for their work on stratospheric ozone.

### Antarctic ozone hole[edit]

The discovery of the Antarctic "ozone hole" by British Antarctic Survey
scientists Farman, Gardiner and Shanklin (first reported in a paper in
_Nature_ in May 1985[98] ) came as a shock to the scientific community,
because the observed decline in polar ozone was far larger than anyone had
anticipated.[40] Satellite measurements showing massive depletion of ozone
around the south pole were becoming available at the same time. However, these
were initially rejected as unreasonable by data quality control algorithms
(they were filtered out as errors since the values were unexpectedly low); the
ozone hole was detected only in satellite data when the raw data was
reprocessed following evidence of ozone depletion in _in situ_
observations.[65] When the software was rerun without the flags, the ozone
hole was seen as far back as 1976.[99]

Susan Solomon, an atmospheric chemist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), proposed that chemical reactions on polar stratospheric
clouds (PSCs) in the cold Antarctic stratosphere caused a massive, though
localized and seasonal, increase in the amount of chlorine present in active,
ozone-destroying forms. The polar stratospheric clouds in Antarctica are only
formed when there are very low temperatures, as low as −80 °C, and early
spring conditions. In such conditions the ice crystals of the cloud provide a
suitable surface for conversion of unreactive chlorine compounds into reactive
chlorine compounds, which can deplete ozone easily.

Moreover, the polar vortex formed over Antarctica is very tight and the
reaction occurring on the surface of the cloud crystals is far different from
when it occurs in atmosphere. These conditions have led to ozone hole
formation in Antarctica. This hypothesis was decisively confirmed, first by
laboratory measurements and subsequently by direct measurements, from the
ground and from high-altitude airplanes, of very high concentrations of
chlorine monoxide (ClO) in the Antarctic stratosphere.[100]

Alternative hypotheses, which had attributed the ozone hole to variations in
solar UV radiation or to changes in atmospheric circulation patterns, were
also tested and shown to be untenable.[101]

Meanwhile, analysis of ozone measurements from the worldwide network of
ground-based Dobson spectrophotometers led an international panel to conclude
that the ozone layer was in fact being depleted, at all latitudes outside of
the tropics.[17] These trends were confirmed by satellite measurements. As a
consequence, the major halocarbon-producing nations agreed to phase out
production of CFCs, halons, and related compounds, a process that was
completed in 1996.

Since 1981 the United Nations Environment Programme, under the auspices of the
World Meteorological Organization, has sponsored a series of technical reports
on the Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, based on satellite
measurements. The 2007 report showed that the hole in the ozone layer was
recovering and the smallest it had been for about a decade.[102] The 2010
report found, "Over the past decade, global ozone and ozone in the Arctic and
Antarctic regions is no longer decreasing but is not yet increasing. The ozone
layer outside the Polar regions is projected to recover to its pre-1980 levels
some time before the middle of this century. In contrast, the springtime ozone
hole over the Antarctic is expected to recover much later."[103] In 2012, NOAA
and NASA reported "Warmer air temperatures high above the Antarctic led to the
second smallest season ozone hole in 20 years averaging 17.9 million square
kilometres. The hole reached its maximum size for the season on Sept 22,
stretching to 21.2 million square kilometres."[104] A gradual trend toward
"healing" was reported in 2016.[11]

The hole in the Earth's ozone layer over the South Pole has affected
atmospheric circulation in the Southern Hemisphere all the way to the
equator.[105] The ozone hole has influenced atmospheric circulation all the
way to the tropics and increased rainfall at low, subtropical latitudes in the
Southern Hemisphere.

### Arctic ozone hole[edit]

On March 3, 2005, the journal _Nature_ [106] published an article linking
2004's unusually large Arctic ozone hole to solar wind activity.

On March 15, 2011, a record ozone layer loss was observed, with about half of
the ozone present over the Arctic having been destroyed.[107][108][109] The
change was attributed to increasingly cold winters in the Arctic stratosphere
at an altitude of approximately 20 km (12 mi), a change associated with global
warming in a relationship that is still under investigation.[108] By March 25,
the ozone loss had become the largest compared to that observed in all
previous winters with the possibility that it would become an ozone hole.[110]
This would require that the quantities of ozone to fall below 200 Dobson
units, from the 250 recorded over central Siberia.[110] It is predicted that
the thinning layer would affect parts of Scandinavia and Eastern Europe on
March 30–31.[110]

On October 2, 2011, a study was published in the journal _Nature_ , which said
that between December 2010 and March 2011 up to 80 percent of the ozone in the
atmosphere at about 20 kilometres (12 mi) above the surface was
destroyed.[111] The level of ozone depletion was severe enough that scientists
said it could be compared to the ozone hole that forms over Antarctica every
winter.[111] According to the study, "for the first time, sufficient loss
occurred to reasonably be described as an Arctic ozone hole."[111] The study
analyzed data from the Aura and CALIPSO satellites, and determined that the
larger-than-normal ozone loss was due to an unusually long period of cold
weather in the Arctic, some 30 days more than typical, which allowed for more
ozone-destroying chlorine compounds to be created.[112] According to Lamont
Poole, a co-author of the study, cloud and aerosol particles on which the
chlorine compounds are found "were abundant in the Arctic until mid March
2011—much later than usual—with average amounts at some altitudes similar to
those observed in the Antarctic, and dramatically larger than the near-zero
values seen in March in most Arctic winters".[112]

### Tibet ozone hole[edit]

As winters that are colder are more affected, at times there is an ozone hole
over Tibet. In 2006, a 2.5 million square kilometer ozone hole was detected
over Tibet.[113] Also again in 2011 an ozone hole appeared over mountainous
regions of Tibet, Xinjiang, Qinghai and the Hindu Kush, along with an
unprecedented hole over the Arctic, though the Tibet one is far less intense
than the ones over the Arctic or Antarctic.[114]

### Potential depletion by storm clouds[edit]

Research in 2012 showed that the same process that produces the ozone hole
over Antarctica occurs over summer storm clouds in the United States, and thus
may be destroying ozone there as well.[115][116]

## Ozone depletion and global warming[edit]

Main article: Ozone depletion and global warming

Among others, Robert Watson had a role in the science assessment and in the
regulation efforts of ozone depletion and global warming.[36] Prior to the
1980s, the EU, NASA, NAS, UNEP, WMO and the British government had dissenting
scientific reports and Watson played a role in the process of unified
assessments. Based on the experience with the ozone case, the IPCC started to
work on a unified reporting and science assessment[36] to reach a consensus to
provide the IPCC Summary for Policymakers.

There are various areas of linkage between ozone depletion and global warming
science:

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Radiative-

forcings.svg/370px-Radiative-forcings.svg.png)

Radiative forcing from various greenhouse gases and other sources

            
                            * The same CO
            

2 radiative forcing that produces global warming is expected to cool the
stratosphere.[117] This cooling, in turn, is expected to produce a relative
_increase_ in ozone ( O  
3) depletion in polar area and the frequency of ozone holes.[118]

            
                            * Conversely, ozone depletion represents a radiative forcing of the climate system. There are two opposing effects: Reduced ozone causes the stratosphere to absorb less solar radiation, thus cooling the stratosphere while warming the troposphere; the resulting colder stratosphere emits less long-wave radiation downward, thus cooling the troposphere. Overall, the cooling dominates; the IPCC concludes " _observed stratospheric O
            

3 losses over the past two decades have caused a negative forcing of the
surface-troposphere system_"[19] of about −0.15 ± 0.10 watts per square meter
(W/m2).[91]

            
                            * One of the strongest predictions of the greenhouse effect is that the stratosphere will cool.[117] Although this cooling has been observed, it is not trivial to separate the effects of changes in the concentration of greenhouse gases and ozone depletion since both will lead to cooling. However, this can be done by numerical stratospheric modeling. Results from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory show that above 20 km (12 mi), the greenhouse gases dominate the cooling.[119]
                * As noted under 'Public Policy', ozone depleting chemicals are also often greenhouse gases. The increases in concentrations of these chemicals have produced 0.34 ± 0.03 W/m2 of radiative forcing, corresponding to about 14 percent of the total radiative forcing from increases in the concentrations of well-mixed greenhouse gases.[91]
                * The long term modeling of the process, its measurement, study, design of theories and testing take decades to document, gain wide acceptance, and ultimately become the dominant paradigm. Several theories about the destruction of ozone were hypothesized in the 1980s, published in the late 1990s, and are currently being investigated. Dr Drew Schindell, and Dr Paul Newman, NASA Goddard, proposed a theory in the late 1990s, using computational modeling methods to model ozone destruction, that accounted for 78 percent of the ozone destroyed. Further refinement of that model accounted for 89 percent of the ozone destroyed, but pushed back the estimated recovery of the ozone hole from 75 years to 150 years. (An important part of that model is the lack of stratospheric flight due to depletion of fossil fuels.)
            

## Misconceptions[edit]

### CFC weight[edit]

Since CFC molecules are heavier than air (nitrogen or oxygen), it is commonly
believed that the CFC molecules cannot reach the stratosphere in significant
amount.[120] However, atmospheric gases are not sorted by weight; the forces
of wind can fully mix the gases in the atmosphere. Lighter CFCs are evenly
distributed throughout the turbosphere and reach the upper atmosphere,[121]
although some of the heavier CFCs are not evenly distributed.[122]

### Percentage of man-made chlorine[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/27/Sources_stratospheric_chlorine.png/300px-

Sources_stratospheric_chlorine.png)

Sources of stratospheric chlorine

Another misconception is that "it is generally accepted that natural sources
of tropospheric chlorine are four to five times larger than man-made ones."
While this statement is strictly true, _tropospheric_ chlorine is irrelevant;
it is _stratospheric_ chlorine that affects ozone depletion. Chlorine from
ocean spray is soluble and thus is washed by rainfall before it reaches the
stratosphere. CFCs, in contrast, are insoluble and long-lived, allowing them
to reach the stratosphere. In the lower atmosphere, there is much more
chlorine from CFCs and related haloalkanes than there is in HCl from salt
spray, and in the stratosphere halocarbons are dominant.[123] Only methyl
chloride, which is one of these halocarbons, has a mainly natural source,[124]
and it is responsible for about 20 percent of the chlorine in the
stratosphere; the remaining 80 percent comes from manmade sources.

Very violent volcanic eruptions can inject HCl into the stratosphere, but
researchers[125] have shown that the contribution is not significant compared
to that from CFCs. A similar erroneous assertion is that soluble halogen
compounds from the volcanic plume of Mount Erebus on Ross Island, Antarctica
are a major contributor to the Antarctic ozone hole.[125]

Nevertheless, a 2015 study[126] showed that the role of Mount Erebus volcano
in the Antarctic ozone depletion was probably underestimated. Based on the
NCEP/NCAR reanalysis data over the last 35 years and by using the NOAA HYSPLIT
trajectory model, researchers showed that Erebus volcano gas emissions
(including hydrogen chloride (HCl)) can reach the Antarctic stratosphere via
high-latitude cyclones and then the polar vortex. Depending on Erebus volcano
activity, the additional annual HCl mass entering the stratosphere from Erebus
varies from 1.0 to 14.3 kt.

### First observation[edit]

G.M.B. Dobson mentioned that when springtime ozone levels in the Antarctic
over Halley Bay were first measured in 1956, he was surprised to find that
they were ~320 DU, or about 150 DU below spring Arctic levels of ~450 DU.
These were at that time the only known Antarctic ozone values available. What
Dobson describes is essentially the _baseline_ from which the ozone hole is
measured: actual ozone hole values are in the 150–100 DU range.[127]

The discrepancy between the Arctic and Antarctic noted by Dobson was primarily
a matter of timing: during the Arctic spring ozone levels rose smoothly,
peaking in April, whereas in the Antarctic they stayed approximately constant
during early spring, rising abruptly in November when the polar vortex broke
down.

The behavior seen in the Antarctic ozone hole is completely different. Instead
of staying constant, early springtime ozone levels suddenly drop from their
already low winter values, by as much as 50 percent, and normal values are not
reached again until December.[128]

### Location of hole[edit]

Some people thought that the ozone hole should be above the sources of CFCs.
However, CFCs are well mixed globally in the troposphere and stratosphere. The
reason for occurrence of the ozone hole above Antarctica is not because there
are more CFCs concentrated but because the low temperatures help form polar
stratospheric clouds.[129] In fact, there are findings of significant and
localized "ozone holes" above other parts of the earth.[130][ _better source
needed_ ]

## World Ozone Day[edit]

In 1994, the United Nations General Assembly voted to designate September 16
as the International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer, or "World
Ozone Day", to commemorate the signing of the Montreal Protocol on that date
in 1987.[131]

## See also[edit]

            
                            * ![Global Warming Map.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Global_Warming_Map.jpg/32px-Global_Warming_Map.jpg) Global warming portal
                * ![Aegopodium podagraria1 ies.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/32px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg) Environment portal
                * ![Earth Day Flag.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/Earth_Day_Flag.png/32px-Earth_Day_Flag.png) Ecology portal
            

## References[edit]

            
                            1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ "Twenty Questions and Answers About the Ozone Layer" (PDF). _Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 2010_. World Meteorological Organization. 2011. Retrieved  March 13, 2015.
                2. **^** Andino, Jean M. (October 21, 1999). "Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are heavier than air, so how do scientists suppose that these chemicals reach the altitude of the ozone layer to adversely affect it?". _Scientific American_. **264** : 68.
                3. **^** "Part III. The Science of the Ozone Hole". Retrieved  March 5, 2007.
                4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The Antarctic Ozone Hole Will Recover". NASA. June 4, 2015. Retrieved  August 5, 2017.
                5. **^** "The Ozone Hole-The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer". Theozonehole.com. September 16, 1987. Retrieved  May 15, 2019.
                6. **^** "Background for International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer - 16 September". _www.un.org_. Retrieved  May 15, 2019.
                7. **^** Newman, Paul A. "Chapter 5: Stratospheric Photochemistry Section 4.2.8 ClX catalytic reactions". In Todaro, Richard M. (ed.). _Stratospheric ozone: an electronic textbook_. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Atmospheric Chemistry and Dynamics Branch. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                8. **^** "Stratospheric Ozone Depletion by Chlorofluorocarbons (Nobel Lecture)—Encyclopedia of Earth". Eoearth.org. Archived from the original on September 9, 2011.
                9. **^** Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion 2010, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration
                10. **^** "The Ozone Hole Tour: Part II. Recent Ozone Depletion". University of Cambridge. Retrieved  March 28, 2011.
                11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Solomon, S.; Ivy, D. J.; Kinnison, D.; Mills, M. J.; Neely Rr, 3rd; Schmidt, A. (June 30, 2016). "Emergence of healing in the Antarctic ozone layer". _Science_. **353** (6296): 269–74. Bibcode:2016Sci...353..269S. doi:10.1126/science.aae0061. PMID 27365314.
                12. **^** Mersmann, Katy; Stein, Theo (November 2, 2017). "Warm Air Helped Make 2017 Ozone Hole Smallest Since 1988". _nasa.gov_. Retrieved  December 31, 2017.
                13. **^** U.S. EPA: Ozone Depletion. epa.gov
                14. **^** Zafar, A. Mannan; Müller, Rolf; Grooss, Jens-Uwe; Robrecht, Sabine; Vogel, Bärbel; Lehmann, Ralph (January 2018). "The relevance of reactions of the methyl peroxy radical (CH3O2) and methylhypochlorite (CH3OCl) for Antarctic chlorine activation and ozone loss" (PDF). _Tellus B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology_. **70** (1): 1–18. doi:10.1080/16000889.2018.1507391. ISSN 1600-0889.
                15. **^** Son, Seok-Woo; Han, Bo-Reum; Garfinkel, Chaim I.; Kim, Seo-Yeon; Park, Rokjin; Abraham, N. Luke; Hideharu Akiyoshi; Archibald, Alexander T.; Butchart, N. (2018). "Tropospheric jet response to Antarctic ozone depletion: An update with Chemistry-Climate Model Initiative (CCMI) models". _Environmental Research Letters_. **13** (5): 054024. Bibcode:2018ERL....13e4024S. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aabf21. ISSN 1748-9326.
                16. **^** "Largest-ever Ozone Hole over Antarctica". _earthobservatory.nasa.gov_. September 11, 2000. Retrieved  November 26, 2018.
                17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Myth: Ozone Depletion Occurs Only In Antarctica". EPA. June 28, 2006. Retrieved  March 28, 2011.
                18. **^** Self, Stephen, et al. (1996). "The Atmospheric Impact of the 1991 Mount Pinatubo Eruption". USGS. Retrieved May 28, 2016.
                19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientific Basis". _Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Work Group I_. 2001. pp. Chapter 6.4 Stratospheric Ozone. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 28, 2016.
                20. **^** 2008 News, Briefs, and Features. NASA
                21. **^** "Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis". UNEP. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                22. **^** "Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion 1998 – Preface". US National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved  December 21, 2012.
                23. **^** Newman, P. A.; Daniel, J. S.; Waugh, D. W.; Nash, E. R. (2007). "A new formulation of equivalent effective stratospheric chlorine (EESC)". _Atmos. Chem. Phys_. **7** (17): 4537–52. doi:10.5194/acp-7-4537-2007.
                24. **^** "chlorofluorocarbons". Encyclopedia.com. Retrieved  March 28, 2011.
                25. **^** Laube, Johannes C.; Newland, Mike J.; Hogan, Christopher; Brenninkmeijer, Carl A. M.; Fraser, Paul J.; Martinerie, Patricia; Oram, David E.; Reeves, Claire E.; Röckmann, Thomas; Schwander, Jakob; Witrant, Emmanuel; Sturges, William T. (March 9, 2014). "Newly detected ozone-depleting substances in the atmosphere" (PDF). _Nature Geoscience_. **7** (4): 266–269. Bibcode:2014NatGe...7..266L. doi:10.1038/ngeo2109.
                26. **^** McGrath, Matt (March 9, 2014). "Mysterious new man-made gases pose threat to ozone layer". _BBC News_. Retrieved  March 10, 2014.
                27. **^** Nash, Eric; Newman, Paul (September 19, 2001). "NASA Confirms Arctic Ozone Depletion Trigger". _Image of the Day_. NASA. Retrieved  April 16, 2011.
                28. **^** Sparling, Brien (June 26, 2001). "Antarctic Ozone Hole". NASA Advanced Supercomputing Department. Archived from the original on April 3, 2009. Retrieved April 16, 2011.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                29. **^** Parson, Robert (December 16, 1997). "Antarctic ozone-depletion FAQ, section 7". Faqs.org. Retrieved April 16, 2011.
                30. **^** Toon, Owen B.; Turco, Richard P. (June 1991). "Polar Stratospheric Clouds and Ozone Depletion" (PDF). _Scientific American_. **264** (6): 68–74. Bibcode:1991SciAm.264...68T. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0691-68. Retrieved  April 16, 2011.
                31. **^** Sumi´nska-Ebersoldt; Lehmann, R.; Wegner, T.; Grooß, J.-U.; Hösen, E.; Weigel, R.; Frey, W.; Griessbach, S.; Mitev, V.; Emde, C.; Volk, C. M.; Borrmann, S.; Rex, M.; Stroh, F.; von Hobe, M. (July 2011). "ClOOCl photolysis at high solar zenith angles: analysis of the RECONCILE self-match flight". _Atmos. Chem. Phys_. **12** (3): 1353–1365. Bibcode:2012ACP....12.1353S. doi:10.5194/acp-12-1353-2012.
                32. **^** "Ozone Facts: What is the Ozone Hole?". _Ozone Hole Watch_. NASA. November 18, 2009. Retrieved  April 16, 2011.
                33. **^** Rowland, Frank Sherwood (May 29, 2006). "Stratospheric ozone depletion". _Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B_. **361** (1469): 769–790. doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1783. PMC 1609402. PMID 16627294. "4. Free radical reactions for ozone removal: Reaction 4.1"
                34. **^** Boyesa, Edward; Stanisstreeta, Martin (1992). "Students' perceptions of global warming". _International Journal of Environmental Studies_. **42** (4): 287–300. doi:10.1080/00207239208710804.
                35. **^** Compare Sheldon Ungar, 2000 and various web sites such as Gavin Schmidt's realclimate complaint in Ozone depletion and global warming 2005 or the UCS FAQ on the topic
                36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ Reiner Grundmann _Technische Problemlösung, Verhandeln und umfassende Problemlösun_ g, generic problem solving capability) in Gesellschaftliche Komplexität und kollektive Handlungsfähigkeit (Societys complexity and collective ability to act), ed. Schimank, U. (2000). Frankfurt/Main: Campus, p.154-182 book summary at the Max Planck Gesellschaft
                37. **^** Gunkel, Christoph (September 13, 2013). "Öko-Coup aus Ostdeutschland". _Der Spiegel_ (in German). Retrieved  September 4, 2015.
                38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Ungar, Sheldon (July 1, 2000). "Knowledge, ignorance and the popular culture: climate change versus the ozone hole". _Public Understanding of Science_. **9** (3): 297–312. doi:10.1088/0963-6625/9/3/306.
                39. **^** Grundmann, Reiner (May 14, 2007). "Climate Change and Knowledge Politics" (PDF). _Environmental Politics_. **16** (3): 414–432. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.535.4984. doi:10.1080/09644010701251656. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 26, 2014.
                40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Zehr, Stephen C. (1994). "Accounting for the Ozone Hole: Scientific Representations of an Anomaly and Prior Incorrect Claims in Public Settings". _The Sociological Quarterly_. **35** (4): 603–19. doi:10.1111/j.1533-8525.1994.tb00419.x. JSTOR 4121521.
                41. **^** "Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientific Basis". _Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Work Group I_. 2001. pp. Chapter 9.3.2 Patterns of Future Climate Change. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 28, 2016.
                42. **^** Muir, Patricia (March 6, 2008). "Stratospheric Ozone Depletion". Oregon State University. Retrieved April 16, 2011.
                43. **^** "Long-term increase in summer UV radiation". NIWA. September 9, 1999. Retrieved  December 4, 2013.
                44. **^** McKenzie, Richard; Conner, Brian; Bodeker, Greg (September 10, 1999). "Increased Summertime UV Radiation in New Zealand in Response to Ozone Loss". _Science_. **285** (5434): 1709–1711. doi:10.1126/science.285.5434.1709. PMID 10481002.
                45. **^** "Health and Environmental Effects of Ozone Layer Depletion". EPA. February 15, 2013. Retrieved  September 26, 2013.
                46. **^** "Reconstruction of Paleobehavior of Ozonosphere Based on Response to UV-B Radiation Effect in Dendrochronologic Signal" (PDF). Atmospheric Radiation Measurement, USA. Retrieved May 28, 2016.
                47. **^** The HIPERION Report (PDF) (Report). Ecuadorian Civilian Space Agency. 2008.
                48. **^** Lilley, Ray (October 5, 2000). "Ozone Hole Over City for First Time". Associated Press. Retrieved March 13, 2015.
                49. **^** de Gruijl, Frank R. (Summer 1995). "Impacts of a Projected Depletion of the Ozone Layer". _Consequences_. **1** (2).
                50. **^** Fears, T. R.; Bird, C. C.; Guerry d, 4th; Sagebiel, R. W.; Gail, M. H.; Elder, D. E.; Halpern, A.; Holly, E. A.; Hartge, P.; Tucker, M. A. (2002). "Average midrange ultraviolet radiation flux and time outdoors predict melanoma risk". _Cancer Res_. **62** (14): 3992–6. PMID 12124332.
                51. **^** Abarca, J. F.; Casiccia, C. C. (December 2002). "Skin cancer and ultraviolet-B radiation under the Antarctic ozone hole: southern Chile, 1987–2000". _Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed_. **18** (6): 294–302. doi:10.1034/j.1600-0781.2002.02782.x. PMID 12535025.
                52. **^** West, S. K.; Duncan, D. D.; Muñoz, B.; Rubin, G. S.; Fried, L. P.; Bandeen-Roche, K.; Schein, O. D. (1998). "Sunlight exposure and risk of lens opacities in a population-based study: the Salisbury Eye Evaluation project". _JAMA_. **280** (8): 714–8. doi:10.1001/jama.280.8.714. PMID 9728643.
                53. **^** Dobson, R. (2005). "Ozone depletion will bring big rise in number of cataracts". _BMJ_. **331** (7528): 1292–1295. doi:10.1136/bmj.331.7528.1292-d. PMC 1298891.
                54. **^** "Ozone: Good Up High, Bad Nearby" (PDF). EPA. Archived from the original on June 2, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2015.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                55. **^** Melamed, M. L.; Michos, E. D.; Post, W.; Astor, B. (2008). "25-hydroxyl Vitamin D Levels and the Risk of Mortality in the General Population". _Arch. Intern. Med_. **168** (15): 1629–37. doi:10.1001/archinte.168.15.1629. PMC 2677029. PMID 18695076.
                56. **^** Vieth R (1999). "Vitamin D supplementation, 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations, and safety". _Am. J. Clin. Nutr_. **69** (5): 842–56. doi:10.1093/ajcn/69.5.842. PMID 10232622.
                57. **^** "Sunburned whales: Troubling environment news of the week". _The Washington Post_. BlogPost (blog). November 11, 2010. Retrieved  March 28, 2011.
                58. **^** Thomas, Abbie (November 10, 2010). "Whales showing more sun damage". Abc.net.au. Retrieved March 28, 2011.
                59. **^** Sinha, R. P.; Singh, S. C.; Häder, D. P. (1999). "Photoecophysiology of cyanobacteria". _Recent Research Developments in Photochemistry and Photobiology_. **3** : 91–101.
                60. **^** "Health and Environmental Effects of Ozone Layer In Plants". U.S Environmental Protection Agency. February 15, 2013. Retrieved  November 12, 2013.
                61. **^** National Academy of Sciences (1976). _Halocarbons, effects on stratospheric ozone_. Washington, DC. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Morrisette, Peter M. (1989). "The Evolution of Policy Responses to Stratospheric Ozone Depletion". _Natural Resources Journal_. **29** : 793–820. Retrieved April 20, 2010.
                63. **^** Sawchuk, Arthur R. (December 19, 1994). "Voluntary Initiatives to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions", "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 6, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2010.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link). DuPont Canada Inc.
                64. **^** Shabecoff, Philip (November 5, 1986). "U.S. Report Predicts Rise in Skin Cancer with Loss of Ozone". _The New York Times_. p. A1. Retrieved January 10, 2013.
                65. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Grundmann, Reiner (2001). _Transnational Environmental Policy: the ozone layer_. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-22423-9.
                66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Amendments to the Montreal Protocol | Ozone Layer Protection | US EPA". Epa.gov. June 28, 2006. Retrieved  March 28, 2011.
                67. **^** Gareau, Brian J. (2010). "A critical review of the successful CFC phase-out versus the delayed methyl bromide phase-out in the Montreal Protocol". _International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics_. **10** (3): 209–231. doi:10.1007/s10784-010-9120-z.
                68. **^** Decanio, Stephen J.; Norman, Catherine S. (July 2005). "Economics of the 'Critical use' of Methyl Bromide under the Montreal Protocol". _Contemporary Economic Policy_. **23** (3): 376–393. doi:10.1093/cep/byi028.
                69. **^** Sarma, K. Madhava "Compliance with the Multilateral Environmental Agreements to Protect the Ozone Layer" in Ulrich Beyerlin et al. Ensuring Compliance with Multilateral Environmental Agreements Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff 2006
                70. **^** Mate, John (2001). "Making a Difference: A Case Study of the Greenpeace Ozone Campaign". _Review of European Community and International Environmental Law_. **10** (2): 190–198. doi:10.1111/1467-9388.00275.
                71. **^** Currie, Duncan E.J. (2005) "The Experience of Greenpeace International" in Tullio Treves et al. (eds.) _Civil Society, International Courts, and Compliance Bodies_ The Hague, The Netherlands: TMC Asser.
                72. **^** Benedick, Richard Elliot (1991) _Ozone Diplomacy_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
                73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Happy birthday, Greenfreeze!". _Greenpeace International_. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                74. **^** Stafford, Edwin R.; Hartman, Cathy L.; Liang, Ying (October 10, 2016). "Wayback Machine" (PDF). _Business Horizons_. **46** (2): 47–56. doi:10.1016/S0007-6813(03)00009-0. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 10, 2016.
                75. **^** "Climate-Friendly Greenfreezers Come to the United States". _NBC New York_. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Greenpeace USA". Greenpeace.org. September 23, 2015. Retrieved  September 27, 2015.
                77. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Greenfreeze: A Revolution In Domestic Refrigeration". Ecomall.com. January 1, 1995. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                78. **^** "Natural Refrigerants – Businesses". _Greenpeace International_. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                79. **^** "La Historia del "Greenfreeze "". Ilustrados!. Retrieved September 27, 2015.
                80. **^** "Lanzan la primera de las "Propuestas Greenpeace": la heladera "Greenfreeze" | Greenpeace Argentina". Greenpeace.org. Retrieved  September 27, 2015.
                81. **^** "Use of Ozone Depleting Substances in Laboratories. TemaNord 516/2003" (PDF). Norden.org. January 1, 2003. Archived from the original on February 27, 2008. Retrieved March 28, 2011.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                82. **^** "Der Greenfreeze – endlich in den USA angekommen". _Greenpeace_. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                83. **^** "Discurso de Frank Guggenheim no lançamento do Greenfreeze". _Brasil_. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                84. **^** "SNAP Program Chronology | Alternatives / SNAP | US EPA". Epa.gov. October 15, 2014. Retrieved  September 27, 2015.
                85. **^** "Greenfreeze F-Gas Victory! Greener Refrigerators Finally Legal in the U.S." _Greenpeace USA_. December 14, 2011. Archived from the original on January 29, 2012. Retrieved  January 1, 2018.
                86. **^** "GE Opening a Door to a Future of Cleaner Home Refrigeration" (Press release). Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved  August 24, 2014.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                87. **^** Molina, M.; Zaelke, D.; Sarma, K. M.; Andersen, S. O.; Ramanathan, V.; Kaniaru, D. (2009). "Reducing abrupt climate change risk using the Montreal Protocol and other regulatory actions to complement cuts in CO 2 emissions". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **106** (49): 20616–20621. Bibcode:2009PNAS..10620616M. doi:10.1073/pnas.0902568106. PMC 2791591. PMID 19822751.
                88. **^** Norman, Catherine; Decanio, Stephen; Fan, Lin (2008). "The Montreal Protocol at 20: Ongoing opportunities for integration with climate protection". _Global Environmental Change_. **18** (2): 330–340. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.03.003.
                89. **^** Estrada, Francisco (2013). "Statistically derived contributions of diverse human influences to twentieth-century temperature changes". _Nature Geoscience_. **6** (12): 1050–1055. Bibcode:2013NatGe...6.1050E. doi:10.1038/ngeo1999. hdl:2144/27169.
                90. **^** "NOAA Study Shows Nitrous Oxide Now Top Ozone-Depleting Emission". Noaanews.noaa.gov. August 27, 2009. Retrieved  April 6, 2011.
                91. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Summary for Policymakers". _IPCC/TEAP special report on safeguarding the ozone layer and the global climate system: issues related to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons_. Cambridge: Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [by] Cambridge University Press. 2005. ISBN 978-0-521-86336-0. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 29, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2016.
                92. **^** Canada's SCISAT satellite explains 2006 ozone-layer depletion. Canadian Space Agency. October 6, 2006.
                93. **^** Lipkin, Richard (October 7, 1995). SST emissions cut stratospheric ozone. (The introduction of 500 new supersonic transport planes by 2015 could deplete the ozone layer by as much as 1%). Science News.
                94. **^** "Increase in supersonic jets could be threat to ozone U-2 plane trails Concorde, studies exhaust particles". _The Baltimore Sun_. Newsday. October 8, 1995. Retrieved  December 21, 2012.
                95. **^** "Du Pont: A case study in the 3D corporate strategy". Greenpeace. 1997. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                96. **^** Roan, Sharon (1989) _Ozone crisis: The 15-year evolution of a sudden global emergency_ , New York: Wiley, p. 56 ISBN 0-471-52823-4
                97. **^** _Causes and Effects of Stratospheric Ozone Reduction: An Update_. National Research Council. 1982. p. Summary, 3. doi:10.17226/319. ISBN 978-0-309-03248-3.
                98. **^** Farman, J. C.; Gardiner, B. G.; Shanklin, J. D. (1985). "Large losses of total ozone in Antarctica reveal seasonal ClO x/NOx interaction". _Nature_. **315** (6016): 207–210. Bibcode:1985Natur.315..207F. doi:10.1038/315207a0.
                99. **^** History and politics accessed September 30, 2016.
                100. **^** Solomon, P. M.; Connor, B.; De Zafra, R. L.; Parrish, A.; Barrett, J.; Jaramillo, M. (1987). "High concentrations of chlorine monoxide at low altitudes in the Antarctic spring stratosphere: Secular variation". _Nature_. **328** (6129): 411–413. doi:10.1038/328411a0.
                101. **^** Reddy, Jeevananda (November 4, 2008). _Climate Change Myths and Realities_. p. 32. Retrieved  December 20, 2018.
                102. **^** "Ozone hole closing up, research shows". _ABC News_. Australian Broadcasting Commission. November 16, 2007.
                103. **^** "New report highlights two-way link between ozone layer and climate change". _UNEP News Center_. November 16, 2010.
                104. **^** "NOAA, NANA: Antarctic ozone hole second smallest in 20 years". October 24, 2012.
                105. **^** "Study Links Ozone Hole to Weather Shifts". The Earth Institute – Columbia University. April 22, 2011. Retrieved  December 21, 2012.
                106. **^** Schiermeier, Quirin (2005). "Solar wind hammers the ozone layer". _Nature_. doi:10.1038/news050228-12. Retrieved  May 28, 2016.
                107. **^** Dell'Amore, Christine (March 22, 2011). "First North Pole Ozone Hole Forming?". National Geographic. Retrieved April 6, 2011.
                108. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres (March 14, 2011). "Arctic on the verge of record ozone loss". Science Daily. Retrieved April 6, 2011.
                109. **^** "The Arctic Ozone Sieve: More Global Weirding?". Scienceblogs.com. March 25, 2011. Archived from the original on April 4, 2011. Retrieved  April 6, 2011.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                110. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Developing ozone hole approaches Europe". EurActiv. Archived from the original on April 4, 2011. Retrieved  April 6, 2011.
                111. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Arctic ozone loss at record level". BBC News Online. October 2, 2011. Archived from the original on October 3, 2011. Retrieved  October 3, 2011.
                112. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Unprecedented Arctic Ozone Loss in 2011, Says NASA-Led Study" (Press release). NASA. October 2, 2011. Retrieved  July 1, 2016.
                113. **^** "Earth news: Chinese Scientists Find New Ozone Hole Over Tibet". Elainemeinelsupkis.typepad.com. May 4, 2006. Retrieved  April 6, 2011.
                114. **^** Schiermeier, Quirin (February 22, 1999). "The Great Beyond: Arctic ozone hole causes concern". Blogs.nature.com. Retrieved April 6, 2011.
                115. **^** Oskin, Becky (July 26, 2012). "Storm Clouds May Punch Holes in Ozone". LiveScience. Retrieved March 13, 2015.
                116. **^** Fountain, Henry (July 27, 2012). "Storms Threaten Ozone Layer Over U.S., Study Says". _The New York Times_. p. A1. Retrieved March 13, 2015.
                117. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hegerl, Gabriele C.; et al. "Understanding and Attributing Climate Change" (PDF). _Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. p. 675. Retrieved  February 1, 2008.
                118. **^** "Ozone Depletion". UNEP/DEWA/Earthwatch. January 16, 2010. Archived from the original on January 16, 2010.
                119. **^** "The Relative Roles of Ozone and Other Greenhouse Gases in Climate Change in the Stratosphere". Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory. February 29, 2004. Archived from the original on January 20, 2009. Retrieved  March 13, 2015.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
                120. **^** Silverman, Amy (May 4, 1995). "Freon Easy". Phoenix News. Retrieved April 6, 2011.
                121. **^** FAQ, part I, section 1.3.
                122. **^** Fabian, P.; Borchers, R.; Krüger, B. C.; Lal, S. (1985). "The vertical distribution of CFC-114 (CClF2-CClF2) in the atmosphere". _Journal of Geophysical Research_. **90** (D7): 13091. Bibcode:1985JGR....9013091F. doi:10.1029/JD090iD07p13091.
                123. **^** ozone-depletion FAQ, Part II, section 4.3
                124. **^** Yokouchi, Y.; Noijiri, Y.; Barrie, L. A.; Toom-Sauntry, D.; Machida, T.; Inuzuka, Y.; Akimoto, H.; Li, H. -J.; Fujinuma, Y.; Aoki, S. (2000). "A strong source of methyl chloride to the atmosphere from tropical coastal land". _Nature_. **403** (6767): 295–298. Bibcode:2000Natur.403..295Y. doi:10.1038/35002049. PMID 10659845.
                125. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ozone-depletion FAQ, Part II, section 4.4
                126. **^** Zuev, V.V.; Zueva, N.E.; Savelieva, E.S.; Gerasimov, V.V. (2015). "The Antarctic ozone depletion caused by Erebus volcano gas emissions". _Atmospheric Environment_. **122** : 393–399. Bibcode:2015AtmEn.122..393Z. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.10.005.
                127. **^** Dobson, G.M.B. (1968) _Exploring the Atmosphere_ , 2nd Edition, Oxford.
                128. **^** ozone-depletion FAQ, Part III, section 6. faqs.org
                129. **^** "ozone-depletion FAQ, Antarctic". Faqs.org. Retrieved  April 6, 2011.
                130. **^** "Ozone hole: Definition". Answers.com. Retrieved  April 6, 2011.
                131. **^** Andersen, Stephen O.; Sarma, K. Madhava (2002). _Protecting the Ozone Layer: The United Nations History_. Earthscan. p. 272. ISBN 9781849772266.
            

## Further reading[edit]

            
                            * Andersen, S. O. and K. M. Sarma. (2002). _Protecting the Ozone Layer: The United Nations History_ , Earthscan Press. London.
                * Benedick, Richard Elliot; World Wildlife Fund (U.S.); Institute for the Study of Diplomacy. Georgetown University. (1998). _Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet_ (2nd ed.). Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-65003-9. Retrieved May 28, 2016. (Ambassador Benedick was the Chief U.S. Negotiator at the meetings that resulted in the Montreal Protocol.)
                * Chasek, Pamela S., David L. Downie, and Janet Welsh Brown (2013). _Global Environmental Politics_ , 6th Edition, Boulder: Westview Press.
                * Gareau, Brian (2013). _From Precaution to Profit: Contemporary Challenges to Environmental Protection in the Montreal Protocol_. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-17526-4. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013.
                * Grundmann, Reiner (2001). _Transnational Environmental Policy: Reconstructing Ozone_. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-22423-9. Retrieved May 28, 2016.
                * Parson, Edward (2004). _Protecting the Ozone Layer: Science and Strategy_. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
            

## External links[edit]

            
                            * Ozone layer at Curlie
                * NOAA/ESRL Ozone Depletion
                * NOAA Ozone Depleting Gas Index
                * The Ozone Hole
                * MACC stratospheric ozone service delivers maps, datasets and validation reports about the past and current state of the ozone layer.
                * Green Cooling Initiative on alternative natural refrigerants cooling technologies
                * "Ozone Hole: How We Saved the Planet" premiered April 10, 2019 PBS
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Human impact on the environment

* * *

General|

            
                            * Environmental issues
                  * list of issues
                * Human impact
                * Impact assessment
                * Planetary boundaries
            

|

![Planetary

boundaries](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/70/Planetary_boundaries.svg/140px-

Planetary_boundaries.svg.png)

Causes|

            
                            * Agriculture
                  * fishing
                  * irrigation
                  * meat production
                  * cocoa production
                  * palm oil
                * Energy industry
                  * biofuels
                  * biodiesel
                  * coal
                  * electricity generation
                  * nuclear power
                  * oil shale
                  * petroleum
                  * reservoirs
                  * wind power
                * Genetic pollution
                * Industrialisation
                * Land use
                * Manufacturing
                  * cleaning agents
                  * concrete
                  * plastics
                  * nanotechnology
                  * paint
                  * paper
                  * pesticides
                  * pharmaceuticals and personal care
                * Mining
                * Overdrafting
                * Overfishing
                * Overgrazing
                * Overexploitation
                * Overpopulation
                * Particulates
                * Pollution
                * Quarrying
                * Reservoirs
                * Tourism
                * Transport
                  * aviation
                  * roads
                  * shipping
                * Urbanization
                  * urban sprawl
                * War
            

Effects|

            
                            * Biodiversity threats
                  * biodiversity loss
                  * decline in amphibian populations
                  * decline in insect populations
                * Climate change
                  * global warming
                  * runaway climate change
                * Coral reefs
                * Deforestation
                * Defaunation
                * Desertification
                * Ecocide
                * Erosion
                * Environmental degradation
                * Freshwater cycle
                * Habitat destruction
                * Holocene extinction
                * Nitrogen cycle
                * Land degradation
                * Land consumption
                * Land surface effects on climate
                * Loss of green belts
                * Phosphorus cycle
                * Ocean acidification
                * Ozone depletion
                * Resource depletion
                * Water degradation
                * Water scarcity
            

Mitigation|

            
                            * Birth control
                * Cleaner production
                * Climate change mitigation
                * Climate engineering
                * Community resilience
                * Decoupling
                * Ecological engineering
                * Environmental engineering
                * Environmental mitigation
                * Industrial ecology
                * Mitigation banking
                * Organic farming
                * Reforestation
                  * urban
                * Restoration ecology
                * Sustainable consumption
                * Waste minimization
            
                * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
                * by country
                * assessment
                * mitigation
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Global warming and climate change

* * *

|

Temperatures

* * *
            
                            * Brightness temperature
                * Effective temperature
                * Geologic record
                * Hiatus
                * Historical climatology
                * Instrumental record
                * Paleoclimatology
                * Paleotempestology
                * Proxy data
                * Record of the past 1,000 years
                * Satellite measurements
            

|

Causes

* * *

| Anthropogenic  
(caused by human activity)|

            
                            * Attribution of recent climate change
                * Aviation
                * Biofuel
                * Black carbon
                * Carbon dioxide
                * Deforestation
                * Earth's energy budget
                * Ecocide
                * Fossil fuel
                * Global dimming
                * Global warming potential
                * Greenhouse effect
                * (Infrared window)
                * Greenhouse gases
                * Land use, land-use change, and forestry
                * Radiative forcing
                * Tropospheric ozone
            

---|---  
Natural|

            
                            * Albedo
                * Bond events
                * Climate oscillations
                * Climate sensitivity
                * Cloud forcing
                * Cosmic rays
                * Feedbacks
                * Glaciation
                * Global cooling
                * Milankovitch cycles
                * Ocean variability
                  * AMO
                  * ENSO
                  * IOD
                  * PDO
                * Orbital forcing
                * Solar variation
                * Volcanism
            

Models|

            
                            * Global climate model
            

|

History

* * *
            
                            * History of climate change science
                * Atmospheric thermodynamics
                * Svante Arrhenius
                * James Hansen
                * Charles David Keeling
            

|

Opinion and climate change

* * *

| General|

            
                            * Environmental ethics
                * Media coverage of climate change
                * Public opinion on climate change
                * (Popular culture)
                * Scientific opinion on climate change
                * Scientists who disagree with the mainstream assessment
                * Climate change denial
                * Global warming conspiracy theory
            

---|---  
By country & region|

            
                            * Africa
                * Arctic
                * Argentina
                * Australia
                * Bangladesh
                * Belgium
                * Canada
                * China
                * Europe
                * European Union
                * Finland
                * Grenada
                * India
                * Japan
                * Luxembourg
                * New Zealand
                * Norway
                * Russia
                * Scotland
                * South Korea
                * Sweden
                * Tuvalu
                * United Kingdom
                * United States
            

|

Politics

* * *

|

            
                            * Clean Power Plan
                * Climate change denial
                * (Manufactured controversy)
                * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
                * March for Science
                * People's Climate March
                * United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
                * Global climate regime
            

* * *

|

Potential effects and issues

* * *

| General|

            
                            * Abrupt climate change
                * Anoxic event
                * Arctic dipole anomaly
                * Arctic haze
                * Arctic methane emissions
                * Central American dry corridor
                * Climate change and agriculture
                * Climate change and ecosystems
                * Climate change and gender
                * Climate change and poverty
                * Drought
                * Economics of global warming
                * Effects on plant biodiversity
                * Effects on health
                * Effects on humans
                * Effects on marine mammals
                * Environmental migrant
                * Extinction risk from global warming
                * Fisheries and climate change
                * Forest dieback
                * Industry and society
                * Iris hypothesis
                * Megadrought
                * Ocean acidification
                * Ozone depletion
                * Physical impacts
                * Polar stratospheric cloud
                * Regime shift
                * Retreat of glaciers since 1850
                * Runaway climate change
                * Sea level rise
                * Season creep
                * Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
                * Surf breaks and waves
            

---|---  
By country|

            
                            * Australia
                * South Asia
                  * India
                  * Nepal
                * United States
            

|

Mitigation

* * *

| Kyoto Protocol|

            
                            * Clean Development Mechanism
                * Joint Implementation
                * Bali Road Map
                * 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference
            

---|---  
Governmental|

            
                            * European Climate Change Programme
                * G8 Climate Change Roundtable
                * United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
                * Paris Agreement
                  * United States withdrawal
                * Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
                * List of climate change initiatives
            

Emissions reduction|

            
                            * Carbon credit
                * Carbon-neutral fuel
                * Carbon offset
                * Carbon tax
                * Emissions trading
                * Fossil fuel phase-out
            

Carbon-free energy|

            
                            * Efficient energy use
                * Renewable energy
                * Low-carbon economy
                * Nuclear power
                * Carbon capture and storage
            

Personal|

            
                            * Individual action on climate change
                * Simple living
            

Other|

            
                            * Carbon dioxide removal
                * Carbon sink
                * Climate action
                * Climate Action Plan
                * Climate change mitigation scenarios
                * Climate engineering
                * Individual and political action on climate change
                * Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
                * Reforestation
                * Urban reforestation
            

|

Proposed adaptations

* * *

| Strategies|

            
                            * Damming glacial lakes
                * Desalination
                * Drought tolerance
                * Irrigation investment
                * Rainwater storage
                * Sustainable development
                * Weather modification
            

---|---  
Programmes|

            
                            * Land allocation decision support system
            
                * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Glossary
                * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Index
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Climate change
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Global warming
                * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Pollution

* * *

Air pollution|

            
                            * Acid rain
                * Air quality index
                * Atmospheric dispersion modeling
                * Chlorofluorocarbon
                * Indoor air quality
                * Global dimming
                * Global distillation
                * Global warming
                * Ozone depletion
                * Atmospheric particulate matter
                * Smog
            

Water pollution|

            
                            * Environmental impact of pharmaceuticals and personal care products
                * Environmental impact of shipping
                * Environmental monitoring
                * Eutrophication
                * Freshwater environmental quality parameters
                * Groundwater pollution
                * Hypoxia
                * Marine debris
                * Marine pollution
                * Nutrient pollution
                * Ocean acidification
                * Oil spill
                * Septic tank
                * Surface runoff
                * Thermal pollution
                * Turbidity
                * Urban runoff
                * Wastewater
                * Water quality
                * Water stagnation
                * Waterborne diseases
            

Soil contamination|

            
                            * Bioremediation
                * Electrical resistance heating
                * Herbicide
                * Open defecation
                * Pesticide
                * Phytoremediation
                * Soil Guideline Values (SGVs)
            

Radioactive contamination|

            
                            * Actinides in the environment
                * Bioremediation of radioactive waste
                * Environmental radioactivity
                * Fission product
                * Nuclear fallout
                * Plutonium in the environment
                * Radiation poisoning
                * Radium in the environment
                * Uranium in the environment
            

Other types of pollution|

            
                            * Land degradation
                * Light pollution
                * Pollution from nanomaterials
                * Noise pollution
                * Radio spectrum pollution
                * Urban heat island
                * Visual pollution
            

Inter-government treaties|

            
                            * Basel Convention
                * CLRTAP
                * Kyoto Protocol
                * MARPOL Convention
                * Montreal Protocol
                * OSPAR
                * Rotterdam Convention
                * Stockholm Convention
            

Major organizations|

            
                            * Basel Action Network
                * Central Pollution Control Board (India)
                * DEFRA
                * Environment Agency (England)
                * Scottish Environment Protection Agency
                * U.S. EPA
                * European Environment Agency
                * Greenpeace
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Natural resources

* * *

Air|

| Pollution / quality|

            
                            * Ambient standards (USA)
                * Index
                * Indoor
                  * developing nations
                * Law
                  * Clean Air Act (USA)
                * Ozone depletion
            

---|---  
Emissions|

            
                            * Airshed
                * Trading
                * Deforestation (REDD)
            

![Carson Falls on Mount Kinabalu,

Borneo](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/57/Carson_Fall_Mt_Kinabalu.jpg/100px-

Carson_Fall_Mt_Kinabalu.jpg)

Energy|

            
                            * Law
                * Resources
                * Fossil fuels (peak oil)
                * Geothermal
                * Hydro
                  * tidal
                  * wave
                * Nuclear
                * Solar
                  * sunlight
                  * shade
                * Wind
            

Land|

            
                            * Arable
                  * peak farmland
                * Degradation
                * Law
                  * property
                * Management
                  * habitat conservation
                * Minerals
                  * mining
                    * law
                    * sand
                  * peak
                  * rights
                * Soil
                  * conservation
                  * fertility
                  * health
                  * resilience
                * Use
                  * planning
                  * reserve
            

Life|

            
                            * Biodiversity
                * Bioprospecting
                * Biosphere
                * Bushfood
                * Bushmeat
                * Fisheries
                  * law
                  * management
                * Food
                * Forests
                  * genetic resources
                  * law
                  * management
                * Game
                  * law
                * Gene bank
                * Herbalist plants
                * Marine conservation
                * Non-timber forest products
                * Rangeland
                * Seed bank
                * Wildlife
                  * conservation
                  * management
                * Wood
            

Water|

| Types / location|

            
                            * Aquifer
                  * storage and recovery
                * Drinking
                * Fresh
                * Groundwater
                  * pollution
                  * recharge
                  * remediation
                * Hydrosphere
                * Ice
                  * bergs
                  * glacial
                  * polar
                * Irrigation
                  * _huerta_
                * Rain
                  * harvesting
                * Stormwater
                * Surface water
                * Wastewater
                  * reclaimed
            

---|---  
Aspects|

            
                            * Desalination
                * Floods
                * Law
                * Leaching
                * Sanitation
                * Conflict
                * Conservation
                * Peak water
                * Pollution
                * Privatization
                * Quality
                * Right
                * Resources
                  * management
                  * policy
            

Related|

|

            
                            * Commons
                  * enclosure
                  * global
                  * land
                  * tragedy of
                * Economics
                  * ecological
                  * land
                * Ecosystem services
                * Exploitation
                  * overexploitation
                  * Earth Overshoot Day
                * Management
                  * adaptive
                * Natural capital
                  * accounting
                * Nature reserve
                * Systems ecology
                * Urban ecology
                * Wilderness
            

* * *

Resource|

            
                            * Common-pool
                * Conflict (perpetuation)
                * Curse
                * Depletion
                * Extraction
                * Nationalism
                * Renewable / Non-renewable
            
                * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Global catastrophic risks

* * *
            
                            * Future of the Earth
                * Ultimate fate of the universe
            

Technological|

            
                            * Grey goo
                * Kinetic bombardment
                * Mutual assured destruction
                  * Dead Hand
                  * Doomsday device
                * Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence
                  * Existential risk from artificial intelligence
                  * AI takeover
                * Technological singularity
                * Transhumanism
                * Year 2000 problem
            

Sociological|

            
                            * Malthusian catastrophe
                * New World Order (conspiracy theory)
                * Nuclear holocaust
                  * winter
                  * famine
                  * cobalt
                * Societal collapse
                * World War III
            

Ecological|

| Climate change|

            
                            * Extinction risk from global warming
                  * Tipping points in the climate system
                * Global terrestrial stilling
                * Ice age
                * Ecocide
                * Human impact on the environment
                * Ozone depletion
                * Cascade effect
                * Supervolcano
                  * winter
            

---|---  
Earth Overshoot Day|

            
                            * Overexploitation
                * Overpopulation
                  * Human overpopulation
            

Biological|

| Extinction|

            
                            * Extinction event
                * Human extinction
                * Genetic erosion
                * Genetic pollution
            

---|---  
Others|

            
                            * Dysgenics
                * Pandemic
                  * Biological agent
                * Transhumanism
            

Astronomical|

            
                            * Big Crunch
                * Big Rip
                * Coronal mass ejection
                * Gamma-ray burst
                * Hypercane
                * Impact event
                  * Asteroid impact avoidance
                  * Potentially hazardous object
                * Rogue planet
                * Solar flare
            

Mythological|

| Eschatology|

            
                            * Buddhist
                * Hindu
                * Last Judgment
                  * Christian
                    * Book of Revelation
                  * Islamic
                  * Jewish
                * Norse
                * Zoroastrian
            

---|---  
Others|

            
                            * 2011 end times prediction
                * 2012 phenomenon
                * Apocalypse
                * Armageddon
                * Blood moon prophecy
                * Doomsday Clock
                * End time
                * List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events
                * Nibiru cataclysm
                * Rapture
                * Revelation 12 sign prophecy
                * Third Temple
            

Fictional|

            
                            * Alien invasion
                * Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
                  * List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
                  * List of apocalyptic films
                * Climate fiction
                * Disaster films
                  * List of disaster films
                * List of fictional doomsday devices
                * Zombie apocalypse
            
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Categories 
                  * Apocalypticism
                  * Future problems
                  * Hazards
                  * Risk analysis
                  * Doomsday scenarios
            

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

            
                            * BNE: XX538283
                * BNF: cb122513346 (data)
                * GND: 4220886-5
                * LCCN: sh88004697
                * NARA: 10643009
                * SUDOC: 031265057
            

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ozone_depletion&oldid=899813297"

Categories:

            
                            * Ozone depletion
            

Hidden categories:

            
                            * CS1 maint: Unfit url
                * CS1 German-language sources (de)
                * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
                * Articles with short description
                * Use mdy dates from May 2016
                * Use American English from May 2016
                * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
                * All pages needing factual verification
                * Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2011
                * All articles lacking reliable references
                * Articles lacking reliable references from March 2018
                * Articles with Curlie links
                * Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
                * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
                * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
                * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
                * Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
                * Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
            

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

            
                            * Not logged in
                * Talk
                * Contributions
                * Create account
                * Log in
            

### Namespaces

            
                            * Article
                * Talk
            

### Variants

### Views

            
                            * Read
                * Edit
                * View history
            

### More

### Search

### Navigation

            
                            * Main page
                * Contents
                * Featured content
                * Current events
                * Random article
                * Donate to Wikipedia
                * Wikipedia store
            

### Interaction

            
                            * Help
                * About Wikipedia
                * Community portal
                * Recent changes
                * Contact page
            

### Tools

            
                            * What links here
                * Related changes
                * Upload file
                * Special pages
                * Permanent link
                * Page information
                * Wikidata item
                * Cite this page
            

### In other projects

            
                            * Wikimedia Commons
            

### Print/export

            
                            * Create a book
                * Download as PDF
                * Printable version
            

### Languages

            
                            * العربية
                * Azərbaycanca
                * বাংলা
                * भोजपुरी
                * Български
                * Bosanski
                * Català
                * Čeština
                * Deutsch
                * Eesti
                * Ελληνικά
                * Español
                * فارسی
                * Français
                * Gaeilge
                * ગુજરાતી
                * 한국어
                * Հայերեն
                * हिन्दी
                * Hrvatski
                * Bahasa Indonesia
                * Italiano
                * עברית
                * ಕನ್ನಡ
                * ქართული
                * Қазақша
                * Kreyòl ayisyen
                * Кыргызча
                * Magyar
                * Македонски
                * Bahasa Melayu
                * Монгол
                * Nederlands
                * 日本語
                * Polski
                * Português
                * Русский
                * සිංහල
                * Simple English
                * Slovenčina
                * Slovenščina
                * Српски / srpski
                * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                * Suomi
                * Svenska
                * Tagalog
                * தமிழ்
                * తెలుగు
                * ไทย
                * Türkçe
                * Українська
                * Tiếng Việt
                * 中文
            

Edit links

            
                            * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 15:19 (UTC).
                * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                * Privacy policy
                * About Wikipedia
                * Disclaimers
                * Contact Wikipedia
                * Developers
                * Cookie statement
                * Mobile view
                * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
            

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

