

Skip to main content

**Smithsonian Institution**

Language __Search Smithsonian Ocean

Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Flickr Follow us on
Tumbr

Donate

# Smithsonian Ocean

## Main Menu

            
                            * Ocean Life
                  * Marine Mammals
                  * Sharks & Rays
                  * Reptiles
                  * Seabirds
                  * Fish
                  * Invertebrates
                  * Plankton
                  * Plants & Algae
                * Ecosystems
                  * Coral Reefs
                  * Deep Sea
                  * Coasts & Shallow Water
                  * Poles
                  * Census of Marine Life
                * Planet Ocean
                  * Tides & Currents
                  * Waves, Storms & Tsunamis
                  * The Seafloor
                  * Temperature & Chemistry
                * Through Time
                  * Ancient Seas
                  * Extinctions
                  * Evolution
                  * The Anthropocene
                * Conservation
                  * Fishing
                  * Pollution
                  * Habitat Destruction
                  * Invasive Species
                  * Acidification
                  * Climate Change
                  * Gulf Oil Spill
                  * Solutions & Success Stories
                  * Get Involved
                * Human Connections
                  * Books, Film & The Arts
                  * Recreation
                  * Seafood
                  * Exploration
                  * History & Cultures
                  * Careers
                * At The Museum
                * Educators
            

Menu

# Climate Change at the Poles

![Polar bears are threatened by a lack of sea

ice.](/sites/default/files/styles/article_main_image/public/arctic_ploar_bear.jpg?itok=kKnHyj7F)
Polar bears are threatened by the loss of sea ice in the Arctic. (K. Elliott,
NOAA, Hidden Ocean 2005)

by Maggy Hunter Benson

__

At the ends of the Earth, life thrives despite extreme conditions. In the
**Arctic** and Southern Oceans, organisms have evolved adaptations to cope
with year-round cold and six months of darkness. But the tough critters living
in these harsh climates belie the delicate balance that holds the ecosystem
together—a balance that **human activities** are disrupting in alarming ways.

Among the biggest threats to the poles is rapid **climate change**.
Atmospheric carbon dioxide has been rising for more than a century, with hefty
contributions from the fossil fuels used to power our homes, businesses, and
cars. The increasingly dense blanket of greenhouse gases is trapping heat and
taking its toll on the planet, especially at the poles. Global temperatures
have increased since the 1800s with models predicting their continued rise,
and sea ice has been decreasing in extent and thickness. By 2040, **Arctic**
sea ice may disappear altogether during summer months.

The warming of polar oceans has powerful implications for organisms living
there—and for us. Polar sea ice helps regulate Earth's climate. White ice
reflects more of the Sun's energy back into space than does dark water.
Without sea ice, Earth would absorb more solar radiation—and our climate would
be even warmer.

Many animals also depend directly on sea ice. Polar bears, for instance, hunt
seals from the ice and gain most of their weight in winter. But with ice
declining and breaking up earlier, bears have less time to hunt. Because their
**habitat is melting** , the bears were listed as a threatened species under
the Endangered Species Act in May of 2008. Pacific walruses, which usually
plow a large area of the ocean floor while looking for clams and other prey,
have started congregating near the shore and on land because the sea ice is
beyond their reach. Ringed seals, ivory gulls, and ice algae are just some of
the other species that rely on the ice to survive.

![Walruses use sea ice as platforms on which to nurse their young and launch

their

dives.](/sites/default/files/styles/article_full_width/public/NOAA_Walrus_anim0022_full_1.jpg?itok=XBjhVC2_)
Walruses use sea ice as platforms on which to nurse their young and launch
their dives. (Capt. B. Christman, NOAA)

In polar waters, tiny **swimming snails called pteropods** will feel the
changes in another way. In addition to warming, the ocean is becoming more
acidic as it absorbs more carbon dioxide from the air. Scientists predict that
during this century, parts of the Southern Ocean will be so acidic that the
**shells of pteropods and other organisms will begin dissolving**. Since they
are an essential food source for larger animals such as herring, cod, and, and
baleen whales, the problems pteropods face could disrupt the entire ecosystem.
Their plight also spells **trouble for corals** and other marine animals that
build their shells or skeletons from calcium.

Other species, such as caribou, are changing their migration patterns and
ranges as seasons and weather patterns shift. For people who live near the
poles, like the Inuvialuit people of Sachs Harbour, Canada, weather and
hunting grounds are becoming more unpredictable. Knowledge of the environment
that has served generations is being defied by a changing climate. Many
northern communities have also observed coastal erosion and watched the
permafrost—ground that is frozen most of the year—melting and buckling under
their homes and roads. While not common, some communities like Kivalina and
Shishmaref, both in Alaska, are planning to entirely relocate, with costs in
the hundreds of millions of dollars.

![This image is a helper image for making the video

responsive.](/themes/custom/a_clean_ocean/images/16x9.png)

NOAA Ocean Today

September 2011

Tags: **Endangered species** **Walruses** **Arctic** **Antarctic** **Climate
Change** **Ice**

## Smithsonian Institution

Smithsonian Ocean

Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Flickr Follow us on
Tumbr

Contact Us

### Explore

            
                            * Ocean Life
                * Ecosystems
                * Planet Ocean
                * Through Time
                * Conservation
                * Human Connections
                * At The Museum
                * About
                * Media Archive
                * Terms of Use
                * Privacy
            

### Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History

Donate

            
                            * Ocean Life
                  * Marine Mammals
                  * Sharks & Rays
                  * Reptiles
                  * Seabirds
                  * Fish
                  * Invertebrates
                  * Plankton
                  * Plants & Algae
                * Ecosystems
                  * Coral Reefs
                  * Deep Sea
                  * Coasts & Shallow Water
                  * Poles
                  * Census of Marine Life
                * Planet Ocean
                  * Tides & Currents
                  * Waves, Storms & Tsunamis
                  * The Seafloor
                  * Temperature & Chemistry
                * Through Time
                  * Ancient Seas
                  * Extinctions
                  * Evolution
                  * The Anthropocene
                * Conservation
                  * Fishing
                  * Pollution
                  * Habitat Destruction
                  * Invasive Species
                  * Acidification
                  * Climate Change
                  * Gulf Oil Spill
                  * Solutions & Success Stories
                  * Get Involved
                * Human Connections
                  * Books, Film & The Arts
                  * Recreation
                  * Seafood
                  * Exploration
                  * History & Cultures
                  * Careers
                * At The Museum
                * Educators
            

#### Search Smithsonian Ocean

Cancel

Close

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

